Motivation: Ontologies and taxonomies have proven highly beneficial for biocuration.
The Open Biomedical Ontology (OBO) Foundry alone lists over 90 ontologies mainly built with OBOEdit.
Creating and maintaining such ontologies is a labour-intensive, difficult, manual process.
Automating parts of it is of great importance for the further development of ontologies and for biocuration.
Results: We have developed the Dresden Ontology Generator for Directed Acyclic Graphs (DOG4DAG), a system which supports the creation and extension of OBO ontologies by semi-automatically generating terms, definitions and parentchild relations from text in PubMed, the web and PDF repositories.
DOG4DAG is seamlessly integrated into OBO-Edit.
It generates terms by identifying statistically significant noun phrases in text.
For definitions and parentchild relations it employs pattern-based web searches.
We systematically evaluate each generation step using manually validated benchmarks.
The term generation leads to high-quality terms also found in manually created ontologies.
Up to 78% of definitions are valid and up to 54% of childancestor relations can be retrieved.
There is no other validated system that achieves comparable results.
By combining the prediction of high-quality terms, definitions and parentchild relations with the ontology editor OBO-Edit we contribute a thoroughly validated tool for all OBO ontology engineers.
Availability: DOG4DAG is available within OBO-Edit 2.1 atContact: thomas.waechter@biotec.tu-dresden.de Supplementary Information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION The advent of controlled vocabularies used for gene product annotation has had a deep impact on life science research (Bodenreider and Stevens, 2006; Howe et al., 2008), since it was a prerequisite for the analysis of high-throughput screens and the cross-referencing between databases of different model organisms and different types of data.
Successful vocabularies in the life sciences range from formal ontologies defined in description logics such as SNOMED CT via directed acyclic graphs representing is-a and part-of relations such as the Gene Ontology (GO) (Ashburner et al., 2000) to hierarchical terminologies which define narrower and broader terms such as MeSH [www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh].
Over the past years, numerous ontologies have been created as evidenced by over 90 ontologies listed by the Open Biomedical Ontology (OBO) Foundry (Smith et al., 2007).
Creating ontologies is a labour-intensive, difficult, manual process, which is supported by dedicated ontology editors such as Protg [protege.stanford.edu] and OBO-Edit To whom correspondence should be addressed.
(Day-Richter et al., 2007).
Recently, there have been efforts to alleviate these difficulties through text-mining, which comprises a host of techniques from natural language processing to statistics.
One such system is the Protg plug-in TerMine (Frantzi et al., 2000), which suggests terms by analyzing the frequencies of word tuples in a text for a given query.
Overall, text-mining has to address three problems to support ontology creation and extension: (i) generation of relevant ontology terms, (ii) their definitions and (iii) relationships between them.
Tables 13 summarize the current state-of-the-art for these three problems.
Table 1 shows that a number of systems have integrated linguistic and statistical filtering with machine learning achieving either high precision or recall.
Table 2 shows the success rates of definition generation systems.
In particular, the definitional question answering task (Voorhees, 2003) in the TREC 2003 information retrieval competition serves as a good evaluation benchmark.
Existing systems achieved success rates of over 25%.
The most difficult problem is taxonomy induction, since it requires the identification of entities and their relations in text.
Table 3 shows recent results with success rates usually <50%.
Besides evaluating ontology creation against benchmarks, one can assess how well semi-automated ontology creation and extension adheres to design guidelines as put forward among others by Schober et al.(2009).
This article is organized as follows: first, we introduce DOG4DAG, the first tool for ontology generation within OBO-Edit.
Second, we introduce the approach and system and then evaluate the quality of term, definition and relationship generation.
Finally, we discuss how the system supports the design guidelines in Schober et al.(2009) and its limits.
2 THE OBO-EDIT PLUG-IN DOG4DAG Before we describe the methods and results underlying our textmining approach to ontology generation, we give an example demonstrating the functionality of the implemented system.
DOG4DAG aims to support the work of ontology engineers, who create ontologies from scratch and extend existing ontologies, as well as biocurators, who annotate gene products with terms from the GO and other ontologies.
2.1 Example: ontology creation Figure 1 shows a screenshot of DOG4DAG with three panels for term generation (step 1), definition generation (step 2) and suggestion of parent terms (step 3).
A user wishes to learn about endocytosis.
DOG4DAG offers to either submit the query to PubMed or the Web or to upload text or PDF documents (Fig.1 (1)).
While PubMed is the default source for terminology, the web is often useful since full-text articles and other online resource such as clinical trials can be implicitly included in the search.
PDFs are useful as a source if the user has e.g.a repository of full-text PDF articles covering the domain in question.
The Author(s) 2010.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[11:07 12/5/2010 Bioinformatics-btq188.tex] Page: i89 i88i96 Semi-automated ontology generation within OBO-Edit Table 1.
Overview on term generation systems and their characteristics System Characteristics Description Linguistic filtering Statistical filtering Machine learning Context NEURAL: Frantzi (1995) Morphosyntactic patterns, list of suffixes, frequency, mutual information (Medicine), 70% recall CLARIT : Evans (1996) NP parsers, statistical disambig., sub-compound generation, 240 Mb News corpus, 82% recall TerMine: Frantzi et al.(2000) POS tagger; context defining words in the corpus, 75% precision within top 25% of terms OntoLearn: Navigli and Velardi (2004) Comprehensive system including term, definition extraction and disambiguation; Tourism domain 0.80 precision 0.55 recall (estimated) Text2Onto: Cimiano and Vlker (2005) Framework for ontology learning, algorithms for term and relation extraction Lee et al.(2006) Dependency parsing for relationship extraction for sub-units of GO concepts low precision 3.5% added (recall) Wermter and Hahn (2006) Comparison of statistics with filtering by frequency or linguistic information All methods use linguistic filtering, most methods statistical filtering, some methods use context information.
The quality is given in terms of precision and recall (see Methods section).
Table 2.
Overview on the quality of definition extraction and definitional question answering Xu et al.(2003) F =0.31, 1st rank in TREC2003 Yang et al.(2003) F =0.26, 2nd rank in TREC2003 Echihabi et al.(2003) F =0.27, 3rd rank in TREC2003 Han et al.(2006) F =0.16 Degrski et al.(2008) F =0.30 In the TREC2003 task on definitional question answering, the best system achieved a F-measure of F =0.31.
In information retrieval, quality is often measured as F-measure (F), the harmonic mean of precision and recall (see Methods section) Table 3.
Overview on the quality of taxonomy induction Hearst (1992) Precision >90%, Recall<<10% Caraballo (1999) 33% Precision (strict), 60% Precision Sanderson and Croft (1999) 48% Precision (baseline 28%) Cimiano et al.(2005) F =0.33 (Finance), F =0.41 (Tourism) Snow et al.(2004) Maximal F-measure 14.235.9% Snow et al.(2006) 58% Precision, 20% Recall Ryu and Choi (2006) All Recall and Precision below 50% The F-measure is usually <50%.
In information retrieval, quality is often measured as F-measure (F), the harmonic mean of precision and recall (see Methods section).
Term generation: the user selects terms from the list of generated terms (Fig.1 (2)), such as e.g.trafficking and endosome.
The selected terms are added to the clipboard (Fig.1 (3)).
If the generated term exists already in other OBO ontologies then a corresponding reference is provided.
Endocytosis is e.g.defined in GO and in the ascomycete phenotype ontology APO, whereas trafficking does not exist in any OBO ontology.
Such
