doi:10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80681-9 Cell, Vol.
100, 457467, February 18, 2000, Copyright 2000 by Cell Press A Role for CaMKII in T Cell Memory induces high levels of kinase activity.
Activated CaMKIIJack D. Bui,* Sebastien Calbo,* phosphorylates various substrates including threonineKristine Hayden-Martinez,* 287 (for g, T286 for a) in the CaMKII inhibitory domainLawrence P. Kane,* Phyllis Gardner, (Miller and Kennedy, 1986; Braun and Schulman, 1995).and Stephen M. Hedrick* Autophosphorylation of Thr-287 causes CaMKII sub-*Department of Biology and Cancer Center units to acquire a high affinity for calmodulin in the ab-University of California, San Diego sence of calcium, such that calmodulin can remainLa Jolla, California 92093-0687 trapped on autophosphorylated CaMKII; this resultsDepartment of Molecular Pharmacology in autonomous, or calcium-independent, CaMKII activityand Medicine (Meyer et al., 1992).Stanford University CaMKII exists as a holoenzyme composed of 612Stanford, California 94305-5401 subunits, and the proportion of autophosphorylated subunits is determined by the frequency of calcium oscillations produced by influx through calcium-selectiveSummary channels such as the postsynaptic N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate receptors (Bennett et al.,In order to study the role of calcium/calmodulin kinase 1983; Kanaseki et al., 1991; Hanson and Schulman,II (CaMKII) in T cells, we generated transgenic mice 1992; De Koninck and Schulman, 1998).
CaMKII can thusexpressing CaMKIIgB* (T287D), a partially calciumstore the previous frequency of calcium oscillations inindependent mutant of CaMKIIgB.
In these mice, the the form of phosphothreonines such that CaMKII is a size of the thymus was increased 1.5-to 2-fold, at biochemical decoder that contributes to at least one least in part due to an increase in the lifespan of douaspect of the frequency response function leading to ble-positive (DP) thymocytes.
More importantly, there LTP in hippocampal neurons.
Conceptually, calcium was an increase in the number of T cells in the seconddependent activity reflects acute activation, whereas ary lymphoid organs that had acquired an antigen-the level of autonomous CaMKII activity reflects the predependent memory phenotype.
These T cells were vious frequency of calcium oscillations.
bonafide memory cells as assessed by a variety of In T cells, calcium is an important second messenger criteria.
In addition, T cells from wild-type mice ac-that contributes to the induction of proliferation, anergy, quired calcium-independent CaMKII activity after several and cell death (Schwartz, 1996; Sloan-Lancaster and rounds of antigen-stimulated division.
We propose Allen, 1996; Alberola-Ila et al., 1997; McConkey and Orthat CaMKII controls a distinct process of activation-renius, 1997; Berridge et al., 1998).
It thus affects acute induced cellular differentiation.
T cell activation and also long-term changes in antigen responsiveness.
As a major downstream effector of calIntroduction cium-calmodulin in T cells, CaMKII has the biochemical design to regulate activation, anergy, and memory.
To The multifunctional calcium/calmodulin kinase II family determine the effect of CaMKIIg on T cells, Nghiem et consists of at least four different isoforms that mediate al.
(1993) constructed a calcium-independent mutant of part of the cellular response to calcium in various tissues CaMKIIg-B analogous to the CaMKIIa mutant used to (Hanson and Schulman, 1992).
The a and b isoforms of study neuronal LTP.
This mutant (CaMKIIgB) encodes CaMKII are exclusively expressed in the brain, whereas a negatively charged aspartic acid substituted for the the g and d isoforms of CaMKII are ubiquitously ex-threonine 287 phosphorylation site and exhibited 37% pressed (Tobimatsu and Fujisawa, 1989).
In the brain, autonomous activity.
In Jurkat T cells, CaMKIIg-B* squelched IL-2 production (Nghiem et al., 1994), andCaMKII function is intricately linked to the induction of this was interpreted as an indication that CaMKII mayLTP (Lisman and Goldring, 1988; Malinow et al., 1989; be a mediator of T cell anergy.Deisseroth et al., 1995; Fukunaga et al., 1996) and spatial In order to understand how CaMKII regulates T celllearning as shown by the analysis of mice that express physiology, and in particular the long-term generationa calcium-independent form of CaMKIIa or mice that of anergy or memory, we generated mice expressing theare deficient in CaMKIIa (Silva et al., 1992a, 1992b; Sodcalcium-independent mutant of CaMKIIgB (CaMKIIgB*)erling, 1993; Mayford et al., 1995, 1996; Giese et al., in the T cell lineage.
Furthermore, we developed an assay1998).
There is only a limited understanding of CaMKII to specifically measure CaMKII activity in T cells.
Herein,function in other tissues (Nishimoto et al., 1991; Heist we report a previously unrecognized role for CaMKII inand Schulman, 1998).
influencing immature T cell lifespan and T cell memoryCaMKII can reveal kinase activity in two ways.
Upon formation.calcium influx, calcium-calmodulin binds to CaMKII and Results To whom correspondence should be addressed (e-mail: shedrick@ ucsd.edu).
Transgene Construction These authors contributed equally to this work.
A form of CaMKII found in human T cells is the B subtype Present address: Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0795. of the gamma isoform, CaMKIIgB (Nghiem et al., 1993).
Cell 458 increase in the percentage of DPs (Figure 2A).
A similar change in percentages was also seen in CaMKIIgB*-50 mice (Figure 2, legend).
The accummulated data from a large number of mice showed that the thymi from CaMKIIgB* mice were about 1.5 to 2 times the size of control mice, and this increase was mostly in the progenitor DP population (Figure 2B).
There was a slight decrease in CD4SPs but not in CD8SPs (data not shown).
These differences in cell numbers remained consistent with age (3.5 weeks to 7.5 months), such that age-related thymic atrophy was normal in CaMKIIgB* mice (data not shown).
We tested the possibility that this phenotype could be explained by cell division; however, cell cycle analysis using 7-AAD (DNA content) and the incorporation of BrdU (DNA synthesis) showed that there was no difference in intrathymic proliferation (data not shown).
We thus considered the alternative possibility that the CaMKIIgB* gene affected cell survival.
The majority of DPs are not selected for further development, and kinetic labeling experiments showed that they undergo programmed cell death after a fixed lifespan of approximately 3.5 days (Huesmann et al., 1991; Shortman et al., 1991).
We similarly measured the DP lifespan by the continuous administration of BrdU in vivo followed by an analysis of the incorporation of label into the nondividing DP population (Figure 2C).
Whereas DPs from wild-type mice had a 33.5 day lifespan, DPs from CaMKIIgB* mice showed a longer lifespan estimated to be 44.5 days.
Consistent with an enhanced survival in the thymus, the DPs but not the SPs exhibitedFigure 1.
Trangenic Constructs and Transgene Expression an enhanced survival in culture as measured by the(A) Depiction of the human CaMKIIgB construct showing a point number of surviving, annexin V-negative cells (Figure 2D).mutation in the autoinhibitory domain.
In order to determine whether endogenous CaMKII(B) Two expression cassettes were used to generate a total of six founders with variable expression.
The CD4 silencer element is in-activity regulates DP survival, we tested the effects of cluded in the human CD2-based expression cassette, though in this CaMKII inhibitors on thymocyte survival in organ culture.
context it does not function (K. H. M., unpublished data).
In separate experiments, we used KN62 and also the (C) Western blot showing thymic expression of the transgene com combination of KN93 and its inactive ortholog, KN92pared to endogenous CaMKII.
As a control, Jurkat human T cell lym(Tokumitsu et al., 1990; Sumi et al., 1991).
The experi-phoma cells expressing SV40 large T were transfected with the transments consistently showed that the addition of CaMKIIgene.
The transgene in founder 32 was made homozygous (1/1) to increase expression.
inhibitor caused a reduction in cell recovery in the DP population (Figure 2E).
The recovery of SPs was also reduced and that could be due to decreased numberThe partially calcium-independent mutant form of the of surviving DP precursors or a decrease in the survivalhuman CaMKIIgB cDNA (CaMKIIgB*) was subcloned of SPs themselves.
The opposing effects of the trans-into two expression cassettes, and six founders were gene and the CaMKII inhibitors reveal that CaMKII regu-obtained (Figures 1A and 1B).
Transgenic line 32 bred lates the survival and thus the lifespan of DP thymo-for transgene homozygosity expressed roughly 3-fold cytes.the level of endogenous protein (Figure 1C).
In this line, a combination of RT-PCR and Western analysis indicated transgene expression in all of the T lineages: CD4CD8 The Phenotype of T Cells in the Peripheraldouble-negative (DN), CD4CD8 double-positive (DP), Lymphoid Organs of CaMKIIgB* Miceand mature CD4 single-positive (CD4SP) and CD8SP T The size of the spleen was increased in the CaMKIIgB*cells (data not shown).
Much of the phenotypic analysis mice, yet FACS analysis indicated no increase in thecame from CaMKIIgB*-32, since it was the first one obnumbers of CD4 or CD8 splenocytes (Figure 3A).
Prelimi-tained.
Line CaMKIIgB*-50 expressed the transgene at nary experiments showed an increase in B cells in theabout ten times the level of the endogenous message spleen, and we do find expression of the transgene in(Figure 1C), and preliminary analysis of this line fully corB cells by RT-PCR.
Analysis of the role of CaMKIIg inroborated the major observations made with CaMKIIgB*-32 B cells is ongoing.mice.
For brevity, we will use CaMKIIgB* to refer to Antigen activation causes CD4 T cells to increase theCaMKIIgB*-321/1 mice.
expression of CD44, decrease L-selectin (CD62L), and decrease CD45RB (Dutton et al., 1998).
This phenotypeThymic Phenotype remains even after the cells revert to quiescence, andThe most obvious effect of CaMKIIgB* on thymic popula tions was a decrease in the proportion of SPs and an it is thus used to characterize prior antigenic experience CaMKII Influences T Cell Memory Formation 459 Figure 2.
Thymic Phenotype of CaMKIIg-B* Mice (A) Thymocytes from CaMKIIg-B* mice show an increase in the proportion of DP cells (two examples each).
(B) Number of thymocytes in 3.5-to 10.5week-old mice.
Absolute cell numbers for each thymic population were plotted compared to controls.
Each triangle represents one mouse.
A circle represents the mean.
Two-tailed student p value is shown, where significant.
(C) In vivo lifespan of thymocytes.
CaMKIIgB* and control mice were continuously administered BrdU, and, at the times indicated, thymocytes were harvested and stained for percent incorporation of BrdU.
Graph shows a summary of three experiments with 20 mice.
Error bars are hidden by the symbols.
(D) The survival of thymocytes in culture.
Thymocytes from CaMKIIg-B* and control mice were cultured in vitro, and, at the times indicated, cells were harvested and stained using Annexin V. (E) The effect of a CaMKII inhibitor KN-62 on thymocyte viability in organ culture.
Normal neonatal thymi were cultured in vitro with 10 mM KN62 or vehicle.
Cell recovery was assessed after 3 days, and the scale indicates the total number of recovered viable cells for each lobe.
or memory T cells.
Functionally, memory cells have age and maintained such that CaMKIIgB* mice consistently exhibited a 1.3-to 2-fold increase in the numberbeen shown to produce a more rapid and varied cytokine response, and thus a secondary cellular immune re-of memory-phenotype cells.
It was found in CD4 and CD8 subpopulations, in both the spleen and LN, and itsponse arises from an enhanced response by individual cells as well as an expansion of the antigen-reactive T was further exaggerated in CaMKIIgB*-50 mice.
cell clade.
Previous work has shown that the proportion of T cells exhibiting a memory/activation phenotype in-Conversion to the Memory Phenotype Is Antigen Specificcreases with age, presumably due to immune responses to environmental antigens (Ernst et al., 1993; Sprent et The physiological development of memory cells is, of course, antigen dependent, and this is supported by theal., 1997).
In CaMKIIgB* mice, we found a substantial increase in the percentage and number of T cells exhib-observation that mice housed in germ-free facilities do not develop CD45lo T cells (Lee et al., 1990).
Furthermore,iting a memory phenotype (Figures 3B and 3C).
This enlarged population was found starting at 3 weeks of in mice transgenic for T cell antigen receptor genes, T Figure 3.
The Number of Memory T Cells in CaMKIIg-B* Mice Is Increased Splenocytes from 4-to 10.5-week-old mice were counted and FACS analyzed.
The number of cells was plotted for each of the indicated populations.
Each triangle represents one mouse, and a square depicts the mean.
Two-tailed student p value is shown, where significant.
(A) Total number of splenocytes and CD4 and CD8 T cells.
(B) The percentage of CD4 and CD8 T cells expressing high levels of CD44 as an indicator of activation/memory.
The CD44 gate is shown in (C).
(C) The number of CD4 memory cells in CaMKIIg-B* and control mice at two different ages.
The number of memory-phenotype cells was assessed by enumerating cells with high levels of CD44 and low levels of CD45RB and L-Selectin.
Cell 460 This was also found for CaMKIIgB*-50 mice.
These data strongly suggest that enhanced conversion to a memory phenotype under the influence of the CaMKIIgB* transgene requires the expression of an endogenous TCR, and we deduce that this event is thus antigen dependent.
Memory Cells Produce IL-4 and IFNg One hallmark of a memory cell population is the ability to secrete a wider diversity of cytokines (Picker et al., 1995; Dutton et al., 1998).
We compared populations enriched for memory or naive cells from CaMKIIgB* and control mice for their ability to synthesize IL-2, IL-4, and IFNg.
As depicted in Figure 4B, the naive cells produced IL-2 almost exclusively, whereas a larger proportion of memory produced IL-4 and IFNg.
Notably, there was no significant difference between cells from CaMKIIgB* mice and wild-type mice in the ability to secrete cytokines.
The CD8 memory-phenotype cells in CaMKIIgB* and control mice exhibited a similar trend of cytokine secretion (data not shown).
We deduce from these data that the memory-phenotype cells from CaMKIIgB* mice have the functional capacity to secrete cytokines in an identical manner to memory cells from wild-type mice.
CaMKIIgB* Mice Exhibit Enhanced Immune Responses Figure 4.
T Cells with a Memory Phenotype in CaMKIIg-B* Mice Are In order to understand the basis of the enhanced numFunctional bers of memory cells, we performed four types of experi(A) The increase in CD44hi cells is antigen dependent.
Spleen cells ments that measure the capacity of T cells to proliferate from AND and AND;CaMKIIg-B* mice were analyzed for the expres and survive both in vitro and in vivo.
The first experimentsion of CD44 versus CD3 or transgenic Va11.
measured the proliferative response of lymph node T(B) Memory-phenotype cells from CaMKIIg-B* mice secrete cytocells from AND and AND;CaMKIIgB* mice elicited bykines indicative of a memory response.
Lymph node cells from CaMKIIg-B* and control mice were enriched for T memory cells pigeon cytochrome c peptide.
This is a response of (see the Experimental Procedures).
IgG-depleted LN was used as naive cells since we showed that memory phenotype a source of naive cells.
After enrichment, cells were stimulated with cells do not retain high levels of the cytochrome c-spe0.5 ng/ml PMA and 0.5 mM ionomycin for 14 hr.
cific TCR (Figure 4A).
As shown, there was no difference in the dose response curves, but the population of T cells from AND;CaMKIIgB* mice synthesized DNA at acells expressing the transgenes do not convert to mem ory cells in the absence of antigen (Linton et al., 1996; higher rate (Figure 5A).
Identical results were obtained using CaMKIIgB*-50 mice (data not shown).Tanchot et al., 1997).
AND transgenic mice possess TCRa and b chain transgenes that endow T cells with In a second type of experiment, we inoculated mice with 10 mg of staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB), whichspecificity for a peptide from pigeon cytochrome c bound to H-2Ek (Kaye et al., 1989).
In order to examine activates T cells expressing Vb8.1 and Vb8.2, but not Vb6 (White et al., 1989).
The expansion and decline ofthe antigen dependence of memory cell formation in CaMKIIgB* mice, we crossed CaMKIIgB* with AND TCR these T cell populations was followed in the peripheral blood lymphocytes (Figure 5B).
Initially, the number oftransgenic mice to obtain mice that were genotypically AND1/2;CaMKIIgB*1/1;H-2b.
They are unlikely to be ex-Vb8 T cells subsided, probably due to the fact that they are sequestered in the lymphatic system (Vasseur et al.,posed to pigeon cytochrome c in our mouse colony, and in any event, this peptide is not presented by H-2Ab, 1999).
This loss of Vb8 T cells preceded a superantigenmediated expansion followed by a decline shown to bethe only MHC class II molecule expressed by these mice.
Similar to CaMKIIgB* mice, the AND1/2;CaMKIIgB*1/1; accompanied by apoptosis (Kawabe and Ochi, 1991; MacDonald et al., 1991; Webb et al., 1994).
This wasH-2b mice had twice the percentage of CD44hi cells when compared with AND1/2;H-2b mice (Figure 4A).
The criti-found with identical kinetics for CaMKII and wild-type littermate mice, with the exception that we consistentlycal issue is whether the CaMKIIgB* transgene is suffi cient to convert cytochrome c-specific T cells to a mem-found an increase in the magnitude of the expansion in vivo (Figure 5B) (see the Discussion).
In the sameory phenotype or whether T cells that express the cytochrome c-specific TCR remain naive.
Notably, al-experiments, nonresponding Vb6 T cells were monitored and found to undergo no appreciable changes (data notthough they expressed normal levels of the TCR-CD3 complex (Figure 4A, bottom left), the cells that ex-shown).
We next tested the ability of the CaMKIIgB* mice topressed high levels of CD44 selectively did not express the transgenic a chain, Va11 (Figure 4A, bottom right).
respond to antigen after a previous immunization.
A CaMKII Influences T Cell Memory Formation 461 Figure 5.
Enhanced Immune Responses in CaMKIIg-B* Mice (A) Enhanced response to PCC T cell from CaMKIIg-B* mice.
Lymph node cells from AND;CaMKIIg-B* and AND mice were cultured for 3 days and pulsed with 1 mCi of 3H-thymidine for the last 20 hr.
(B) Vb81 T cell expansion and deletion in vivo was induced by SEB.
CaMKIIg-B*-50 and wild-type littermates (both H-2bxd) were inoculated with 10 mg of SEB i.v., and, at the times indicated, mice were bled.
The number of Vb81 and Vb61 in blood, counted as a percentage of the total CD41 T cells, was determined.
Data are mean and standard deviation of values from five mice for each group.
(C) CaMKIIg-B* and control mice were immunized with 100 mg of KLH-DNP and complete Freunds adjuvant in the hind footpad.
At the indicated times postimmunization, draining LNs were harvested and stimulated in vitro with KLH and syngeneic APCs for 3 days.
functional CD4 memory response was assayed by im-the number of cells undergoing apoptosis by simultaneously labeling with 7AAD (Philpott et al., 1996) (Figuremunization with KLH-DNP in complete Freunds adju vant followed by restimulation in culture (Figure 5C).
6).
The proportion of apoptotic cells is plotted as a function of the cell divisions for each condition.
The resultsThe results showed that the CaMKIIgB* mice had an enhanced in vitro recall response to KLH.
As seen in show that, especially by day 3, there was a significant decrease in the proportion of apoptotic cells in the cul-the previous experiment, the dose response curves were unchanged in that the cells responded to the same range tures from AND;CaMKIIgB* mice.
This is consistent with a mechanism of action whereby the autonomous formof antigen concentrations.
In order to determine the mechanism by which CaMKII of CaMKIIgB* provides a survival signal that allows cells to choose a memory fate as opposed to activation-enhances proliferation, we analyzed the kinetics of pro gression through the cell cycle and the proportion of induced cell death.
Although this explanation accounts for at least some of the activity of CaMKIIgB*, we cannotcells that undergo apoptosis.
Lymph node cells from AND and AND;CaMKIIgB* mice (H-2b) were stimulated yet exclude the possiblity that there is also an effect on the progression of the cell cycle.in culture with antigen-presenting cells (H-2bxk) and PCC for 13 days.
The cells were labeled with the fluorescent dye, CFSE, at the initiation of culture, and the number of cell divisions was followed by the dilution of fluores-CaM Kinase II Activity in Activated, Dividing T Cells To specifically measure endogenous CaMKIIg activity,cence.
Cells were gated for CD4 and Va11 and the populations analyzed for the number of cell divisions (Figure we immunoprecipitated (IP) CaMKIIg before performing the kinase reaction.
We found an increase in activity6).
Starting at day 2, the population of T cells (CD4; Va111) from AND;CaMKIIgB* mice included cells that from thymocytes isolated from CaMKIIgB* versus con trol mice, as well as in CaMKIIg-B*-transfected versushad undergone at least one extra division relative to cells from AND controls.
For example, at day 3, AND T control Jurkat cells (Figure 7A).
This increase was seen in both autonomous and calcium-dependent activity,cells stimulated with 1 mM PCC included a significant number of cells that had undergone 0, 1, 2, or 3 rounds confirming the specificity of the assay.
Furthermore, this result provided evidence that the CaMKIIgB* transgeneof division, with a barely detectable population that had undergone 4 rounds of division.
In contrast, T cells from encoded the expected biochemical activity.
In normal unstimulated thymocytes, we could not detect autono-AND;CaMKIIgB* mice included cells that had gone through 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 rounds of division.
This result mous activity above background, whereas thymocytes from CaMKIIgB* mice showed 10%20% autonomoussuggests that CaMKII autonomous activity can either shorten the cell cycle or increase cell survival.
In order activity.
The calcium-dependent activity in CaMKIIgB* mice was 2-to 3-fold higher than in wild-type mice,to distinguish between these possibilities, we examined Cell 462 Figure 6.
T Cells from CaMKII Mice Undergo More Rounds of Division and Less ActivationInduced Cell Death Lymph node cells from AND;CaMKIIg-B*-50 and AND littermates were labeled with CFSE and stimulated in vitro with 0, 1, or 10 mM of moth cytochrome c peptide 88103 (MCC).
Each day, CD41Va111 cells were gated for CFSE fluorescence and for the percentage of cells that stained with 7AAD.
consistent with the level of overexpressed protein as Since we could not detect increased CaMKII activity in memory versus naive cells, we reasoned that CaMKIIdetected by Western blots.
The phenotypic results suggest that CaMKIIg contrib-activity must be important for the induction rather than maintenance of T cell memory.
We tested the hypothesisutes to the formation of a memory T cell response.
This could come about in one of two ways: CaMKII may that CaMKII activity increases upon activation and cell division by stimulating purified AND TCR transgenicregulate the formation of memory cells versus activa tion-induced apoptosis; alternatively, CaMKII could pro-cells in vitro with pigeon cytochrome c peptide and antigen-presenting cells from B10.A mice.
Cells werevide an epigenetic mechanism for maintaining T cell memory.
To begin to distinguish between these two cultured in the presence of antigen and antigen-presenting cells and supplemented with 20 U/ml rIL-2 after 48possibilities, we measured CaMKII activity in wild-type memory versus naive cells.
We used two methods to hr.
Cell lysates were generated from cells stimulated for different lengths of time and assayed for CaMKII activityenrich for memory and naive cells in order to avoid potential artifacts introduced by antibody-mediated cel-compared to unstimulated cells.
Cells were also labeled with CFSE at time 0 and analyzed by flow cytometry tolular manipulations.
We also added another control for specificity by carrying out the reactions in the presence determine the distribution of cell divisions (Figure 7C).
The level of autonomous (calcium-independent) CaMKIIand absence of a CaMKII peptide inhibitor (CKI) (Smith et al., 1992).
Since the level of autonomous activity was activity increased at days 4 and 5 but not at day 2, suggesting that autonomous CaMKII activity increaseslow, we used 1/10 the amount of lysate for the calcium dependent versus the autonomous reaction.
The results not simply in response to activation signals but in concert with antigen-and IL-2-mediated cell division (Figurerevealed no significant difference in the calcium-depen dent or autonomous activity in naive versus memory 7D).
The magnitude of the increase by densitometry was approximately 1.4-fold over the background at time zero.populations (Figure 7B).
CaMKII Influences T Cell Memory Formation 463 previous activation in the nervous system may play an analogous role in lymphocytes.
Yet, CaMKII is ubiquitously expressed, and its tailored biochemical characteristics were presumably selected to function in a variety of cell types.
Genetic and biochemical processes are often used and coopted during evolution, so, in retrospect, the notion that there are distant parallels between the memory of experience and the memory of antigen experience may have a basis in fact.
In this report, we document that a point mutation in CaMKIIgB causes two readily apparent effects on the physiology of the immune system.
Most notably, CaMKIIgB* enhances the antigen-dependent formation of T cell memory.
This reverse genetics approach was reinforced by the observation that the activation and induction of cell division in primary cultures of T cells causes an increase in endogenous CaMKIIg activity.
A second observation, that may or may not be related, is that CaMKIIgB* lengthened the DP thymocyte lifespan.
We deduce that the memory phenotype of cells from CaMKIIgB* mice, as defined by the expression of CD44, CD62L, and CD45RB cell surface markers, is indicative of memory T cells able to mediate a secondary immune response.
First, the conversion to the memory-phenotype increased with age, similar to that which is seen in wild-type mice.
Second, the increase in memory-phenotype cells was specific for cells with the potential to recognize environmental antigens, i.e., cells with a transgenic TCR that expressed CaMKIIg-B* remained naive.
Third, memory-phenotype cells from CaMKIIgB* mice expressed an expanded range of cytokines after stimulation that was indistinguishable from wild-type memory cells (Cho et al., 1999).
Fourth, T cells from CaMKIIgB* mice exhibit an enhanced recall response to antigen.
One issue concerns the long-term survival of peripheral Figure 7.
CaMKII Kinase Activity in T Cells from Wild-Type Mice blood T cells stimulated by SEB.
Based on the steady(A) CaMKIIg activity in thymocytes and Jurkat T cells.
Lysates were state increases in memory cells in the peripheral lymphoid isolated from thymocytes explanted from CaMKIIg-B* and control organs, we might have expected the Vb8 T cells to per-mice as well as Jurkat lymphoma cells transfected with CaMKIIg-B* sist at higher levels in CaMKIIgB* mice.
That fact thator empty vector.
SEB causes an initial increase, but no enhanced persis-(B) Naive and memory cells from wild-type mice have equivalent basal calcium-independent CaMKII activity.
Naive and memory cells tence, is probably related to the observation that superwere purified by FACS sorting (top) or magnetic bead negative selec-antigen activation leads not to memory but rather to tion (bottom).
FACS resulted in 98% purity in memory and naive clonal exhaustion and unresponsiveness (Rammensee populations.
Magnetic bead depletion resulted in enriched popula-et al., 1989; Rellahan et al., 1990; McCormack et al., 1993; tions: naive cells, 84% CD44lo, 11% CD44hi; memory cells, 33% Webb et al., 1994).
Indeed, if the CaMKIIgB* transgeneCD44lo and 51% CD44hi T cells.
Where indicated, 20 mM of CaMKII did lead to memory under these circumstances weinhibitory peptide (CKI) was added to the kinase reaction.
would worry that the effect was not physiologically sig-(C) Cell division of antigen-activated cells.
Transgenic AND CD4 LN cells were labeled with CFSE and stimulated in vitro by mitomycin nificant.
In every assay, the effect of CaMKIIgB* was to c-treated APC and 1 mM PCC peptide.
Twenty U/ml IL-2 was added enhance a natural process of proliferation and memory on day 2.
At the times indicated, cells were analyzed by FACS for formation.
the intensity of CFSE fluorescence.
We believe that there are two possibilities to explain (D) CaMKII autonomous activity was increased during late-stage an increase in the number of memory cells.
One relatesantigen activation.
Non-CFSE-labeled transgenic AND CD4 LN cells to the fate of antigen-activated T cells.
Such cells eitherwere activated in parallel with cells from (C), and, at the times indiundergo activation-induced cell death or differentiatecated, cells were harvested for the IP kinase assay.
Where indicated, 50 mM CKI was added to the kinase reaction.
to form memory cells, and it is possible that CaMKIIg regulates this fate decision.
A second possibility is that the lifespan of the memory cell could be increased; how Discussion ever, this possibility is not tenable given the recent work showing that memory cells have an indefinite lifespan Memory T Cells even in the absence of antigen (Sprent et al., 1997; MuThere is no reason a priori that memory in the nervous rali-Krishna et al., 1999; Swain et al., 1999).
We favor system shares more than an etymological similarity to instead the idea that CaMKII regulates the differentiation memory in the immune system.
We were thus somewhat into memory cells but not the maintenance of the mem ory phenotype.
In support of this interpretation, wesurprised to find that a major biochemical decoder of Cell 464 found there to be an increased antigen or superantigen-Thymocyte Lifespan An extravagant aspect of T cell development is the mas-induced expansion of T cell in culture or in vivo.
Move over, at least part of this increase can be explained by sive cell death that occurs as a natural part of thymic selection.
Rather than die continuously with a constanta decrease in activation-induced cell death (Figure 6).
The notion is that memory cells arise from dividing ef-probability, thymocytes have a fixed lifespan of approximately 3.5 days (Huesmann et al., 1991; Shortman etfector cells and the level of CaMKII autonomous activity is an important regulator of survival and differentiation al., 1991), and we have found that this fixed lifespan is manifested in thymocyte survival in vitro as well (J. D. B.,at this critical step.
Remarkably, this is consistent with the role of CaMKII in the induction but not the mainte-unpublished data).
Thus, there must be a mechanism to keep track of time in this nondividing population.nance of LTP (Malinow et al., 1989; Otmakhov et al., 1997).
Since CaMKIIgB* mice displayed an extended lifespan both in vivo and in vitro, the calcium-independent formIn the formation of learning and memory in the brain, CaMKII acts as a decoder of the frequency of calcium of CaMKIIg thus appears to regulate the timing of programmed cell death.
This may be a key to its function,oscillations (De Koninck and Schulman, 1998).
Higher frequencies result in LTP, and lower frequencies result both in the thymus and the generation of memory T cells.in long-term depression.
This decoding function, and memory itself, is critically dependent on the establish-Again, there are similarities, but also important differences in comparing the thymic phenotypes of Bcl-2 andment of autonomous CaMKII kinase activity through the phosphorylation of threonine 286 (Giese et al., 1998).
Is CaMKIIgB transgenic mice.
Both DP and SP thymocytes from Bcl-2 transgenic mice exhibit an increased lifespanit possible that CaMKII in T cells is regulated in the similar fashion?
A body of work has shown that calcium measured in vitro (Sentman et al., 1991; Strasser et al., 1991), and we have found that DP thymocytes from Bcl-2oscillations occur in nonexcitable cells, and both fre quency and amplitude can be determined by the charac-transgenic mice label very slowly with an estimated in vivo lifespan of more than 8 days (J. D. B. and S. M. H.,teristics of agonist-receptor interactions (Thomas et al., 1996).
In particular, ligation of the TCR causes calcium unpublished data).
Despite this profound effect on survival, Bcl-2 mice do not have an increase in total thymo-oscillations in T cells, and the oscillatory frequency can be the determining factor in activation of transcription cytes but do show a greater number of SPs and a skewed selection toward the CD8 lineage (Linette et al.,factors such as NF-AT and NFkB (Dolmetsch et al., 1997, 1998).
Furthermore, recent evidence indicates that 1994; Tao et al., 1994).
We conclude that, separate from the survival effects of Bcl-2, CaMKII plays a part in thememory T cells arise from activated T cells that have undergone numerous rounds of activation-induced cell strict control of DP lifespan.
In this regard, it will be worthwhile to dissect how CaMKII may link up to thedivision (Opferman et al., 1999).
We suggest that the duration of signaling through the TCR and other factors, mechanisms that measure time.
such as coreceptor stimulation, may affect the fre Experimental Proceduresquency and perhaps the amplitude of calcium oscillations.
This, in turn, could determine the level of autono Animalsmous CaMKII activity and the probability of survival as All mice were bred and maintained in the animal facility at the Univer a memory cell.
sity of California, San Diego.
AND T cell antigen receptor transgenic Although we wish to draw an analogy between survival mice were previously described (Kaye et al., 1989).
CaMKIIg-B*-32 transgenic mice were generated at the Scripps Research Instituteand memory in lymphocytes and LTP in neurons, there by Jenny Price.
CaMKIIg-B*-50 transgenic mice were generated byare most certainly important differences.
Intracellular the UCSD Transgenic Core by Michelle Paulus.
Inbred mice werecalcium oscillations in lymphocytes result from the reobtained from Jackson Laboratory.lease of calcium from intracellular stores and the activa tion of store-operated calcium (CRAC) channels in the Cell Culture, NTOC, and Transfection plasma membrane (Zweifach and Lewis, 1993).
In con-Thymus, LN, and spleen cells were harvested and maintained in RPMI media as previously described (Sharp et al., 1997).
Two roundstrast, calcium oscillations in postsynaptic cells result of B cell depletion were carried out using sheep anti-mouse IgMfrom an entirely different mechanism that involves calfrom Dynal as per manufacturers instructions.
Memory cells werecium influx through NMDA receptors (Artola and Singer, enriched by depleting for B cells and MEL-14 (L-selectin) positive1993).
In addition, lymphocyte memory involves survival cells.
Jurkat cells were transfected as described with an efficiency of proliferating cells in the face of activation-induced cell of 5%30% (Jacinto et al., 1998).
For NTOC, neonatal thymus organs death, whereas LTP occurs in a nondividing neuronal were removed from 1-day-old pups and cultured as described (Sharp et al., 1997).population.
We imagine that CaMKII is but one procesFor recall responses, mice were immunized with 100 mg KLH insor of cell-type specific input and functions to initiate complete Freunds adjuvant.
Cells were cultured with APC and KLHdifferentiation programs that are entirely divergent in for 72 hr and pulsed with 1 mCi 3H-thymidine for the last 20 hr of lymphocytes and neurons.
culture.
AND proliferation cultures were done as previously deWe note that survival is not sufficient for enhanced scribed (Sharp et al., 1997).
KLH-DNP and KLH were from Calbio memory T cell formation.
In mice expressing a Bcl-2 chem, Inc. (La Jolla, CA).
Pigeon cytochrome c peptide 88104 (PCC) and moth cytochrome c peptide 88103 (MCC) were synthesized attransgene in the T cell lineage, activation-induced cell the UCSD peptide facility.
Complete Freunds Adjuvant (CFA) wasdeath was decreased, but there was no observed infrom Sigma Chemical Co.crease in the number of memory cells (Strasser et al., 1991; Petschner et al., 1998).
Yet, whereas Bcl-2 is not Plasmids and Transgenesis sufficient to enhance memory cell formation, it is possi-SRaCaMKIIg-B* was obtained from Colleen Sheridan (Nghiem et al., 1994).
The insert along with the CD4 silencer was cloned intoble that it is a downstream target of CaMKII.
CaMKII Influences T Cell Memory Formation 465 the XhoI site of pTEX (Zhumabekov et al., 1995) (details available Acknowledgments upon request).
The expression cassette was liberated from the plasmid for microinjection.
Eight founders were obtained of which two We thank Cornelius Murre for critique of this manuscript, Paul Nghiem for discussion, Colleen Sheridan for the CKIIg-B* construct,expressed mRNA and one was maintained (CaMKIIg-B*-32).
By Southern blot analysis, we estimate that there are one to two copies and Nigel Killeen for the CD4 promoter/enhancer construct.
We thank Mariana Van Stipdonk for help with the CFSE experiments.integrated for this line.
For generation of CaMKIIg-B*-50 mice, CaMKIIg-B* was cloned into LL428 (N. Killeen, UCSF).
LL428 is J. D. B. was supported in part by the University of California San Diego Medical Scientist Training Program program.
This work wasderived from construct i in Sawada et al.(1994).
The expression cassette was separated from the plasmid for microinjection.
Five supported by RO1AI2137215 to S. M. H. founders were obtained, of which two expressed mRNA.
Received July 22, 1999; revised January 18, 2000.
Primers One set of primers was used for detection of the transgene in genomic DNA and in cDNA (59 primer, 5-ATGATGCATCGTCAGGAGAA-3;
