PII: S0092-8674(01)00596-7 Cell, Vol.
107, 739750, December 14, 2001, Copyright 2001 by Cell Press Yeast Cbk1 and Mob2 Activate Daughter-Specific Genetic Programs to Induce Asymmetric Cell Fates daughter asymmetry began to be revealed.
Haploid yeast switch between a and mating types.
Mothers switch mating type, while daughters do not.
Once they Alejandro Colman-Lerner1, Tina E. Chin, and Roger Brent The Molecular Sciences Institute have budded, the former daughters (now mothers)2168 Shattuck Avenue switch mating type (Strathern and Herskowitz, 1979 andBerkeley, California 94704 references therein).
Switching occurs by replacement of a-or-specific DNA sequences at the MAT locus with sequences of the opposite mating type (OshimaSummary and Takano, 1971), a process initiated when the HO endonuclease, expressed only in mothers (Nasmyth,In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, mothers and daughters 1983), makes a double strand break at MAT (Strathernhave distinct fates.
We show that Cbk1 kinase and its et al., 1982).
Since the 1980s, study of the molecularinteracting protein Mob2 regulate this asymmetry by mechanisms causing the differences between mothersinducing daughter-specific genetic programs.
Daughand daughters has occupied a mainstream place in mo-ter-specific expression is due to Cbk1/Mob2-depenlecular biology.
Yeast mother-daughter asymmetry pro-dent activation and localization of the Ace2 transcripvides a tractable system to elucidate the means bytion factor to the daughter nucleus.
Ectopic localization which cells give rise to progeny whose gene expressionof active Ace2 to mother nuclei is sufficient to activate differs as a consequence of internal molecular eventsdaughter-specific genes in mothers.
Eight genes are rather than as a consequence of different environmentaldaughter-specific under the tested conditions, while conditions.two are daughter-specific only in saturated cultures.
Continued work during the 1980s revealed the SWISome daughter-specific gene products contribute to gene products, positive regulators of HO transcriptioncell separation by degrading the cell wall.
These exper(Stern et al., 1984; Breeden and Nasmyth, 1987).
By theiments define programs of gene expression specific early 1990s, some lines of evidence led to the view thatto daughters and describe how those programs are mother-specific transcription of HO was due to Swi5,controlled.
which was degraded in daughters but a small portion of which was protected in mothers (Tebb et al., 1993).Introduction However, failure to detect asymmetrical localization of Swi5 led to the suspicion that this idea might be incorrectMulticellular organisms are made up of different cell (Nasmyth, 1993), and isolation of ash1 mutants, in whichtypes organized into tissues and organs.
One source switching occurs in daughters, led to the current modelof cellular diversity is asymmetric cell division due to for mother-specific expression of HO (Sil and Hersko-differential segregation of mRNAs and proteins that dewitz, 1996; Bobola et al., 1996).
In this view, daughterstermine cell fate.
Numerous mechanisms underlying do not switch mating type because Ash1 represses tran-such asymmetry have been described in bacteria (Jascription of their HO genes.
Ash1 functions only incobs and Shapiro, 1998), worms (Rose and Kemphues, daughters because its mRNA, synthesized in early G1,1998), flies (Lu et al., 1998, 2000), and yeast (below).
is transported via actin cables to the bud, a processSaccharomyces cerevisiae reproduces by budding.
that requires Myo4, She2, She3, She4, and Bni1.
In theMother cells form buds that separate to become daughbud, ASH1 mRNA is translated at anaphase, whereuponters.
Daughters and mothers are genetically identical Ash1 protein translocates to the daughter nucleus and but constitute distinct cell types.
Many daughter comporepresses HO (Sil and Herskowitz, 1996; Bobola et al., nents, such as the cell wall and plasma membrane, have 1996; Jansen et al., 1996).
Aside from this regulation of been newly synthesized during the budding process.
HO, molecular mechanisms for mother-daughter asymIn addition, newborn daughters are smaller than their metry have not been described.
mothers, and thus spend more time in G1 before they are ASH1 transcription itself requires SWI5.
Gene expreslarge enough to start budding themselves.
Separation of sion monitoring studies have shown that SWI5 belongs daughters from mothers is asymmetric.
During budding, to a cell cycle regulated expression cluster induced chitin is preferentially deposited at the bud site, where during the G2 and M phases of the cell cyclein this it forms a ring around the base of the emerging bud case, the CLB2 cluster, named for its prototype mem(Sloat and Pringle, 1978).
After the cell membranes sepa-ber, the gene encoding the B-type cyclin Clb2 (Spellman rate, a septum made of cell wall material forms between et al., 1998).
Phosphorylation of Swi5 by Cdc28/Clb2 the cells, inside the chitin ring.
Degradation of this sep-causes Swi5 to concentrate in the cytoplasm.
At anatum causes cell separation.
The mother retains most of phase, Clb2 is degraded, and dephosphorylated Swi5 its chitin and displays a ring (the bud scar) visible by accumulates and migrates to the nucleus (Nasmyth et staining chitin with calcofluor, while the daughter is left al., 1990; Moll et al., 1991), where it induces expression with a circle in which chitin has been degraded (the of ASH1 and other genes in early G1.
birth scar; Pringle, 1991).
ACE2 is another member of the CLB2 cluster.
Ace2 During the 1970s, one mechanism underlying mother-and Swi5 are paralogs that date from a duplication that doubled the ancestral S. cerevisiae genome (Wolfe and Shields, 1997).
The proteins are 34% identical in se-1 Correspondence: colman-lerner@molsci.org Cell 740 Figure 1.
Cts1 Is Expressed Only in Daughters, and Its Expression Depends on Cbk1 and Ace2 (a) Left panels: PCTS1-YFP fluorescence in wt (YAS254-5c), cbk1 (ACLY245), ace2 (ACLY-311), and swi5 (ACLY313) cells.
Right panels: transmission light image.
(b) Time-lapse images of a YAS245-C cell bearing PCTS1-YFP growing on an agarose pad.
Numbers indicate elapsed time (in minutes) after the initial frame.
(c) Top panel: PHO-YFP and PSIC1-YFP fluorescence in wt cells.
Bottom panels: Transmission light image.
(d) Cts1-YFP fluorescence in ACLY362 grown at pH 7.
(1) Overlay of Cts1-YFP fluorescence (yellow) and calcofluor staining of chitin (blue).
(2) Enlarged view of the mother-daughter pair in (1).
(3) Linear scan along the long axis of the mother-daughter cell pair in 1.
Yellow, YFP; blue, calcofluor.
(e) Top panels: PDSE3-and PDSE4-YFP fluorescence in wt (YAS254-5C) cells 100 min after release from factor arrest.
Bottom panels: Transmission light image of cells in left panels.
Arrowheads in (c) and (e) indicate mothers.
quence and recognize the same DNA sites in vitro (Dohr-the cbk1 separation defect, and Cbk1 and Ace2 interact in two-hybrid experiments, suggesting that Cbk1mann et al., 1996).
Either is sufficient for expression of several genes (McBride et al., 1999), including SIC1 might regulate CTS1 expression by activating Ace2 (Racki et al., 2000).
We isolated Cbk1 independently as(Nugroho and Mendenhall, 1994; Toyn et al., 1997), EGT2, which encodes a protein involved in cell separa-a target in a hunt for peptide aptamers that blocked factor-induced cell cycle arrest (Geyer et al., 1999).
Wetion (Bobola et al., 1996; Kovacech et al., 1996), and ASH1 (Bobola et al., 1996).
However, in some cases, the showed that Cbk1 interacts with the pheromone pathway proteins Ste5 and Ste50 (Geyer et al., 1999).
cbk1function of the paralogs has diverged.
Ace2, but not Swi5, is needed for the expression of CTS1, SCW11, strains show partial resistance to factor and defects in mating projection formation (shmooing), whichYER124C, and YHR143W (Kuranda and Robbins, 1991; Doolin et al., 2001), while Swi5, but not Ace2, is required prompted us to propose that Cbk1 connects the pheromone pathway to pathways that regulate cell morphol-for expression of HO (Dohrmann et al., 1992).
Expression of CTS1, which encodes chitinase, a se-ogy (Geyer et al., 1999).
Cbk1 interacts with a number of proteins, including Mob1 (Ito et al., 2001), which iscreted enzyme required for cell separation, requires the protein kinase Cbk1 (Racki et al., 2000).
cbk1 strains needed for exit from mitosis, presumably to activate the Mob1-interacting protein kinase Dbf2 (Lee et al., 2001).fail to separate after mitosis and grow in clumps (Racki et al., 2000, and this paper).
Mutations in ACE2 suppress Cbk1 also interacts with Mob2, a protein whose se Daughter-Specific Genetic Programs in Yeast 741 quence is 90% identical to that of Mob1 (Racki et al., side of the bud neck, while calcofluor staining of chitin was concentrated on the opposite side.
These results2000).
Here, we describe two distinct programs of gene ex-are consistent with the idea that chitinase, secreted by daughters, is concentrated on the daughter side of thepression in daughter cells.
Both programs require Cbk1, Mob2, and Ace2.
We first found that the CTS1 gene is bud neck.
The only previously studied case of asymmetric ex-expressed only by daughters.
We identified other genes coexpressed under seemingly irrelevant conditions, pression in yeast, mother-specific expression of HO, results from daughter-specific accumulation of the HOthen determined which of these candidate genes had promoters that drove daughter-specific expression.
repressor Ash1.
Therefore, we tested whether daughterspecific expression of CTS1 depended on Ash1 or Ash1Daughter-specific expression results from Cbk1-and Mob2-dependent activation and localization of Ace2 to localization.
We observed the expression of PCTS1-YFP in ash1, myo4, and she4 cells (not shown).
In allthe daughter nucleus.
One daughter-specific expression program consists of eight genes induced in daughter strains, the YFP signal was daughter-specific.
Therefore, daughter-specific CTS1 expression was indepen-cells in early G1.
It includes genes of known function, and four relatively uncharacterized genes which we dent of Ash1 and the machinery involved in ASH1 mRNA transport.named DSE, for Daughter-Specific Expression.
The other program consists of two genes, ASH1 and EGT2.
We investigated the dependence of CTS1 daughterspecific gene expression on Cbk1 and Ace2.
In ace2This program is conditional: in exponentially growing cultures, these genes are expressed in both mothers and cells, PCTS1-YFP fluorescence was undetectable; in cbk1 cells, PCTS1-YFP fluorescence was greatly reduceddaughters, but in saturated cultures, they are expressed only in daughters.
Taken together with the enzymatic and asymmetric expression was lost.
Deletion of SWI5, which is not involved in CTS1 expression, did not affectactivities of the encoded proteins, our results indicate that some daughter-specific gene products bring about asymmetric PCTS1-YFP fluorescence (Figure 1a).
In contrast, deletion of cbk1 or ace2 did not affect mother-cell separation by degrading the septum from the daughter side of the mother-daughter pair.
specific expression of PHO-YFP, while deletion of SWI5 abolished it (not shown).
Results CTS1 Defines a Larger Set of Cbk1-and Ace2Dependent Daughter-Specific GenesCTS1 Is Expressed in and Localized to Daughter Cells We set out to identify possible additional daughter-specific genes by whole-genome gene expression monitor-To characterize Cbk1-dependent CTS1 regulation, we constructed a single-copy plasmid that carried the YFP ing.
No mother-daughter differential whole-genome expression data was available to us.
However, we testedgene under the control of the CTS1 promoter (762 to 1; here, we refer to the nucleotide upstream of the the idea that other daughter-specific genes might be coregulated with CTS1 under different, seemingly irrele-start codon as 1).
In exponentially growing yeast car rying PCTS1-YFP, fluorescence was restricted to daugh-vant conditions.
Since CTS1 is cell cycle regulated, we first examinedters in mother-daughter pairs (Figure 1a).
In contrast, only mothers expressed PHO (1807 to 1)-YFP, and both other genes that were cell cycle regulated in a CTS1-like manner.
From gene expression monitoring experiments,mothers and daughters expressed PSIC1 (1213 to 1)-YFP (Figure 1c).
To confirm the daughter cell designation, CTS1 has been grouped in a set of genes designated as the SIC1 cluster.
This cluster is transcribed in latewe monitored cells bearing PCTS1-YFP by time-lapse pho tomicroscopy.
We observed that after each cell finished M and/or early G1 (Spellman et al., 1998; Figure 2a).
Some of the SIC1 cluster genes are known to requiredividing, only the newly budded cell, the daughter, be came fluorescent (n 50 cells).
In Figure 1b, we show either Swi5 or Ace2 for expression, and most contain putative binding sites for these activators in their regula-one example cell.
At time 0, the unbudded cell displays fluorescence, consistent with CTS1 being expressed in tory regions (Spellman et al., 1998).
We used YFP reporters to examine expression from the promoters (fromearly G1.
As the cell buds, YFP fluorescence decreases (from 15 to 90 min), and the newly formed daughter 1200 to 1 for each gene) for the genes in the SIC1 cluster and from other genes whose expression is con-becomes fluorescent (from 105 to 150 min).
These re sults are consistent with the conclusion that CTS1 ex-trolled by Swi5 and Ace2 (see Tables 1 and 2).
Seven of the 26 tested promoters (CST13, PRY3, SCW11,pression is restricted to daughters.
We also observed that in W303 diploid strains carrying PCTS1-YFP, fluores-YER124C, YHR143W, YOR264W, and YNR067C) directed daughter-specific fluorescence in exponentiallycence was restricted to daughters (not shown).
Since CTS1, the gene encoding chitinase, was ex-growing cells.
16 promoters displayed approximately equal fluorescence in mothers and daughters, and threepressed only in daughters, we wondered whether chi tinase might be concentrated in the daughter cell wall.
showed no detectable YFP fluorescence (Figure 1e and Tables 1 and 2).
Six of the eight daughter-specific pro-We constructed ACLY362, a strain that expresses a Cts1-YFP fusion, and examined the fluorescence local-moters (including CTS1) belonged to a smaller, eightgene subnode of the SIC1 cluster (Figure 2a).
Four of theization.
In mother-daughter pairs, Cts1-YFP localized to the bud neck (Figure 1d).
To determine whether Cts1-genes (YER124C, YHR143W, YOR264W, and YNR067C) were previously only partly characterized (Doolin et al.,YFP was localized to the daughter side of the bud neck cell wall, we stained the cells with calcofluor white.
As 2001, Drees et al., 2001); we named these DSE1, DSE2, DSE3, and DSE4 (for Daughter-Specific Expression).
Asshown in Figure 1d, YFP fluorescence was seen on one Cell 742 Figure 2.
Coregulation of Daughter-Specific Genes and Analysis of Existing WholeGenome Expression Data (a) Expression of the SIC1 cluster genes as yeast progress through the cell cycle after release from factor-, cdc15-2-, and cdc284-arrest and after collection from an elutriation chamber (Spellman et al., 1998).
Members of the first group of daughter-specific genes defined here (CTS1, CST13, DSE1, DSE2, SCW11, DSE3, DSE4 and PRY3) are underlined and marked with a circle.
Note that CTS1, CST13, DSE1, DSE2, and SCW11 belong to one branch of this cluster (in cyan) while DSE3 and DSE4 belong to another.
These two genes differ in their regulation from the other daughter-specific genes in response to some perturbations; in particular, DSE3 and DSE4 are not induced by factor.
(b) Daughter-specific genes (marked with circles) are coregulated in response to deletion of different genes (Hughes et al., 2000).
Each column corresponds to a different deletion or drug treatment.
(c) Unconditional and conditional daughterspecific genes (marked with circles) cluster together in the environmental stress response data set (Gasch et al., 2000).
Stress conditions are heat shock (HS), increasing concentrations of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), menadione (M), dithiothreitol (dtt), diamide (D) and sorbitol (Sor), time after amino acid deprivation (aa), nitrogen depletion (N dpl) or growth on YPD (YPD), time course of diauxic shift (DS) or steady state (SS), and growth in different carbon sources (CS).
In (a) and (b), we clustered the original raw data using the Cluster software (Eisen et al., 1998); in (c), the clustering was performed by Gasch et al.(2000).
Red indicates upregulation and green indicates downregulation with respect to reference mRNA from cells grown asynchronously (a), from wild-type cells (b), and from cells that were not perturbed by stressful treatment (c).
Gray boxes indicate data missing from the published datasets.
(d) ASH1 and EGT2 expression in saturated cultures is daughter-specific.
Expression of PASH1-YFP and PEGT2-YFP in cells from exponentially growing (left) or saturated cultures (OD6005, right) of YAS245-5C.
We identified cells as mothers or daughters by staining chitin with calcofluor (arrows indicate birth scars; arrowheads, bud scars).
Figure shows representative mother-daughter pairs.
for CTS1, there was no detectable YFP expression from similar patterns of expression in circumstances other than cell cycle progression.
To test this idea, we exam-these seven promoters in cbk1 or ace2 strains, and YFP expression in swi5 strains was indistinguishable ined whole-genome expression data from cells perturbed by environmental stresses and carbon sourcefrom that in wild-type (not shown).
changes (Gasch et al., 2000) and by deletion of different genes and various drug treatments (Hughes et al., 2000).ASH1 and EGT2 Define Another, Conditional, Set of Cbk1-and Ace2-Dependent In both datasets, most of the daughter-specific genes were coregulated (Table 1 and Figure 2c and 2c).
PRY3Daughter-Specific Genes If the eight daughter-specific genes defined a transcrip-did not cluster with the rest of the daughter-specific genes in any of the other datasets, while DSE4 onlytional regulon, then they might be expected to show Daughter-Specific Genetic Programs in Yeast 743 Table 1.
Genes that Show Daughter-Specific Expression Env Stress Deletion Gene Function Loc EG SC Data Set Data Set CTS1 Endochitinase CW (E) D D Yes Yes CST13 Stress Response?
Nuc (P) D D Yes Yes SCW11 Glucanase?
CW (P) D D Yes Yes PRY3 Mating Response?
CW (E) D D No No DSE1/YER124C Signal Transduction?
Cyt (P) D D Yes Yes DSE2/YHR143W Glucanase?
CW (P) D D Yes Yes DSE3/YOR264W Glucanase?
Nuc (P) D D No Yes DES4/YNR067C Unknown CW (P) D D Yes Yes ASH1 Transcription Factor Nuc (E) M/D D Yes No EGT2 Endoglucanase?
CW (E) M/D D Yes Yes Daughter-specific and conditional daughter-specific expression groups.
Possible functions of the encoded proteins (detailed in the text).
Abbreviations: Loc, localization; CW, cell wall; Nuc, nuclear; Cyt, cytoplasmic; E, experimentally determined; P, predicted from sequence; EG, Exponential Growth, pattern of expression in exponentially growing cultures; SC, saturated cultures (OD6005); D, daughterspecific; M/D, mother and daughter; M, mother-specific; ND, not detected; Env Stress Data Set, coexpressed in environmental stress response data set (Gasch et al., 2000); Deletion Data Set, coexpressed in the deletion data set (Hughes et al., 2000).
clustered with the other daughter-specific genes in the of asymmetric localization of Ace2.
To test this idea, we used a plasmid containing a YFP-Ace2 fusion proteindeletion data set.
ASH1 was coregulated with the daughter-specific under the control of PACE2.
This plasmid complemented the separation defect in ace2 cells (not shown), indicat-genes in the stress-response dataset but not in the dele tion dataset.
These results suggested that under envi-ing that the fusion protein was functional.
We observed the localization of YFP-Ace2 at the end of the first mitosisronmental stress conditions, expression of ASH1 (and perhaps of other genes) might be restricted to daugh-after factor arrest (approximately 80 min).
Arrest induces formation of mating projections that are not re-ters.
To test this idea, we examined YFP fluorescence driven by PASH1 and the other previously tested promot-sorbed, allowing mothers to be distinguished from daughters born after release.
At the end of mitosis, YFP-ers in saturated cultures (see Experimental Procedures).
Here, for daughter cell designation, we stained cells with Ace2 expression was confined to daughter nuclei (Figure 3a), except for a fraction of cells (10%) that showedcalcofluor white, which labels bud scars (Pringle, 1991), present only in mothers.
Under this stress condition, both mother and daughter nuclear YFP signal.
PASH1-YFP and PEGT2-YFP-derived fluorescence were only visible in cells lacking bud scars, i.e., daughters, as Ace2 Transiently Translocateswere the eight previously identified daughter-specific to the Mother Nucleuspromoters (Figure 2d).
The remaining 16 promoters eiWe realized that localization of Ace2 to the daughterther did not direct YFP expression or directed equal nucleus could be due to at least three mechanisms: (1)expression in mothers and daughters (see Table 2).
In preferential accumulation of Ace2 in the cytoplasm ofsaturated cultures, daughter-specific expression of the future daughter followed by import into the nearestASH1 and EGT2 required Ace2 and Cbk1 but was indenucleus, (2) export/degradation of Ace2 from/within thependent of Swi5 (not shown).
This observation sugmother nucleus, or (3) preferential import of Ace2 intogested that EGT2 and ASH1 define a separate, condithe daughter nucleus.
To distinguish among these pos-tional program of daughter-specific gene expression sibilities, we monitored the localization of YFP-Ace2 inactive in saturated cultures.
cells released from factor arrest by time-lapse photomicroscopy.
Before its nuclear transport, YFP-Ace2 wasAce2 Localizes to the Daughter Nucleus evenly distributed in the cytoplasm of the mother andExpression of ACE2-dependent genes was restricted to the nascent daughter.
Initially, YFP-Ace2 translocateddaughters.
We hypothesized that this might be the result to both mother and daughter nuclei.
Whereas YFP fluorescence in the mother nucleus disappeared rapidly, it Table 2.
Genes that Do Not Show Daughter-Specific Expression continued to increase in the daughter nucleus up to a maximum at 22 min, after which it decreased (FiguresGene EG SC Gene EG SC 3b and 4c).
Since YFP-Ace2 was degraded in late G1 BUD9 M/D ND REM1 M/D ND in both cell types, it seemed possible that YFP-Ace2CDC6 M/D ND SIC1 M/D ND disappeared faster from mother nuclei because mothersCHS1 M/D ND TEC1 M/D ND complete G1 more rapidly.
To test this possibility, weCYK3 M/D ND YMR316C-A ND ND FAA3 ND ND YNL046W M/D ND made a strain that carried the cdc15-2 allele and used HO M ND YNL078W M/D ND this temperature-sensitive mutation to arrest cells at PCL2 M/D ND YGR149W M/D M/D telophase.
Mothers and daughters released from such PCL9 M/D ND YGR086C M/D M/D arrest cycle nearly synchronously during the first cellPIR3 M/D M/D YOR263C ND ND division (Futcher, 1999).
After release from cdc15 block,PST1 M/D M/D YFP-Ace2 still accumulated in daughter nuclei after a Abbreviations as in Table 1. transient state in which it localized to both nuclei (not Cell 744 Figure 3.
Ace2 Accumulates in the Daughter Nucleus (a) YFP-Ace2 fluorescence in wt (YAS245-5C) cells.
Left: YFP-Ace2 fluorescence 80 minutes after release from factor arrest.
Middle: DNA staining (DAPI).
Right: transmitted light image.
All three panels show the same cells.
(b) Time-lapse photomicroscopy of YFP-Ace fluorescence in wt cells after release from factor arrest.
Top left: transmitted light image after mounting cells on an agarose pad 30 minutes after release from factor arrest.
Remaining panels show time-lapse pictures starting 40 minutes after mounting (70114 min after factor arrest).
Numbers correspond to elapsed time in min after the first frame.
Double arrows indicate nuclei.
(c) Quantitation of YFP-Ace2 nuclear fluorescence of the cell labeled 1 in (b).
Values correspond to the computed YFP fluorescence over time, starting at 6 minutes after the first frame.
shown).
These findings are thus consistent with a combi-shares 31% sequence identity and 52% sequence similarity with Cbk1.
We suggest that Mob2 may be requirednation of mechanisms 2 and 3, in which asymmetric localization of Ace2 is the result of its rapid removal from to activate Cbk1.
the mother nucleus, either by degradation or export, together with its preferential import into the daughter nucleus.
Cbk1 and Mob2 Localize to the Growing Bud Tip, Then to the Bud Neck and the Daughter Nucleus To understand the mechanism of Cbk1/Mob2/Ace2 acti-The Cbk1 Interacting Protein Mob2 Is Required for Daughter-Specific Expression vation of daughter-specific genes, we determined the subcellular localization of Cbk1 and Mob2 using proteinIn order to gain further insight into the mechanism re sponsible for daughter-specific expression, we ana-fusions to GFP (Cbk1) or YFP (Mob2) and tracked fluorescence as cells progressed through the cell cycle afterlyzed the cell separation phenotype in strains which lacked the genes coding for proteins known to interact release from factor arrest.
Localization of Cbk1-GFP and Mob2-YFP was similar (Figures 4a and 5d, top).with Cbk1: Yol036, Lre1, Ssd1, Not3, and Mob2 (Racki et al., 2000).
Among these mutants, the mob2 strain, Before release from arrest, Cbk1-GFP and Mob2-YFP were localized to the schmoo tip.
In budding cells (50ACLY363, but no others, showed a cell separation defect (below).
In ACLY363, expression of constitutive daugh-min after release), both proteins were present in the growing bud membrane.
In large budded cells (80 minter-specific genes was undetectable.
In saturated cul tures, expression of EGT2 and ASH1 was greatly re-after release, in which mother and daughter DNA have separated), both proteins were localized to the bud neckduced and asymmetric expression was lost (data not shown).
This fact suggested that the separation defect and the daughter nucleus.
We performed time-lapse photomicroscopy of exponentially growing cultures toin mob2 cells arises because of defects in the expres sion of chitinase and other daughter-specific gene prod-determine if, as for Ace2, Cbk1 and Mob2 transiently localize to the mother nucleus.
We observed a smallucts.
The function of Mob2 is unknown, but its homolog, Mob1, interacts with the mitotic exit network kinase Dbf2 amount of Cbk1-GFP and Mob2-YFP in the mother nucleus (Figure 4b and not shown) that lasted for aboutand is required for its activation (Mah et al., 2001).
Dbf1 Daughter-Specific Genetic Programs in Yeast 745 Figure 4.
Colocalization of Cbk1 and Mob2 (a) Cbk1-GFP fluorescence in wt (ACLY315) cells after release from factor arrest.
(b) Time lapse photomicroscopy of ACLY315 cells growing on an agarose pad.
Numbers indicate the time in min after the first frame.
Arrowhead indicates the mother nucleus.
(c) Top: Cbk1-GFP fluorescence in mob2 cells (ACLY360).
Bottom: DNA staining (DAPI) of cells shown in the top panels.
Arrowhead indicates the bud neck.
(d) Mob2-YFP fluorescence in wt (ACLY364), ace2 (ACLY369), and cbk1 (ACLY368) cells.
(e) Two-hybrid mating analysis of Mob2-bait and Cbk1 and Ace21449 preys.
Panel shows a galactose/raffinose Xgal plate after 1 day at 30. pEG202 and pJG4-5 are the empty bait and prey vectors.
Dark patches indicate activation of the lacZ reporter due to protein interaction.
In (a) and (b), arrows indicate daughter nuclei.
In (a), (c), and (d), numbers represent time after release from factor arrest.
Note that in live cells, DAPI also stains mitochondria.
4 min, indicating that Cbk1 and Mob2 also transiently might be required for accumulation of Ace2 in the daughter nucleus but not for nuclear translocation per se.
Inlocalized to the mother nucleus.
the absence of Cbk1 or Mob2, daughter-specific genes were not expressed (Figure 1 and data not shown), evenCbk1 Kinase Activity and Mob2 Are Required for Transcriptionally Active Ace2 to Accumulate though Ace2 was in the nucleus.
This result suggested that Cbk1 and Mob2 have an additional function(s)in the Daughter Nucleus Since Cbk1 and Mob2 were necessary for the induction needed for Ace2 to activate transcription.
To test whether these functions required Cbk1 proteinof the daughter-specific Ace2-dependent genes, we ex amined whether asymmetric nuclear localization of Ace2 kinase activity, we constructed a strain that expresses a mutant Cbk1 (Cbk1-M429A) with a lesion in its ATPrequired Cbk1 and Mob2.
We monitored YFP-Ace2 in cbk1 and mob2 cells.
In these cells, YFP-Ace2 was binding pocket.
This lesion makes the ATP binding site larger, allowing it to interact with the inhibitors NaPP1present in both mother and daughter nuclei (Figure 5a and data not shown), suggesting that Cbk1 and Mob2 and 1NM-PP1 (Bishop et al., 2000).
In the absence of Cell 746 daughter nuclei (Figure 5a).
Similarly, Cbk1-M429A cells treated with inhibitors showed no YFP fluorescence from PCTS1 and other daughter-specific reporters (not shown).
These experiments indicate that Cbk1 kinase activity is required for specific accumulation of Ace2 in the daughter nucleus, and also for an additional function needed to activate transcription of daughter-specific genes.
Active Ectopic Ace2 Activates Daughter-Specific Genes in Mothers To determine if translocation of active Ace2 to the daughter nucleus was sufficient to bring about daughter-specific gene expression, we delivered active Ace2 to the mother nucleus and determined whether active ectopic Ace2 could induce daughter-specific genes in mothers.
Activation and proper localization of wild-type Ace2 requires Cbk1 and Mob2.
We reasoned that an Ace2 gain-of-function mutant such as Ace2-G128E, which is active in cbk1 mutants (Racki et al., 2000), might accumulate in both nuclei.
To test this idea, we used a reporter plasmid expressing YFP-Ace2-G128E controlled by PACE2 in wt cells.
This Ace2 mutant accumulated in mother and daughter nuclei at the end of mitosis (Figure 5b).
We then constructed a strain which expressed Ace2-G128E instead of Ace2 and examined expression of PCTS1-YFP.
In this strain, PCTS1-YFP expression was visible in both mothers and daughters (Figure 5c).
These results are consistent with the idea that localization of Ace2 to the daughter nucleus and its activation by Cbk1/Mob2 are sufficient for daughter-specific gene expression.
Cbk1, Mob2, and Ace2 Are Required to Localize One Another Cbk1 and Mob2 were required to localize Ace2 to the daughter nucleus.
Since Cbk1 and Mob2 interacted and colocalized to the growing bud tip, the bud neck, andFigure 5.
Cbk1 Targets Ace2 to the Daughter Nucleus and Activates the daughter nucleus, we examined the relevant deletionIt, Resulting in Daughter-Specific Gene Expression strains to determine whether they were required for each(a) Top: YFP-Ace2 expression under the control of the ACE2 pro moter in YAS245-5C (wt), ACLY245 (cbk1), and ACLY330 (express-others localization.
In mob2 cells, Cbk1-GFP was not ing Cbk1-M429A).
Fixed cells were imaged 80 minutes after release visible at the bud tip, although it still concentrated at from factor arrest.
In the case of ACLY330 cells, we released the bud neck at the end of mitosis (Figure 4c).
In this cultures from arrest and grew them in the presence or absence of mutant, a fraction of Cbk1-GFP localized constitutively2 M NaPP1.
Bottom: DAPI staining of the images on top.
to the nucleus.
In cbk1 yeast, Mob2-YFP fluorescence(b) Left: YFP-Ace2 (top) or YFP-Ace2-G128E (bottom) fluorescence showed a related pattern; it was not localized to the budin wt (YAS245-5C) cells transformed with either pACE2-YFP-Ace2 or pACE2-YFP-Ace2-G128E.
Middle: DAPI staining of the left panels.
tip or the bud neck during budding, but at the end of Right: transmitted light image of the left panel.
mitosis it concentrated in both mother and daughter (c) Left: PCTS1-YFP fluorescence in YAS254-5c (wt) or ACLY382 (ex-nuclei (Figure 4d, bottom).
These results are consistent pressing Ace2-G128E).
Right: transmitted light image of the left with the conclusion that Cbk1 and Mob2 are requiredpanel.
for the correct localization of one another in time and space.
The pattern of nuclear localization of Mob2 was similarinhibitors, as judged by cell morphology and expression of daughter-specific reporter constructs, the mutant ki-to that of Ace2.
Therefore, we asked if Ace2 was required for Mob2 nuclear transport.
To test this idea, we usednase had normal function.
However, in the presence of 100 nM NaPP1 or 1 M 1NM-PP1, cells carrying Cbk1-ace2 cells that expressed Mob2-YFP.
In these cells, Mob2-YFP fluorescence localized to the bud tip and theM429A showed the characteristic cbk1 separation defect (not shown).
Under these conditions, a Cbk1-bud neck but did not accumulate in the nucleus (Figure 4d, middle).
This finding suggested that Ace2 was re-M429A-GFP fusion exhibited a normal pattern of localization (not shown).
quired for Mob2 nuclear transport.
In further support of this conclusion, in yeast bearing the gain-of-functionIn untreated Cbk1-M429A cells, YFP-Ace2 was localized only to daughter nuclei.
In mutants treated with mutant Ace2-G128E, Mob2-YFP fluorescence localized to both mother and daughter nuclei at the end of mitosisinhibitors, YFP-Ace2 was localized to both mother and Daughter-Specific Genetic Programs in Yeast 747 born.
At that time, phosphorylation by Cdc28 causes accumulation of Ace2 in the cytoplasm (OConallain et al., 1999).
At the end of anaphase, when Cdc28 kinase activity drops, Ace2 specifically accumulates in the daughter nucleus.
Our data suggest that initially, Cbk1/ Mob2-activated Ace2 translocates to both mother and daughter nuclei, perhaps in a complex with Mob2 and Cbk1.
Later, import into the mother nucleus stops, and Ace2 in the mother nucleus is either degraded or exported.
Meanwhile, import of activated Ace2 into the daughter nucleus triggers expression of daughter-specific genes.
The Unconditional ProgramFigure 6.
Summary Model for Induction of Daughter-Specific Genetic Programs Our experiments defined a set of daughter-specific genes.
One of these genes, CTS1, is rather well studied,Ace2 is localized to the cytoplasm during mitosis due to phosphorylation (Ace2-P) by Cdc28/Cbl1 and Cdc28/Clb2.
At the end of mito-and three, SCW11, PRY3, and CTS13, have been at least sis, Clb1 and Clb2 are degraded, increasing the amount of nonphos-partially characterized (Cappellaro et al., 1998; Entian phorylated, noncytoplasmically retained Ace2.
At this time, Cbk1 et al., 1999; Ouspenski et al., 1999).
The other four genes, and Mob2 are localized to the bud neck.
Modification of Ace2 by YER124C, YHR143W, YOR264W, and YNR067C, are rel-Cbk1 (Ace2*), probably by phosphorylation, both targets Ace2 to the atively uncharacterized.
We named these genes DSE1,nucleus of the daughter cell and activates the Ace2 transcriptional DSE2, DSE3, and DSE4, for Daughter-Specific Expres-function.
Ace2 translocates to the nucleus, perhaps in a complex with Cbk1 and Mob2.
In the mother nucleus (left), the Ace2 complex sion.
Induction of these eight genes required Cbk1, (gray letters) disappears, due to export or degradation.
In the daugh-Mob2, and Ace2.
Cbk1-dependent (but not daughterter nucleus (right), Ace2 accumulates and induces expression of specific) expression of CTS1, SCW11, PRY3, and DSE4/ daughter-specific genes, such as CTS1, and of mother-daughter YNR067C has been noted recently by Bidlingmaier etgenes, such as SIC1.
In saturated cultures, Ace2 also induces exal.
(2001).
DSE1 might participate in pathways regulatingpression of a second set of conditional daughter-specific genes, cell wall metabolism, since yeast bearing deletions ofincluding ASH1 and EGT2.
dse1 have increased sensitivity to drugs that affect cell wall (Doolin et al., 2001), and Dse1 interacts by twohybrid analysis with the bud formation proteins Boi1(not shown).
Taken together, these results suggested and Boi2 (Drees et al., 2001).
Consideration of existingthat Mob2 might physically interact with Ace2.
Consissequence data suggested that the SCW11, DSE2, andtent with this idea, we observed that a Mob2 bait and an DSE4 products might help degrade the cell wall andAce21449 prey interact in two-hybrid experiments (Figure separate daughter cells from mother cells (see below).4e).
Thus, our results indicate that these three proteins By contrast, the sequence of the other daughter-specificinteract and are needed for the correct localization of genes (CST13, PRY3, and DSE3) did not immediatelyone another.
suggest their functions, but their daughter-specific expression suggests that they may also help establishDiscussion daughter fate.
We have identified two distinct programs of daughterspecific gene expression in S. cerevisiae.
Both programs The Conditional Program require Cbk1, Mob2, and Ace2.
One consists of genes Our results also uncovered a second program.
This prothat are constitutively expressed in daughters.
The other gram causes daughter-specific expression of genes unconsists of genes that are expressed in daughters condi-der particular environmental conditions.
In exponentially tionally, under the stress of growth to saturation.
Genes growing cultures, ASH1 and EGT2 are expressed in in both programs are required for cell separation.
mothers and daughters, and either Swi5 or Ace2 can Daughter-specific expression is the result of Cbk1-and activate their expression.
However, in saturated culMob2-dependent localization of Ace2 to the daughter tures, transcription of these genes is restricted to daughnucleus.
Cbk1 and Mob2 associate in two-hybrid experi-ter cells and shifts from dual control by Swi5 and Ace2 ments and likely form a complex, much like the Dbf2 to exclusive control by Ace2 (Figure 2d and Table 1).
In kinase pairs with Mob1 (Mah et al., 2001).
Moreover, the saturated cultures, expression of the Swi5-dependent fact that in two-hybrid experiments Cbk1 and Mob2 HO promoter is greatly diminished (Table 2), suggesting each interact with Ace2 and that all three proteins accu-that the shift in control may be due to a reduction in mulate in the daughter nucleus at the end of mitosis Swi5 activity.
suggests that they might form a three protein complex ASH1 protein product is expressed in daughters due (Finley and Brent, 1994).
to daughter-specific localization of its mRNA.
Our find ing that, in saturated cultures, activity of the ASH1 promoter is also confined to daughters identifies a secondCbk1/Mob2 Control of Daughter-Specific Gene Expression mechanism of daughter-specific ASH1 expression.
It is possible that in saturated cultures (and perhaps inCbk1/Mob2 control of daughter-specific gene expres sion is summarized in Figure 6.
Ace2 is expressed during colonies), both mechanisms are active.
If so, the effect would be to localize Ash1 (and perhaps other proteins)G2 (Spellman et al., 1998), before new daughters are Cell 748 to daughters of daughters and thus to bring about cell Table 3.
Strain List fates specific to granddaughters.
Such localization of Strain Name Relevant GenotypeAsh1 would mean that, in saturated cultures, mothers YAS245-5C MATaand daughters, but not granddaughters, could switch ACLY245 MATa cbk1::kanMX6mating types.
ACLY311 MATa ace2::his5 ACLY313 MATa swi5::his5Cell Separation ACLY315 MATa cbk1::CBK1-GFP::his5 Cells lacking CBK1 or its target genes CTS1 and SCW11 ACLY330 MATa cbk1::CBK1-M429A show defects in mother-daughter separation (Kuranda ACLY360 MATa cbk1::CBK1-GFP::his5 mob2::TRP1 ACLY362 MATa cts1::CTS1-YFP::his5and Robbins, 1991, Cappellaro et al., 1998).
CTS1 enACLY363 MATa mob2::TRP1codes chitinase.
SCW11 encodes a protein with seACLY364 MATa mob2::MOB2-YFP::his5quence similarity to glucanases.
DSE2 and DSE4 also ACLY368 MATa mob2::MOB2-YFP::his5 cbk1::kanMX6 encode secreted proteins with sequence similarity to ACLY369 MATa mob2::MOB2-YFP::his5 ace2::kanMX6 glucanases.
It seems likely, then, that at least these four ACLY382 MATa ace2::his5::pACE2-G128E daughter-specific genes encode proteins that degrade Strains used during this work.
All were derived from W303a as de-the cell wall from the daughter side and cause daughters scribed in the Experimental Procedures and the Supplemental Ex to separate from mothers.
Cells lacking the conditional perimental Procedures at http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/107/ daughter-specific gene EGT2 also show separation de-6/739/DC1.
fects.
EGT2 encodes a cell wall protein, and cells lacking EGT2 show overall reductions in glucanase levels (Kovacech et al., 1996; Smits et al., 1999).
Our results provide under seemingly unrelated circumstances.
Moreover,an explanation for the bud-scar/birth-scar asymmetry as the quantity of expression data collected for otherafter cell division: upon cell separation, daughter-spepurposes, or even collected without reference to anycific expression of Cts1 and these other proteins dehypothesis, increases, the utility of irrelevant coregula-grades material on the daughter-proximal side of the tion to identify new programs and pathways should alsoseptum and causes the birth scar.
The remaining mateincrease.rial on the mother-proximal side of the septum is unde graded, and forms the bud scar.
Relevance to Other Organisms A Possible Cytokinesis Checkpoint Cell fate asymmetry in budding yeast is regulated by Why does Ace2 need to be activated by Cbk1/Mob2?
mother-specific transcription of HO and by daughterOur findings indicate that daughter-specific gene ex-specific programs described here.
These results cannot pression leads to the degradation of the connecting exclude the idea that there may be still other asymmetric septum, followed by cell separation (see below).
We processes that regulate events specific to mothers, found that Cbk1 and Mob2 localized to the bud neck daughters, and, perhaps (in light of our findings with just when Ace2 began to accumulate in the daughter Ash1), granddaughters.
The proteins that govern the nucleus, suggesting that Cbk1/Mob2 movement to the daughter-specific proteins, the kinase Cbk1, Mob2, and bud neck might trigger Ace2 movement to the nucleus.
the transcription factor Ace2, have homologs in other The Cbk1 and Mob2 proteins would thus appear suited organisms.
It would not be surprising to find that these to transduce a signal indicating the completion of mem-proteins regulate asymmetric cell division and lineage brane fission in the bud neck.
We propose that this determination in higher eukaryotes.
Cbk1/Mob2 signal is part of a cytokinesis checkpoint that ensures that cell wall degradation does not com Experimental Proceduresmence until membrane fission is completed.
In this model, at the end of mitosis, Ace2 would integrate a Genetic and Molecular Biological Methods cell cycle and a morphogenic signal.
Nucleic acid and yeast manipulations were performed as described (Ausubel et al., 1987; Guthrie and Fink, 1991).
Systematizable Methods to Identify Programs of Gene Expression Yeast Strains and Plasmids We have identified programs of gene expression spe-Strains are detailed in Table 3.
YAS245-5C (can1::HO-CAN1 ho::HO ADE2 ura3 ade2 leu2 trp1 his3) is a W303a derivative (Anita Sil,cific to daughter cells.
Some of the methods that enpersonal communication).
Other strains in Table 3 derive fromabled these findings deserve mention.
First, we made YAS245-5C.
Construction, by standard techniques, is detailed inextensive use of fluorescent protein reporters to look the Supplemental Experimental Procedures at http://www.cell.com/among many candidate promoters to find those which cgi/content/full/107/6/739/DC1.
were in fact daughter-specific.
Second, in two cases, We constructed YFP reporter plasmids as follows.
We isolated a we identified sets of candidate daughter-specific genes KpnI-BamHI fragment containing PGAL1, the EcoRI and XhoI sites, and the ADH1 terminator from pJG4-4 (Geyer et al., 1999) and intro-by the fact that they were coregulated under other, duced it into pRS316 (Sikorski and Hieter, 1989) to generate pACL7.seemingly irrelevant, circumstances, and in response to We made YFP by PCR-mediated site-directed mutagenesis of theother, seemingly irrelevant, perturbations.
This ability GFP sequence from A. victoria and introduced the gene into pACL7to reexamine preexisting expression data is potentially to make pACL7-YFP.
We removed the PGAL1 fragment to make aquite useful.
We suspect that enough published gene plasmid backbone into which we introduced fragments containing expression data now exists to identify other genetic other promoters.
Details of these constructions are given in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures.programs involved in other processes by coregulation Daughter-Specific Genetic Programs in Yeast 749 Growth Conditions and Cell Cycle Arrest Analysis of Gene Expression Data We obtained cell cycle (Spellman et al., 1998) and response to geneTo test promoter expression patterns, we first grew colonies bearing the appropriate plasmids or integrated constructs overnight in BSM deletion (Hughes et al., 2000) gene expression data directly from http://genome-www.stanford.edu/cellcycle/ and http://www.rii.com/(QBiogene, Inc., Carlsbad, CA) 2% glucose.
We then diluted these cultures to OD600 0.1 in BSM 2% raffinose and allowed them to grow publications/cell_hughes.htm.
We clustered the raw data using the Cluster software (Eisen et al., 1998).
We obtained data already clus-to OD600 0.5 at 30C, then prepared the cells for microscopy.
The slow growth of cells on raffinose allows YFP synthesized during late tered by Gasch et al.(2000) for the response of yeast to different environmental conditions from http://genome-www.stanford.edu/M/early G1 to be degraded before the next round of cell division (in our hands, the half-life of YFP is approximately 2 hr; see Supplemen-yeast_stress/ tal Experimental Procedures).
To determine the pattern of expression in saturated cultures, we diluted overnight cultures to OD600 0.1 Acknowledgments in BSM 2% (w/v) glucose and allowed the cultures to grow to OD600 5 (108 cells/ml) at 30C before examination.
Since YFP fluores-We are grateful to Gustavo Pesce, Drew Endy, Eric Lyons, Orna cence is very low on standard (pH 5.0) synthetic medium, to image Resnekov, Eduard Serra, Larry Lok, Ian Burbulis, Ivgueni Kroll, Andy secreted Cts1-YFP in ACLY362 cells, we shifted exponentially grow-Mendelsohn, and Sydney Brenner for their advice and comments, ing cells to synthetic medium equilibrated to pH 7 for 2 hr before to Anita Sil for providing yeast strains, and to Kevan Shokat for observation.
chemical kinase inhibitors.
Work at TMSI is supported by grants To synchronize cells, we arrested them with factor as described from NIGMS, NHGRI, and the DARPA Information Technology Office.
(Futcher, 1999).
Briefly, we diluted overnight cultures to OD600 0.08 This work was supported by a grant to RB from NHGRI.
in BSM 2% glucose and grew them to OD600 0.3 at 30C.
At this point we added 3 M factor.
As judged by microscopic observa Received May 29, 2001; revised October 29, 2001.tion, cells were arrested and shmooing 90 min later.
We removed factor by filtration and rinsing, resuspended the cells in fresh BSM 2% glucose medium, and took samples every 10 min.
