doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2004.07.021 Developmental Cell, Vol.
7, 585595, October, 2004, Copyright 2004 by Cell Press RIAM, an Ena/VASP and Profilin Ligand, Interacts with Rap1-GTP and Mediates Rap1-Induced Adhesion Rap1-GTP regulates LFA-1-mediated adhesion upon TCR, CD31, or CD98 ligation (Katagiri et al., 2000; Reedquist et al., 2000; Suga et al., 2001).
Rap1 is also involved in chemokine-induced 2 and 4 integrin activation and T cell migration (Shimonaka et al., 2003).
However, the Esther M. Lafuente,1 Andre A.F.L.
van Puijenbroek,1 Matthias Krause,2 Christopher V. Carman,3 Gordon J. Freeman,1 Alla Berezovskaya,1 Erica Constantine,1 Timothy A. Springer,3 Frank B. Gertler,2 and Vassiliki A. Boussiotis1,* mechanism that links Rap1 to integrin activation re-1Department of Medical Oncology mains unclear.Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Profilin and Ena/VASP family proteins are importantDepartment of Medicine regulators of the actin cytoskeleton.
Profilin associatesBrigham and Womens Hospital with G-actin and promotes nucleotide exchange to cre-Harvard Medical School ate Profilin-Actin (ATP) complexes.
When bound by Pro-Boston, Massachusetts 02115 filin, actin monomer is added only to the barbed ends of2 Department of Biology F-actin (Pollard and Borisy, 2003).
The Ena/VASP familyMassachusetts Institute of Technology members Mena, VASP, and Evl are recruited to sites ofCambridge, Massachusetts 02139 actin cytoskeleton remodeling such as lamellipodia, filo-3 Center for Blood Research podia, focal contacts, and the T cell:APC contact siteDepartment of Pathology (Krause et al., 2003).
They contain an EVH1 domain thatHarvard Medical School interacts with the proline-rich motif (D/E)(F/L/W/Y)PPPPXBoston, Massachusetts 02115 (D/E)(D/E) (abbreviated as FPPPP) present in proteins such as Zyxin and Vinculin that target Ena/VASP proteins to focal adhesions (Niebuhr et al., 1997) or in Fyb/Summary SLAP that recruits Ena/VASP to the T cell:APC interface (Krause et al., 2000; Renfranz and Beckerle, 2002).
TheyThe small GTPase Rap1 induces integrin-mediated adalso have proline-rich regions that bind to SH3 domain-hesion and changes in the actin cytoskeleton.
The containing proteins and to Profilin, and an EVH2 domainmechanisms that mediate these effects of Rap1 are that mediates their tetramerization and interacts with G-poorly understood.
We have identified RIAM as a and F-actin (Krause et al., 2003).Rap1-GTP-interacting adaptor molecule.
RIAM de Here, we report the cloning and the structural andfines a family of adaptor molecules that contain a RAfunctional characterization of RIAM, an interactor oflike (Ras association) domain, a PH (pleckstrin homolRap1-GTP.
Overexpression of RIAM promoted the ac-ogy) domain, and various proline-rich motifs.
RIAM tive conformation of 1 and 2 integrin and integrin-also interacts with Profilin and Ena/VASP proteins, mediated adhesion.
Knockdown of RIAM expressionmolecules that regulate actin dynamics.
Overexpresdisplaced Rap1-GTP from the plasma membrane andsion of RIAM induced cell spreading and lamellipodia reverted Rap1-induced adhesion.
RIAM also interactedformation, changes that require actin polymerization.
with Profilin and Ena/VASP proteins.
Overexpression ofIn contrast, RIAM knockdown cells had reduced conRIAM induced changes in actin cytoskeleton, reflectedtent of polymerized actin.
RIAM overexpression also by increased cell spreading and lamellipodia formation.induced integrin activation and cell adhesion.
RIAM In contrast, RIAM knockdown cells had reduced poly-knockdown displaced Rap1-GTP from the plasma merized actin content.
Therefore, RIAM plays a key role membrane and abrogated Rap1-induced adhesion.
in Rap1-induced adhesion and interacts with modula Thus, RIAM links Rap1 to integrin activation and plays tors of the actin cytoskeleton.
a role in regulating actin dynamics.
Results Introduction Identification of RIAM as a Rap1-Interacting Protein The small GTPase Rap1 (Krev-1), a member of the Ras To search for Rap1-interacting molecules in T cells, we superfamily, was identified by its ability to revert K-Ras-used the constitutively GTP bound mutant Rap1E63 (Kiinduced transformation (Kitayama et al., 1989).
Recent tayama et al., 1990) as a bait to screen a Jurkat cDNA data indicate that Rap1 does not simply antagonize Ras library using yeast two-hybrid system.
We isolated sevfunction.
In mammalian cells, Rap1 plays a role in cell eral clones encoding for RGL2, a known interactor of adhesion and spreading.
Fibroblasts deficient for C3G, Rap1 (Peterson et al., 1996), along with clones encoding a Rap1-GEF, display impaired adhesion and accelerated partial cDNAs with homology to mouse PRP48 (AF020313).
migration, phenotypes that can be reversed by overex-We named this protein RIAM for Rap1-GTP-interacting pression of the Rap1-GEFs CalDAG-GEFI or Epac (Ohba adaptor molecule (AY152730).
Later, sequences encoding et al., 2001).
Similarly, a dominant-negative form of C3G for this protein were deposited (NM_019043).
RIAM also blocked HGF-induced Rap1 activation and adhesion has homology to a human clone (LOC54518) that is iden(Sakkab et al., 2000), as did overexpression of the Rap1-tical to RIAM residues 1261 except for its last 27 amino GAP Spa1 (Tsukamoto et al., 1999).
In lymphoid cells, acids (aa), suggesting that it is a splice variant of RIAM.
The open reading frame of RIAM is 1998 bp and encodes a protein of 665 aa.
The human RIAM gene locus is*Correspondence: vassiliki_boussiotis@dfci.harvard.edu Developmental Cell 586 Sequence analysis indicated that RIAM contains a RA (RalGDS/AF-6 or Ras-association) domain, a PH (pleckstrin homology) domain, and two proline-rich regions.
Two putative coiled-coil regions are present at the N terminus (aa 6289 and aa 149181) (Figure 1C).
RIAM Belongs to the MRL Family of Adaptor Molecules Database searches revealed that RIAM has similarities with Grb7, Grb10, and Grb14 adaptor molecules.
The protein with highest homology to RIAM is Lamellipodin (Lpd) (KIAA1681, AY494951) and Lpd-S (ALS2CR9, BAB69020), characterized in the accompanying article by Krause et al.(2004 [this issue of Developmental Cell]).
Furthermore, RIAM is related to proteins CG11940 (AAF49029) in D. melanogaster and Mig-10 (P34400) in C. elegans (Figure 1C).
Comparison of the domain structure of these proteins indicated that they comprise two distinct families (Figure 1C).
Grb7-related proteins have a conserved central region containing a RA domain and a PH domain (Manser and Wood, 1990; Wojcik et al., 1999), a Src homology 2 (SH2) domain at their C-terminal region, and a between PH and SH2 (BPS) domain (Han et al., 2001).
In contrast, RIAM, Lpd, CG11940, and Mig-10 lack SH2 and BPS domains and have a proline-rich region at the C terminus.
Moreover, all proteins in the latter group contain a highly conserved pattern of 27 aa predicted to be a coiled-coil region immediately N-terminal of the RA domain.
In addition, comparison of the RA and PH domains shows differences between the Grb7/10/14and RIAM-related proteins and conserved regions among the proteins within each group (Supplemental Figure S1 at http://www.developmentalcell.com/cgi/ content/full/7/4/585/DC1/).
Dendrograms of sequence relatedness of full-length protein (Figure 1D), the RA and PH domains (data not shown), confirmed that Grb7-and RIAM-related proteins are separated into two distinct families.
We propose to name the family of RIAM-related adaptor molecules the MRL (Mig-10/RIAM/Lpd) family.Figure 1.
RIAM Is Part of the MRL Protein Family (A) Human multiple immune tissue and human multiple tissue Northern blots were sequentially hybridized with full-length RIAM, Rap1, RIAM Interacts with Rap1-GTP In Vitro and In Vivo and G3PDH cDNAs.
We examined the specificity of the RIAM-Rap1 interac(B) RIAM expression detected by Western blot in different cell lines, tion and its dependence on the activation state of Rap1.
in human B cell lymphoma cell lines (H2 and DHL6) and in human In a two-hybrid assay, yeast was cotransformed withprimary T cells.
RIAM with either Rap1WT, the GTP bound mutants(C) Schematic representation of domain structure of human Grb7/ 10/14 and MRL family proteins (asterisks represent a coiled-coil Rap1E63 and Rap1V12, or Rap1N17, a mutant that reregion).
mains in nucleotide-free state.
Interaction was observed (D) Dendrogram of full-length proteins of the Grb7 and MRL families.
with Rap1V12, Rap1E63, and Rap1WT but not with RA, Ras-association domain; PH, pleckstrin homology domain; PR, Rap1N17 (Figure 2A).
As previously reported, when proline rich; SH2, Src homology domain; BPS, between PH and transformed in yeast, Rap1WT is mostly in GTP boundSH2 domain.
state (McCabe et al., 1992).
Only a weak interaction was observed when RIAM was cotransformed with RasV12 (Figure 2A), suggesting that RIAM preferentially inter-on chromosome 10p12.1.
Northern blot analysis showed that RIAM, like Rap1, is expressed broadly (Figure 1A).
acted with Rap1-GTP compared to Ras-GTP.
Since Rap1 and Ras share identical effector domains, se-Two transcripts of 5.4 and 2.8 Kb were detected in im mune tissues.
In nonimmune tissues, the larger tran-quences outside the Rap1 effector domain may contribute to the preferential binding of RIAM with Rap1.
Whenscript predominated.
We raised rabbit polyclonal anti bodies against the C and N termini of RIAM that RIAM was cotransformed with RalA, RalB, Rho, Cdc42, and Rac, interaction was not detected (data not shown,recognized a 110 kDa band in Western blots of various cell types (Figure 1B).
In vitro translation of full-length see accompanying article by Krause et al.[2004]).
The RIAM/Rap1 interaction was tested by in vitro pro-RIAM cDNA produced a protein of 110 kDa (Figure 2B), confirming that the protein recognized by our antibody tein association assay (Figure 2B).
GST-Rap1WT, GSTRap1E63, and GST coupled to glutahione-sepharoseis RIAM.
RIAM Mediates Rap1-Induced Adhesion 587 Figure 2.
RIAM Interacts with Rap1-GTP (A) The yeast was transformed with full-length RIAM together with the indicated constructs.
LexA and Bicoid were used as negative controls.
(B) Purified fusion proteins and GST control were analyzed by Coomassie staining (top panel).
Interactions between the indicated proteins and [35S]methionine-labeled in vitro translated RIAM (middle panel) or Luciferase (lower panel) were examined by SDS-PAGE and exposure on film.
In vitro translated RIAM and Luciferase are shown as controls.
(C) COS cells were cotransfected with HARIAM and either empty vector, Rap1WT, or Rap1E63.
Immunoprecipitations were done with anti-HA followed by immunoblot with Rap1 antiserum (first panel) or with Rap1 antiserum followed by immunoblot with anti-HA mAb (second panel).
Equal amounts of wholecell lysates (WCL) were immunobloted with anti-Rap1 and anti-HA antibodies (third and fourth panels).
(D) Jurkat cells were transfected with HARIAM and stimulated with anti-CD3 mAb.
Cell extracts were immunoprecipitated with antiHA antibody and sequentially immunobloted with HA mAb and Rap1 antiserum.
Rap1 activation was determined by pull-down assays using GST-RalGDS-RBD (third panel).
To confirm cell activation, the same samples were immunoblotted with anti-pERK1/2 antibody (fourth panel) and with ERK1/2-specific antiserum (fifth panel).
were incubated with [35S]methionine-labeled RIAM or both RA and PH domains interacted with Rap1-GTP (RIAM 150665, RIAM 150503, RIAM 150430).
Resi-Luciferase, as negative control.
RIAM bound preferen tially to Rap1E63, whereas binding to Rap1WT was al-dues 1150 enhanced this interaction as RIAM 1503 or full-length RIAM interacted with Rap1 more robustlymost undetectable.
Binding to Luciferase was not de tected (Figure 2B, lower panel).
than RIAM 150665.
Thus, the RIAM RA-like and PH domains together are necessary and sufficient for inter-To examine whether RIAM interacted with Rap1 in vivo, HA-tagged RIAM was expressed in COS cells action with Rap1-GTP, and N-terminal RIAM sequences enhance this interaction.with empty vector, Rap1WT, or Rap1E63.
Immunopre cipitation with anti-HA antibody followed by Rap1 immunoblot and reciprocal immunoprecipitation with Rap1 RIAM Interacts with Ena/VASP Proteins and Profilinantiserum followed by anti-HA immunoblot (Figure 2C) showed that RIAM preferentially interacted with RIAM is proline-rich (12.9%) and contains six putative Profilin binding motifs (XPPPPP) and six putative EVH1Rap1E63.
When RIAM was coexpressed with RasV12, only minimal amounts of Ras interacted with RIAM (data binding motifs (D/E)(F/L/W/Y)PPPPX(D/E)(D/E) (Figure 3A; Niebuhr et al., 1997), suggesting that RIAM maynot shown).
Thus in vivo, RIAM preferentially interacts with Rap1-GTP as compared to Ras-GTP.
Interaction interact with Profilin and EVH1 domain-containing pro teins.
In addition, RIAM contains binding motifs for SH3of RIAM with Rap1-GTP was also detected upon physiological stimulation.
Jurkat T cells transfected with HA-and WW domain-containing proteins (Holt and Koffer, 2001).RIAM were stimulated with anti-CD3 mAb (Figure 2D).
Rap1 activation was monitored by pull-down assay with Using the yeast two-hybrids, we detected a strong interaction between RIAM and Profilin of similar intensityGST-RalGDS-RBD followed by Western blot with Rap1 antiserum (Reedquist and Bos, 1998).
Immunoprecipita-to that between RIAM and active Rap1 (Figure 3B).
We also detected interaction between RIAM and VASP bytions with anti-HA antibody followed by Rap1 immunoblot indicated that RIAM interacted with endogenous in vitro association assay.
GST and GST-fusion proteins of VASP or VASP mutant (VASP) in which the ProfilinRap1 after formation of Rap1-GTP (Figure 2D).
Thus, RIAM interacts only with Rap1-GTP, suggesting that it binding region of VASP (Gertler et al., 1996) was elimi nated were coupled to glutathione-sepharose and incu-is a Rap1-effector.
To determine the region of RIAM that associates with bated with [35S]methionine-labeled RIAM or Luciferase, as control.
Both VASP and VASP bound to RIAM (Fig-Rap1, we generated truncation mutants and assayed them for interaction with Rap1 by yeast two-hybrid (Sup-ure 3C), indicating that RIAM interacts directly with VASP.plemental Figure S2).
Only RIAM fragments containing Developmental Cell 588 Figure 3.
RIAM Interacts with Profilin and Ena/VASP Family Proteins (A) Six putative Profilin binding motifs are shown in gray boxes and six putative EVH1 binding motifs are shown underlined.
(B) The yeast was cotransformed with fulllength RIAM and either Profilin or with Rap1E63 as positive control.
B42AD and VPR were used as negative controls.
Colonies from each transformation were assayed for-galactosidase activity.
(C) The indicated purified GST-fusion proteins and GST were visualized by Coomassie staining (top panel).
Interactions between the indicated proteins and [35S]methioninelabeled in vitro translated RIAM or Luciferase were examined by SDS-PAGE and exposure on film (middle and bottom panel).
In vitro translated RIAM and luciferase are shown as controls.
(D) Cell extracts from primary T cells either unstimulated or stimulated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 mAbs were immunoprecipitated with RIAM antibody (left panels) or with control IgG (right panels) followed by immunoblot with VASP, Evl, Profilin, and RIAM antibodies.
(E) COS cells were cotransfected with HAProfilin and Rap1E63 with either Myc-RIAM or empty vector, and immunoprecipitations were done with anti-HA mAb followed by immunoblot with Rap1, HA, and Myc antibodies.
Equivalent amounts of whole-cell lysates (WCL) were used as controls for Rap1E63 and HA-Profilin expression.
To determine if RIAM interacts with Profilin and Ena/ with Rap1 antiserum (Figure 3E, first panel) showed that Rap1 was present in a complex with Profilin (FigureVASP in vivo, we immunoprecipitated RIAM from pri mary human T cell extracts.
Coimmunoprecipitation of 3E, second panel) only when RIAM was expressed, as indicated by immunoblot with anti-Myc antibody (FigureProfilin, VASP, and Evl with endogenous RIAM was de tected prior and after stimulation via TCR/CD3 and 3E, third panel).
These results indicate that RIAM can function as a link between Rap1-GTP and the actin regu-CD28, indicating that these interactions are constitutive in T cells (Figure 3D).
lator Profilin either by direct RIAM binding to Profilin or by RIAM recruitment of Ena/VASP-Profilin complexes.
RIAM Is a Link between Rap1-GTP and Profilin Rap1-GTP localizes at the T cell:APC interface (Katagiri et al., 2002) and is involved in integrin activation (Katagiri RIAM Colocalizes with F-Actin and Induces Cell Spreadinget al., 2000; Reedquist et al., 2000).
These events require reorganization of the cytoskeleton.
However, the mech-The interaction between RIAM and the regulators of actin polymerization, Profilin and Ena/VASP, promptedanism that regulates docking of Rap1 to the cytoskeleton has not been determined.
Our observation that RIAM us to determine the effect of RIAM on the actin cytoskel eton.
HEK293 cells stably transfected with RIAM orassociates with Ena/VASP and Profilin suggests that RIAM might provide a link between Rap1-GTP and the empty vector were examined by confocal microscopy.
As shown in Figure 4, cells overexpressing RIAM werecytoskeleton.
Therefore, we examined whether Rap1GTP, RIAM, and Profilin may be present in complexes.
more spread and had almost double the area of controls (HEK293 RIAM 1760 310 m2, n 50; HEK293HA-Profilin and Rap1E63 were expressed in COS cells with either Myc-RIAM or empty vector.
Immunoprecipi-Vector 932 342 m2, n 50).
Staining with RIAM antibody revealed that RIAM is distributed throughouttation with anti-HA antibody followed by immunoblot RIAM Mediates Rap1-Induced Adhesion 589 Figure 4.
RIAM Induces Cell Spreading and Lamellipodia Formation HEK293 and Jurkat T cells stably transfected with empty vector or with RIAM were seeded on fibronectin (HEK293) or poly-Lysine (Jurkat).
Cells were fixed, stained, and analyzed by confocal microscopy.
RIAM was visualized with RIAM-specific antibody (green) and polymerized (F)-actin was detected with Cy5Phalloidin (red).
Points of RIAM localization at the lamella are marked with arrows.
Scale bars equal 50 m for HEK293 cells and 10 m for Jurkat cells.
the cytoplasm and at the leading edge where it colocal-Rap1E63, or empty vector were added in plates coated with increasing concentrations of fibronectin.
Cellsizes with F-actin (Figure 4, arrows).
This localization of RIAM is consistent with the reported localization of Ena/ transfected with RIAM had a 3-to 4-fold increased adhesion compared to controls (Figure 5A).
RIAM-inducedVASP proteins at the leading edge (Gertler et al., 1996; Rottner et al., 1999), where they are recruited to the fast adhesion was comparable to that induced by Rap1E63 and was increased by PMA (Figure 5A).
Adhesion wasgrowing ends of actin filaments (Bear et al., 2002; also see accompanying article by Krause et al.[2004]).
blocked by an antibody against the 1 chain of VLA-4 (Figure 5B; Nojima et al., 1990), indicating that, similarTo determine whether cell spreading was induced by overexpression of RIAM in other cell types, we stably to Rap1-GTP, RIAM induced 1 integrin-mediated adhesion.
To determine whether RIAM induced active confor-transfected Jurkat T cells with RIAM or empty vector.
RIAM-transfected Jurkat cells formed extensive lamelli-mational changes in 1 integrins, we analyzed activation epitope exposure in cells transfected with empty vector,podia (Figure 4).
In these cells, RIAM was detected in the perinuclear region and at the leading edge (Figure RIAM, or Rap1E63.
Cells were incubated with HUTS4 antibody that specifically binds to 1 integrins in their4, bottom row, arrow).
active conformation (Carman and Springer, 2003; Luque et al., 1996).
In basal conditions, RIAM-transfected cellsRIAM Induces 1 and 2 Integrin-Mediated Adhesion Rap1-GTP induces 1 and 2 integrin-mediated ad-showed increased binding to HUTS4 to levels comparable to cells transfected with Rap1E63 (Figure 5C).hesion in T cells.
To determine if RIAM had a similar ef fect, stable Jurkat T cell lines transfected with RIAM, To examine if RIAM also regulates 2 integrin-mediated Developmental Cell 590 Figure 5.
RIAM Induces Cell Adhesion Mediated by 1 and 2 Integrins (A and D) Jurkat cells stably transfected with RIAM (closed square), Rap1E63 (closed triangle), or vector (closed circle) were untreated (solid line) or treated (dashed line and open marker) with PMA, labeled, and seeded on triplicate wells coated with the indicated concentrations of fibronectin (A) or ICAM-1 (D).
Bound cells are expressed as percentage of the total seeded cells.
Data are means of at least four independent experiments.
(The p values for RIAM binding to fibronectin are 0.000328 and 0.028 for cells untreated and treated with PMA, respectively.
The p values for RIAM binding to ICAM are 0.00014 and 0.0033 for cells untreated and treated with PMA, respectively.)
(B and E) Jurkat cells stably transfected with RIAM, Rap1E63, or vector were untreated or stimulated with PMA.
Cells were plated on 20 g/ml fibronectin in the presence (gray bars) or the absence (black bars) of anti-VLA-4 antibody (B) or on 200 ng/ml ICAM-1 in the presence (gray bars) or the absence (black bars) of anti-LFA-1 antibody (E).
Bound cells are expressed as percentage of the total seeded cells.
Data are means of four independent experiments.
(C and F) Jurkat cells stably transfected with RIAM, Rap1E63, or vector were stained with the 1 activation-dependent antibody HUTS4 (C) or with the 2 activation-dependent antibody KIM127 (F) in the presence (black bars) or absence (gray bars) of Mn2 and analyzed by flow cytometry.
Signals from HUTS4 or KIM127 were expressed as a percentage of signals from the conformation-independent TS2/16 and TS2/4 antibodies, respectively.
(G) HEK293 cells stably transfected with RIAM (open square), Rap1E63 (closed triangle), Lpd (open circle), or vector alone (closed circle) were labeled and seeded on triplicate wells coated with the indicated concentrations of fibronectin.
Bound cells are expressed as percentage of the total seeded cells.
adhesion, RIAM-, Rap1E63-, and vector-transfected Jur-and both interact with Ena/VASP proteins.
Therefore, we compared the adhesive properties of HEK293 cells over-kat cells were seeded in ICAM-1-coated plates.
RIAM transfected cells displayed 3-to 4-fold increase of adhe-expressing RIAM or Lpd.
RIAM-transfected cells had increased adhesion on fibronectin to levels comparablesion as compared to controls (Figure 5D).
This adhesion was comparable to that induced by Rap1E63 and was to Rap1E63-transfected cells.
Surprisingly, Lpd-transfected cells showed no increase in adhesion but ratherincreased by PMA.
Addition of LFA-1 blocking mAb con firmed that increased adhesion was mediated by LFA-1 had a small but reproducible decrease in adhesion compared to controls (Figure 5G).
(Figure 5E).
As with 1 integrins, RIAM exhibited a ten dency to promote active conformation of LFA-1 as determined by using KIM127 antibody that specifically RIAM Knockdown Reverts Rap1-Induced Cell Adhesionbinds to 2 integrins in their active conformation (Figure 5F).
The ability of RIAM to bind Rap1-GTP, to induce integrin activation, and to increase adhesion prompted us toTo test whether RIAM-induced adhesion requires Ena/ VASP proteins, we transfected the Jurkat cell line stably determine whether RIAM is a downstream effector of Rap1.
Rap1E63 Jurkat cell line was stably transfected withoverexpressing RIAM with proline-rich repeats of ActA to block interaction between Ena/VASP and proteins a vector containing specific RIAM shRNA sequences (this line is named Rap1E63-RIAM-KD) or with shRNA vectorcontaining EVH1 binding motifs (Krause et al., 2000).
RIAM-induced adhesion was unchanged (data not shown), control (this line is named Rap1E63-control-KD).
Rap1E63 RIAM-KD cells had 80% reduction in RIAM protein com-suggesting that RIAM binding of Ena/VASP proteins is not required for RIAM-induced adhesion.
pared with controls as determined by Western blot (Fig ure 6A).
Rap1E63-RIAM-KD, Rap1E63-control-KD, andRIAM and its homolog Lpd have RA and PH domains RIAM Mediates Rap1-Induced Adhesion 591 Figure 6.
RIAM Knockdown Abrogates Rap1GTP-Mediated Cell Adhesion and Displaces Rap1-GTP from the Plasma Membrane (A) RIAM expression was analyzed by Western blot in the indicated Jurkat cell lines.
The amount of protein in each lane was normalized by expression of GAPDH.
(B and C) The indicated Jurkat cell lines were untreated (black bars) or treated (gray bars) with PMA and seeded in triplicate wells coated with fibronectin (B) or ICAM-1 (C).
Bound cells were expressed as percentage of the total seeded cells.
Results are representative of four independent experiments.
(D) Rap1E63-control-KD Jurkat cell line (ac) or Rap1E63-RIAM-KD Jurakt cell line (df) were seeded on slides coated with anti-CD3 mAb.
Cells were fixed, permeabilized, and incubated with GST-RalGDS-RBD followed by anti-GST antibody to detect localization of active Rap1 (a and d) and with Phalloidin to detect F-actin (b and e) and analyzed by confocal microscopy.
Overlapping images are shown in (c) and (f).
Scale bars equal 20 m. Control staining showed no detectable binding (Supplemental Figure S3).
Rap1E63 cell lines were used in adhesion assays.
To intracellular localization of Rap1-GTP (Bivona et al., 2004).
Rap1E63-RIAM-KD and Rap1E63-control-KD Jur-determine baseline adhesion, the vector control Jurkat cell line used in Figure 5 was also included.
Compared to kat cells were seeded on anti-CD3-coated slides, fixed, and probed with GST-RalGDS-RBD.
In Rap1E63-con-Rap1E63, Rap1E63-RIAM-KD cells displayed reduced adhesion on fibronectin to levels similar to vector-trans-trol-KD cells (Figure 6D, panels ac), Rap1-GTP was localized in the perinuclear region and at the plasmafected Jurkat cells (Figure 6B).
In contrast, Rap1E63 control-KD and Rap1E63 cells showed comparable ad-membrane (panel a), consistent with previous reports (Bivona et al., 2004), where it colocalized with F-actinhesion to fibronectin.
Similarly, Rap1E63-RIAM-KD cells had reduced adhesion to ICAM-1 as compared to (panel c).
Strikingly, in Rap1E63-RIAM-KD Jurkat cells (Figure 6D, panels df), Rap1-GTP was displaced fromRap1E63 cells (Figure 6C).
Thus, RIAM is required for Rap1-induced adhesion.
This observation places RIAM the plasma membrane and was detected only in the perinuclear region (panel d).
In these cells, no colocaliza-downstream of Rap1-GTP.
tion of Rap1-GTP with F-actin was detected (panel f).
These results indicate that RIAM is required for localiza-RIAM Is Required for the Recruitment of Rap1-GTP to the Plasma Membrane tion of Rap1-GTP at the plasma membrane.
Rap1-GTP localizes at the plasma membrane, and this localization is required for Rap1 to mediate cell adhesion RIAM Is Required to Maintain the Cellular Content of F-Actin(Bivona et al., 2004).
Based on our observation that Rap1E63-RIAM-KD Jurkat T cells displayed reduced ad-Our studies showed that RIAM-overexpressing cells dis play extensive lamellipodia.
The physical force for lamel-hesion, we examined whether distribution of Rap1-GTP was affected by depletion of RIAM.
We used GST-lipodia formation is provided by polymerization of actin underneath the plasma membrane.
RIAM interacts withRalGDS-RBD, which interacts with Rap1-GTP (Reedquist and Bos, 1998) and has been used to determine Profilin and Ena/VASP proteins, important regulators of Developmental Cell 592 Our data showed that in T cells, RIAM and active Rap1 induced a comparable increase in cell adhesion and RIAM expression is required for Rap1E63-mediated adhesion.
Interestingly, in HEK293 cells, in which expression of either RIAM or Rap1 could induce adhesion, we detected only minimal expression of RIAM protein.
It is possible that these low levels of RIAM in HEK293 cells are sufficient to mediate Rap1-induced adhesion.
It is also possible that Rap1 may induce adhesion by mechanisms that do not require RIAM.
Consistent with the latter possibility is our recent observation that Rap1E63transfected HEK293 cells have increased number of focal adhesions but a low change in active conformation of 1 integrins (E.M.L., C.V.C., A.A.F.L.v.P., M.K., A.B., and V.A.B., unpublished data).
Thus, in certain cell types, Rap1 may mediate increase in adhesion by regulatingFigure 7.
RIAM Is Required to Maintain the Cellular Content of integrin redistribution rather than integrin affinity.F-Actin RIAM interacts with Profilin and with Ena/VASP family(A) Stable RIAM-KD and Control-KD Jurkat T cell lines were stained with Rhodamine-Phalloidin and examined by FACS analysis for proteins, both known to regulate actin dynamics.
Since F-actin content.
Results of one representative experiment are Ena/VASP proteins also bind Profilin, it is possible that shown.
RIAM may interact with Profilin directly, indirectly through (B) Summarized results of five independent experiments are shown Ena/VASP, or both.
Ena/VASP proteins are involved in as percentage of positive cells and as mean fluorescense intensity spreading of platelets, macrophage phagocytosis, for-(MFI) of Rhodamine-Phalloidin binding (p values for % of positive mation and locomotion of lamellipodia, actin reorganiza-cells and MIF are 0.045 and 0.032, respectively).
tion in T cells, and filopodia formation in neuronal growth cones and Dictyostelium (Coppolino et al., 2001; Han et al., 2002; Krause et al., 2000; Laurent et al., 1999; Le-actin polymerization.
For these reasons, we examined brand et al., 2004; Reinhard et al., 1992).
Both RIAM andwhether diminished expression of RIAM might affect Lpd localize at the leading edge and may recruit Ena/the content of polymerized F-actin.
We used our vector VASP proteins to this site (see accompanying article bycontrol Jurkat cell line stably transfected with RIAM Krause et al.[2004]).
Thus, RIAM may regulate the actinshRNA (RIAM-KD) or with control shRNA (control-KD).
cytoskeleton through recruitment of Profilin and Ena/In RIAM-KD cells, expression of RIAM was reduced by VASP.
In fact, we have observed that overexpression of80% (Supplemental Figure S4).
F-actin content was deRIAM induces cell spreading and lamellipodia formation,tected by staining with Phalloidin.
Quantification by flow processes that require actin cytoskeleton reorganiza-cytometry showed that RIAM depletion resulted in sigtion.
Conversely, RIAM knockdown cells have a lowernificant reduction in F-actin content, as RIAM-KD cells content of F-actin, indicating that RIAM together withhad 38.8% 9% downshift in the mean fluorescence its interacting partners Profilin and Ena/VASP proteinsintensity of Phalloidin binding compared to control-KD may play a role in actin polymerization.
Strikingly, Lpdcells (Figure 7).
However, the total actin content was also regulates actin polymerization, as Lpd knockdowncomparable in RIAM-KD and control-KD cells (data not cells had a dramatic reduction in F-actin content (accom-shown), suggesting that RIAM regulates the ratio of F-actin: panying article by Krause et al.[2004]).G-actin content.
Ena/VASP proteins directly regulate actin dynamics (Krause et al., 2003).
When all Ena/VASP proteins wereDiscussion delocalized in Jurkat T cells, the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton at the contact site with anti-CD3-Rap1 is a small GTPase with a critical role in cell adhecoated latex beads was impaired (Krause et al., 2000).sion and spreading (Bos et al., 2001).
Recent studies Fyb/SLAP also associates with Ena/VASP proteinshave shown that TCR, CD98, and CD31 mediate activa(Krause et al., 2000).
Interestingly, T cells from Fyb/SLAP-tion of LFA-1 integrin in T cells, in a Rap1-GTP-dependeficient mice do not have detectable differences in thedent manner.
We have identified RIAM, an adaptor procontent of polymerized actin as compared to controltein that may link Rap1-GTP to integrin activation in cells (Peterson et al., 2001).
Our present results suggestT cells.
First, RIAM and Rap1 associated upon TCR that RIAM may substitute for Fyb/SLAP, explaining theligation in Jurkat T cells.
Second, localization of Rap1absence of a dramatic phenotype in Fyb/SLAP-defi-GTP at the plasma membrane that correlates with the cient cells.ability of Rap1 to induce integrin-mediated adhesion Disruption of the interaction between RIAM and Ena/(Bivona et al., 2004) was abrogated in RIAM knockdown VASP by expression of ActA repeats had no effect oncells.
Consistently, knocking down RIAM eliminated adthe ability of RIAM to mediate adhesion.
Therefore, thehesion mediated by Rap1-GTP.
Third, overexpression effect of RIAM on integrin activation is likely Ena/VASPof RIAM promoted the active conformation of integrins independent.
Similarly, despite its overall similarity toand enhanced cell adhesion.
Overexpression of RIAM RIAM and shared ability to bind Ena/VASP, Lpd overex-enhanced adhesion even in the presence of Spa1, a Rap1 pression could not induce adhesion.
Together, theseGAP that inactivates Rap1, indicating that RIAM func tions downstream of Rap1 (data not shown).
observations suggest that the ability of RIAM to mediate RIAM Mediates Rap1-Induced Adhesion 593 Isolation of Full-Length RIAMRap1-induced adhesion may be a RIAM-specific, Ena/ We isolated full-length clones by ClonCapture cDNA selection kitVASP-independent attribute.
(Clontech) using a Jurkat cDNA library and RIAM (nt 540841) biotin-Recently RAPL, another Rap1 effector, was described.
ylated PCR fragment as probe.
RAPL binds to Rap1-GTP and modulates LFA-1 distribution and ligand binding.
It has been proposed that RAPL Northern Blot Analysis Human Multiple Tissue Northern blots (Clontech) were incubatedmay interact with L integrin subunit, thereby destabiliz30 min at 42C in prehybridization solution (Molecular Researching the formation of L2 heterodimer and upregulating Center, Inc.) and hybridized overnight at 42C with multiprime ran-ligand binding affinity (Katagiri et al., 2003).
Our present domly labeled [-32P]dATP probes (Megaprime Labelkit, Amersham).
data showed that RIAM can induce the active conformation of 1 and 2 integrins.
Further work will be required Mammalian Expression Plasmids to determine how RIAM induces integrin conforma-The ORF of Rap1WT, Rap1E63, and c-H-RasV12 (kindly provided by Dr. H. Kitayama, University of Tokyo, Japan) were subcloned intotional changes.
pAXEF-1 (Anumanthan et al., 1998).
Myc-tagged RIAM was insertedWe have identified RIAM as a partner of Rap1-GTP.
in pAXEF or pcDNA1.1 (Invitrogen) vectors.
pSRHA (kindly providedIn the accompanying article, Krause et al.(2004) have by Dr. C. Rudd, DFCI) was used to express RIAM and Profilin as identified Lpd as a binding partner of Ena/VASP pro-HA-tagged fusions.
Profilin was PCR amplified from pGADProfilin I teins.
RIAM and Lpd, along with their C. elegans and (kindly provided by Dr. L. van Aelst, Cold Spring Harbor).
To create the Drosophila orthologs Mig-10 and CG11940, form a plasmid-expressing RIAM shRNA, specific oligonucleotides were cloned into pLL3.7 vector (Rubinson et al., 2003).
As controls, vectorgene family that we named the MRL family.
Members expressing shRNA for mouse Lpd or empty vector were used.
Theof the MRL family share a common domain structure sequences of the shRNA oligos can be obtained from the authorswith the presence of a RA domain, a PH domain, and upon request.
proline-rich motifs.
We have shown that the RA domain of RIAM binds preferentially to Rap1.
In the accompa-Antibody Production nying article, Krause et al.showed that the PH domain RIAM (aa 480665) was cloned into pGEX-6P1 vector (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech).
GST-RIAM fusion protein was immobilized onof Lpd is specific for the phosphoinositide PI(3,4)P2.
The glutathione agarose, digested with Prescission protease (AmershamPH domain of RIAM is highly related to the PH domain Pharmacia Biotech), and used to raise the polyclonal rabbit antise of Lpd, suggesting that it may have a similar specificity.
rum #4612 (Covance).
Purified antibody was used for RIAM immunoSince generation of PI(3,4)P2 is one of the consequences precipitation and immunofluorescence.
For Western blot, we used of TCR ligation, recruitment of RIAM via its PH domain an affinity-purified polyclonal antibody directed against the RIAM peptide 78AEQRTIQAQKSLQNQHH96 (Biosource #5541.1).to the inner membrane leaflet may take place during T cell activation.
TCR ligation induces the recruitment In Vitro Protein Interaction Assaysof Rap1-GTP to the T cell:APC contact site (Katagiri et PCR fragments from Rap1 WT, Rap1 E63, VASP, and VASP were al., 2002).
At this location, interaction between Rap1-inserted into pGEX vectors (Pharmacia Pharmacia Biotech), exGTP and RIAM can take place, resulting in integrin acti-pressed in E. coli DH10B, and purified on glutathione-sepharose vation and enhanced cell adhesion.
Our studies showed (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech).
10 g of GST and GST fusion pro teins were incubated for 1 hr at 4C with 50 l of glutathione-sepha-that RIAM has a critical role in regulating membrane rose in GST-buffer (1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 50 mM Tris-Cl [pHlocalization of Rap1-GTP, since constitutively Rap17.5], 200 mM NaCl, and 2 mM MgCl2).
10 l of [35S]methionine-GTP was displaced from the plasma membrane in RIAM labeled RIAM or Luciferase synthesized in vitro (TNT T7 System knockdown cells.
Although the precise mechanism via Promega) were suspended in GST buffer and incubated for 1 hr at which RIAM affects localization of Rap1-GTP remains 4C with the indicated GST-fusion proteins coupled on glutathione sepharose.
The samples were analyzed on 10% SDS-PAGE andto be determined, it is possible that via its interaction visualized by autoradiography.
1 l of [35S]methionine-labeled prod-with phosphoinositides, RIAM may stabilize Rap1-GTP ucts were analyzed along with the pull-down assays as control.at the plasma membrane.
In agreement with this hypoth esis, we have observed that RIAM PH domain is required Stable and Transient Transfections and T Cell Activation to mediate RIAM/Rap1 interaction.
To our knowledge, COS, HEK293, and Jurkat cells were cultured routinely.
Stable transRIAM is the first Rap1-interacting protein shown to con-fections were done by electroporation.
Transient transfections in COS cells were done using DEAE-dextran.
Stable cell lines express-tain a PH domain.
Thus, RIAM, an effector of Rap1, ing shRNAs were generated either by electroporation of the linear-controls Rap1 localization at the plasma membrane, meized plasmids or by infection with lentivirus according to describeddiates Rap1-induced adhesion, and has an additional protocol (Rubinson et al., 2003).
Cells were sorted for GFP expres role in regulating actin dynamics.
sion.
Primary T cells were isolated from leukapheresis products of healthy volunteer donors using the RosetteSept Antibody cocktail (Stem Cell Technology).
T cells were left untreated or were incubated Experimental Procedures with 1 g/ml anti-CD3 mAb and 1 g/ml anti-CD28 mAb (CLB; Research Diagnostics) for 30 min on ice followed by crosslinking with Yeast Expression Plasmids and Interaction Trap rabbit-anti-mouse Ig (DAKO; 20 g/ml) for the indicated time pepLexA and pJG4-5 (pB42AD) were used as bait and prey vectors, riods.
respectively.
The yeast strain EGY191 (Invitrogen) was transformed sequentially with the plasmid pLexARap1E63 and a Jurkat cDNA GST Pull-Down, Immunoprecipitation, and Western Blot library in pJG4-5 (Clontech).
Interaction trap was done as described GST-RalGDS-RBD fusion proteins were purified on glutathione(Golemis et al., 1994; Gyuris et al., 1993).
Rap1WT, Rap1V12, Rap1N17, sepharose (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech).
50 g of fusion protein Rap1E63 cDNA were cloned in-frame with the DBD of LexA.
RIAM coupled to beads were incubated with Jurkat cell lysates in GSTdeletion mutants amplified by PCR from cDNA clones were inserted buffer.
Eluted proteins were immunobloted with Rap1 antibody.
For in pJG4-5.
The yeast strain EGY191 and the plasmids pLexA, immunoprecipitations, cell lysates (1 mg) were incubated overnight pLexAc-H-RasV12, and pRFHM-1 (pLexABicoid) pJG4-5-VPR were at 4C with the indicated antibodies: RIAM polyclonal antibody #4612, Rap1 antiserum (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) precoupled tokindly provided by Dr. P. Silver (Dana-Farber Cancer Institute).
Developmental Cell 594 Sepharose beads (GammaBind Plus); anti-HA (rat mAb, 3F10 aga-Received: December 11, 2003 Revised: July 20, 2004rose matrix, Roche); and Ras (mouse mAb agarose slurry, Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
Proteins were analyzed by immunodetection Accepted: September 10, 2004 Published: October 11, 2004with antibodies against RIAM #5541, Rap1 (Santa Cruz), Ras (mAb, BD/Transduction Laboratories), c-Myc (mAb 9E10, Santa-Cruz), and HA (mAb 12CA5, Boehringer).
Stripping and reblotting of the blots
