Cell, Vol. 105, 81–91, April 6, 2001, Copyright ª2001 by Cell Press

Drosophila Rho-Associated Kinase (Drok) Links
Frizzled-Mediated Planar Cell Polarity Signaling
to the Actin Cytoskeleton

Christopher G. Winter,* Bruce Wang,*
Anna Ballew,*† Anne Royou,‡
Roger Karess,‡ Jeffrey D. Axelrod,†
and Liqun Luo*§
* Department of Biological Sciences
Stanford University
Stanford, California 94305
† Department of Pathology
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, California 94305
‡ CNRS
Centre de Ge´ ne´ tique Mole´ culaire
UPR 2167
Avenue de la Terrasse
91198 Gif sur Yvette
France

Summary

Frizzled (Fz) and Dishevelled (Dsh) are components
of an evolutionarily conserved signaling pathway that
regulates planar cell polarity. How this signaling path-
way directs asymmetric cytoskeletal reorganization
and polarized cell morphology remains unknown.
Here, we show that Drosophila Rho-associated kinase
(Drok) works downstream of Fz/Dsh to mediate a
branch of the planar polarity pathway involved in om-
matidial rotation in the eye and in restricting actin
bundle formation to a single site in developing wing
cells. The primary output of Drok signaling is regulat-
ing the phosphorylation of nonmuscle myosin regula-
tory light chain, and hence the activity of myosin II.
Drosophila myosin VIIA, the homolog of the human
Usher Syndrome 1B gene, also functions in conjunc-
tion with this newly defined portion of the Fz/Dsh sig-
naling pathway to regulate the actin cytoskeleton.

Introduction

A fundamental problem in cell and developmental biol-
ogy is to understand how cytoskeletal architecture is
organized in response to extracellular signals, giving
rise to tissue and cell-specific morphology. In neurons,
guidance cues instruct the polarized growth of axons
and dendrites to their synaptic targets. Epithelial cells
are polarized along their apical/basal axis and, in many
cases, along the orthogonal axis within the plane of the
tissue. An example of this planar cell polarity (PCP) is
seen within the sensory epithelium of the vertebrate
inner ear. The apical surface of each hair cell contains
a single sensory transduction unit that is composed
of numerous actin-based stereocilia ordered by height,
forming a staircase-like arrangement (Tilney and Tilney,
1992). This precisely polarized organization is essential
for auditory and vestibular sensory function. Mutations

§ To whom correspondence should be addressed (e-mail: lluo@
stanford.edu).

in myosin VIIA, which is highly expressed in the inner
ear sensory epithelia (Hasson et al., 1997), lead to inner
ear defects and deafness in both mice (shaker-1 mutant)
and humans (Usher syndrome 1B; reviewed in Friedman
et al., 1999). Developmental analysis revealed that in the
shaker-1 mutant mouse, the stereocilia on each cell are
divided into multiple, disorganized groups (Self et al.,
1998), suggesting a possible defect in the establishment
of PCP.
PCP has been most extensively studied in the context
of eye and wing development in Drosophila (reviewed
in Shulman et al., 1998; Mlodzik, 1999). During the devel-
opment of the compound eye, trapezoid-shaped clus-
ters of photoreceptors adopt a specified chirality and
orientation. Mutations in genes that regulate PCP result
in failure of ommatidia to acquire the correct chirality,
and/or failure to rotate properly. In the wing, PCP is
evident in the uniform pattern formed by distally oriented
hairs that cover the dorsal and ventral surfaces. Each
cell constructs a single wing hair derived from a prehair
composed largely of bundled actin filaments assembled
at the distal vertex of the hexagon-shaped cells during
pupal development (Wong and Adler, 1993). Mutants in
PCP signaling have characteristic defects in both the
orientation and number of wing hairs per cell (Gubb and
Garcia-Bellido, 1982; Wong and Adler, 1993).
Genetic analyses have led to a model for PCP signal-
ing in which cells receive and interpret information from
the extracellular environment and translate these signals
into changes in both cytoskeletal polarity and transcrip-
tion (Shulman et al., 1998; Mlodzik, 1999). The seven-
pass transmembrane protein, Frizzled (Fz) (Vinson et
al., 1989), likely acts as a receptor, and requires the
downstream signaling protein Dishevelled (Dsh) (Kling-
ensmith et al., 1994; Theisen et al., 1994; Krasnow et
al., 1995). Dsh and Fz family proteins also participate
in the Wingless (Wg)/Wnt signal transduction system
that regulates a wide variety of developmental events,
including cell proliferation and cell fate specification (re-
viewed in Wodarz and Nusse, 1998). However, Wg and
PCP signaling appear to use distinct pathways down-
stream of Dsh (Axelrod et al., 1998; Boutros et al., 1998).
PCP signaling proceeds through several unique compo-
nents including Flamingo, a novel cadherin (Usui et al.,
1999), and the small GTPase RhoA/Rho1 (Strutt et al.,
1997). Studies of dominant-negative and active forms of
Rac1 suggest that it may also function in PCP signaling
(Eaton et al., 1996; Fanto et al., 2000). In addition, a
number of tissue-specific factors may participate in in-
terpreting the Fz/Dsh signal (Shulman et al., 1998; Mlod-
zik, 1999). This morphogenetic pathway appears to be
evolutionarily conserved, as it has been shown to regu-
late convergent extension during vertebrate embryonic
development (reviewed in Sokol, 2000).
Ultimately, the PCP signal from Fz/Dsh is expressed
as asymmetric cytoskeletal structure. Identification of
the small GTPase RhoA as a downstream component
of the Fz/Dsh pathway offered some clues as to how
this signaling pathway could relay its information to the
cytoskeleton. RhoA acts as a molecular switch that

Cell
82

Figure 1. Characterization of Drok Protein and Generation of Loss-
of-Function Mutants
(A) Domain structure of Drok compared to rat Rok-b and Drosophila
Gek. The N-terminal (gray) and other domains are color coded. The
most similar Drosophila protein to Drok is Gek. Percent amino acid
identities are given for each domain.
(B) Drok/GTPase binding assays. The lower panel shows protein
levels of various GST fusions revealed by Coomassie staining of the
same gel.
(C) Genomic map of Drok region.
(D) Molecular identity of the Drok2 mutation. The consensus guanine
at the splice acceptor site between intron1 and exon2 is mutated
to adenine (highlighted in red).

gates signaling to downstream targets, both nuclear and
cytoskeletal, by cycling between its active GTP-bound
form and inactive GDP-bound form (Hall, 1998). During
eye development, RhoA signals via Jun N-terminal ki-
nase (JNK) and Jun to regulate Fz/PCP-dependent tran-
scription (Strutt et al., 1997; Weber et al., 2000; Fanto
et al., 2000). However, it has remained unclear how the

Fz/Dsh pathway regulates the formation of polarized
cytoskeletal structure.
We report here that a RhoA effector protein, the Dro-
sophila Rho-associated kinase (Drok), functions to regu-
late the actin cytoskeleton downstream of Fz/Dsh. Drok
controls a subset of the PCP response: regulating the
number but not the orientation of wing hairs, and the
rotation but not chirality of photoreceptor clusters. We
show that the major signaling output from Drok is the
phosphorylation of nonmuscle myosin II regulatory light
chain (MRLC) and regulation of myosin II activity. Finally,
we show that fly myosin VIIA, homolog of the human
Usher Syndrome 1B and mouse shaker-1 genes, also
displays strong genetic interactions with this newly de-
fined Fz/Dsh cytoskeletal signaling pathway. These data
provide the first link between Fz/Dsh signaling and direct
modulators of the cytoskeleton, and suggest that such
a pathway is evolutionarily conserved during the devel-
opment of epithelial polarity.

Results

Drok as a Downstream Effector
of Drosophila RhoA
We have reported a multidomain protein kinase, Gek,
that binds specifically to the GTP-bound form of Dro-
sophila Cdc42 and may serve as an effector for Cdc42
(Luo et al., 1997). We hypothesized that there might be
additional Gek-like kinases that serve as effectors for
other Rho-family GTPases. Using degenerate PCR, we
identified the Drosophila homolog of a class of mamma-
lian Rho-associated kinases/ROCKs (Ishizaki et al.,
1996; Leung et al., 1996; Matsui et al., 1996), which we
named Drok for Drosophila Rho-associated kinase. In
the course of our studies, Mizuno et al. (1999) have
independently reported the identification of Drok. Figure
1A depicts the domain organization of Drok in compari-
son with rat ROK-b. Both proteins are composed of a
conserved N-terminal domain, a serine/threonine kinase
domain, a large coiled-coil domain with an embedded
Rho-binding domain, and a C-terminal Plekstrin-homol-
ogy (PH) domain split by a Cys-rich domain (CRD).
To test the physical
interaction between Drok and
various Rho-GTPases, we employed a pull-down assay
using GST-GTPase fusion proteins and in vitro trans-
lated Drok. Drok bound to the constitutively active form
of Drosophila RhoA (Figure 1B, lane 2), but not to consti-
tutively active Rac1 or Cdc42 (lanes 3–4). Mutating a key
amino acid within the effector-binding domain (T37A)
abolished the interaction with Drok (lane 1). These re-
sults, together with those from Mizuno et al. (1999),
suggest that Drok is an effector specific for Drosophila
RhoA.

Generation of Drok Mutants
The Drok gene was mapped to chromosome region
15A1 on the X chromosome (Figure 1C). To generate
loss-of-function mutations in Drok, we made the as-
sumption that hemizygous Drok mutant males would be
lethal, but that such lethality could be rescued by either
a genomic duplication that covers the region [Tp(1;
2)r175c] or by a Drok cDNA expressed under the control

Cytoskeletal Link of Polarity Signaling
83

Figure 2. Defects in Epithelial Polarity Resulting from Loss of Drok
Function
(A and B) Tangential sections of somatic clones in the adult eye
showing the arrangement of photoreceptors and orientation of the
ommatidia (denoted by arrows) in the ventral half of the eye (ventral
is down and anterior to the left) in control (A) and Drok2 (B) clones.
(C and D) Trichomes on the adult wing in wild type (C) and a Drok2
mosaic (D). The clonal border is marked with a red dotted line.
Arrowheads indicate the rare misorientation of hairs from Drok2 cells
near the wing vein. Some distortion of wing hair orientation occurred
during mounting due to the fragile nature of the wing hairs in newly
eclosed adult (that allowed the visualization of GFP for marking the
clone).
(E) Drok2 mosaic pupal wing. Homozygous tissues are marked in
green with mCD8GFP. Phalloidin (red) staining reveals the multiple
F-actin prehairs from Drok2 mutant cells.
(F) A magnified image of the F-actin structure in Drok2 mutant cells.
Genotypes: Clone in (A) and whole tissue in (C) are homozygous for
y,w,FRT19A; clones in (B), (D), (E), and (F) are homozygous for y,w,
Drok2, FRT19A.

of the ubiquitously active tubulin-1a promoter (tubP-
Drok). Screening EMS mutagenized flies led to the
identification of two X-linked lethal mutants that were
rescued by Tp(1; 2)r175c and tubP-Drok, and failed to
complement each other. These were named Drok1
and Drok2.
To determine the molecular nature of the Drok muta-
tions, we performed genomic sequencing of the mutant
DNA. The coding sequence of Drok is composed of 10

Figure 3. Evidence that Fz/Dsh Function through Drok in Restricting
Wing Hair Number
(A–D) Representative multiple hair phenotypes (circled in red) of
various genotypes (A–C) in a defined region of the adult wing. Quanti-
fied in (D).
(E and F) F-actin staining of pupal dsh1 wings. Overexpression of
Drok (F) suppresses the assembly of ectopic F-actin-rich prehairs
in dsh1 wings cells, but does not suppress the abnormal assembly
of the prehair at the center of the cell (insets).
(G and H) The adult wing hair phenotype resulting from elevated Fz
activity. Quantified in Table 1.

exons (Figure 1D). A single nucleotide transition of G to
A was found in the Drok2 mutant at the 39 end of intron
1, changing the conserved AG at the splice acceptor
site to AA. Quantitative RT-PCR revealed no change in
the transcript level
in Drok2 hemizygous larvae com-
pared to control (not shown). However, sequence analy-
sis of the Drok2 mutant cDNA revealed that the transcript
has a single base deletion of guanine at the beginning
of exon 2, due to the use of a splice acceptor site one
nucleotide 39 of the original site (Figure 1D). The mutant
mRNA encodes only the first 21 amino acids (aa) of
Drok, followed by a 35 aa random peptide and a stop

Cell
84

Table 1. Genetic Interactions with Frizzled Gain-of-Function Phenotype

Multiple wing hair cells/sector

Genotype

hs-Fz/1; 1/1
hs-Fz/1; wg1g22/1
hs-Fz/1; dsh1/1
hs-Fz/1; Drok2/1
hs-Fz/1; sqhAX3/1
hs-Fz/1; RhoA72O/1
hs-Fz/1; zip1/1
hs-Fz/1; ck13/1

Interaction*

—
no effect
suppression
suppression
suppression
suppression
enhancement
suppression

Avg.

71.1
71.7
21.1
29.4
31.5
34.1
94.3
7.6

Std. Error

(64.0)
(63.9)
(62.8)
(63.6)
(65.3)
(63.4)
(64.0)
(61.4)

N

15
15
8
11
12
10
10
10

Genetic interactions were scored as the effect of loss of one wild-type copy of the genes tested on the expressivity of the multiple wing hair
phenotype resulting from heat shock–induced overexpression of Fz at 30 h APF.
* Interaction: statistical significance was determined by Student’s t-test (p , 0.001).

codon, before the start of the kinase domain (red).
Hence, Drok2 is likely to be a strong loss-of-function, if
not a null mutation. Since we have not yet identified the
molecular nature of the Drok1 mutation, we used the
Drok2 allele for the rest of this study.

Drok Is Essential for a Specific Subset of Epithelial
Polarization Events
The Drok transcript is ubiquitous in all stages of em-
bryogenesis and in imaginal discs (not shown; Mizuno
et al., 1999). Drok2 mutants die before developing into
wandering 3rd instar larvae. To investigate the function
of Drok in the morphogenesis of adult tissues, we exam-
ined somatic Drok2 clones generated by mitotic recom-
bination.
Homozygous Drok2 clones in the eye are of similar
size as their wild-type siblings (twin spots), indicating
no gross defects in proliferation or survival of Drok2
mutant cells. However, about 50% of ommatidia exhib-
ited increase or decrease in photoreceptor numbers
(Figure 2B, arrowheads). A change of photoreceptor
number has also been reported in eye clones homozy-
gous for a hypomorphic RhoA allele (Strutt et al., 1997).
Of those ommatidia with the correct number of photore-
ceptors, 60% were misrotated (Figure 2B), whereas in
control clones all ommatidia were properly rotated (Fig-
ure 2A). These phenotypes resemble those of PCP mu-
tants such as fz, dsh, and RhoA (reviewed in Mlodzik,
1999), suggesting that Drok may also participate in the
signaling cascade controlling PCP. Unlike fz and dsh,
however, very few ommatidia showed aberrant chirality.
We also examined the function of Drok in the wing,
where PCP is exhibited at a single cell level (Wong and
Adler, 1993). In wild-type wings, each cell produces a
single, distally oriented wing hair (Figure 2C), while in
Drok2 adult wing clones, greater than 70% of the cells
produce multiple hairs (Figure 2D). In contrast to most
known PCP genes, including fz and dsh, which exhibit
both stereotypical orientation and multiple hair defects
(Gubb and Garcia-Bellido, 1982; Wong and Adler, 1993),
most hairs within Drok2 clones maintain a largely distal
orientation (Figure 2D).
To investigate the nature of the Drok phenotype during
the development of wing cell polarity, we used phalloidin
to examine the F-actin distribution in Drok2 clones during
prehair initiation (Figure 2E, red). Mutant clones were

positively marked using the MARCM strategy (Lee and
Luo, 1999) (Figure 2E, green). In control clones (not
shown) or in heterozygous tissue neighboring Drok2 mu-
tant clones (Figure 2E), each wing cell generates a single
F-actin bundle from its distal vertex, extending toward
its distal neighbor. However, in Drok2 clones, a majority
of the cells generate more than one F-actin bundle.
The F-actin-based prehairs always initiate at the cell
periphery (Figure 2F). Notably, the majority of the pre-
hairs maintain a roughly distal orientation (in the case
of multiple hairs, the vector average remains distal). The
similarities between the pupal and adult clonal pheno-
types indicate that the multiple hair phenotype of adult
Drok2 clones is likely the result of failure to restrict
F-actin bundle assembly to a single site during prehair
formation.
The multiple hair/actin phenotype was seen only in
mutant cells and never in neighboring heterozygous or
wild-type cells (Figures 2D and 2E), indicating that Drok
acts in a cell-autonomous manner.

Evidence that Drok Acts Downstream of fz/dsh
The similarity of the Drok2 clonal phenotype in the wing
to aspects of the phenotypes of fz, dsh, and RhoA led
us to hypothesize that Drok may act downstream of Fz/
Dsh. To assess the genetic interactions among these
genes, we quantified the multiple hair phenotype in a
defined region, the ventral surface of the proximal-ante-
rior region of the wing.
We made use of the dsh1 allele, which is defective for
PCP function without affecting Wg signaling (Axelrod et
al., 1998; Boutros et al., 1998).
In dsh1 hemizygous
males, an average of 16.8 cells with multiple hairs (12%
of the cells) are present in this region (Figure 3A). When
Drok was overexpressed via a tubP-Drok transgene in
the dsh1 hemizygous background, the average number
of cells exhibiting multiple hairs was reduced by more
than 7-fold to 2.3 per wing region (Figures 3B and 3D).
tubP-Drok expression in a wild-type genetic back-
ground did not give rise to any obvious phenotypes
(data not shown). Suppression of the dsh1 multiple hair
phenotype by tubP-Drok expression could also be seen
when F-actin-based prehairs were visualized in the pu-
pal wing (Figures 3E and 3F). In contrast to the suppres-
sion of the dsh1 phenotype by overexpression of Drok,
reduction of Drok dosage by 50% (assuming that Drok2

Cytoskeletal Link of Polarity Signaling
85

Figure 4. Regulation of Sqh Phosphorylation by Drok In Vivo
Upper panels: Immunoblots of phosphorylated Sqh detected with
anti-phospho-MRLC antibody. Lower panels: Duplicate blots
probed with anti-Sqh antibody.
(A) 1st instar larval extracts of wild type, Drok2/Y, sqhAX3/Y.
(B) Untreated (2) and phosphatase-treated (1) wild-type extracts.
(C) hs-GAL4.UAS-Drok-CAT (Drok-CAT), and hs-GAL4.UAS-
Drok-CAT.KG(Drok-CAT.KG).
(D and E) Confocal images of the same wing cells at 32 hr APF
visualized by GFP (D) or anti-phospho-MRLC (E). Homozygous Drok2
wing cells are marked with green in (D). Red arrowheads: cell mem-
branes between two Drok2/Drok2 cells; yellow arrowheads: cell
membranes between a Drok2/ Drok2 cell and a Drok2/1 (or 1/1) cell.
(F) A dead second instar Drok2 mutant larva, representative of the
lethal phase of the mutant population.
(G) A Drok2 mutant fly rescued from larval lethality to viable adult

is null) resulted in a 2.5-fold increase in the number of
multiple hair cells (Figures 3C and 3D).
We also examined genetic interactions between Drok
and fz in a different assay. The proper level of Fz/Dsh
signaling is critical for the generation of wild-type PCP,
as both overexpression and loss of function of these
genes result in polarity defects in the eye (Zheng et al.,
1995; Strutt et al., 1997) and the wing (Krasnow and
Adler, 1994). Overexpression of Fz 30 hr after puparium
formation (APF) produced primarily a multiple hair phe-
notype that was suppressed by dsh1 heterozygosity (Ta-
ble 1; Krasnow and Adler, 1994). Similarly, reducing the
wild-type copy number of RhoA and Drok by half sup-
pressed the phenotype by 2- to 2.5-fold (Figures 3G and
3H; Table 1). Taken together, these experiments suggest
that Drok functions downstream of Fz/Dsh in restricting
the number of F-actin-based prehairs.

Nonmuscle Myosin II Regulatory Light Chain:
A Critical Drok Target
Studies in mammalian cells have identified several
downstream substrates for Rho-kinase/ROCK (Amano
et al., 2000). In particular, Rho-kinase regulates the
phosphorylation of the nonmuscle myosin regulatory
light chain (MRLC) primarily at Ser-19 and secondarily
at the adjacent Thr-18 (Amano et al., 1996; Kimura et al.,
1996). Phosphorylation of MRLC at these sites results in
a conformational change that allows myosin II to form
filaments and increases its actin-dependent ATPase ac-
tivity (reviewed in Tan et al., 1992).
The amino acid sequence around the phosphorylation
site of MRLC is highly conserved between mammalian
MRLC and the Drosophila homolog, encoded by spa-
ghetti squash (sqh) (Karess et al., 1991; Jordan and Ka-
ress, 1997). We therefore assessed the phosphorylation
of the Drosophila MRLC using an antibody that recog-
nizes mammalian MRLC only when Ser-19 is phosphory-
lated (anti-phosho-MRLC; Matsumura et al., 1998). Im-
munoblot analysis showed that this antibody specifically
recognizes phosphorylated Sqh in larval extracts (Figure
4A)—the single z20 kDa band in wild-type extract is
absent in extracts of a sqh null, or when wild-type extract
is treated with phosphatase (Figure 4B). While phos-
phorylated Sqh is detectable in Drok2 mutant extracts,
its level is greatly reduced (Figure 4A), whereas the Sqh
protein level
is not affected in Drok2 mutants (Figure
4A, lower panel). Previous work with bovine Rho-kinase
established that expression of the N-terminal catalytic
domain gives rise to a constitutively active kinase
(Amano et al., 1997). Raising the level of Drok activity
in vivo by transient expression of the catalytic domain
of Drok (Drok-CAT) resulted in elevated phosphorylation
of Sqh as compared to controls in which a kinase-dead
form (Drok-CAT-KG) was expressed (Figure 4C). Taken
together, these experiments indicate that Drok is re-
quired for maintaining the proper level of MRLC phos-
phorylation in vivo, and that such regulation depends
on its kinase activity.

by the presence of a single copy of a sqhE20E21 transgene.
(H) The wing of a sqhE20E21 rescued Drok2/Y adult fly lacks multiple
hair.

Cell
86

Figure 5. The Role of Myosin II (sqh and zip)
and Myosin VIIA (ck) in the Regulation of Wing
Hair Number
(A) Quantification of multiple hair phenotypes
modified by sqh transgenes with single or
double amino acid substitutions at Thr-20
and Ser-21, or by heterozygosity of the zip1
(null), ck13 (strong), or ck07130 (weak) mutations
(FlyBase).
(B–C) Confocal images of Zip immunoreactiv-
ity in the pupal wing. Red dots outline the
plasma membrane of a single cell.
(D) Phalloidin staining of a clone (within red
dotted area) homozygous for a hypomorphic
zip02957 allele. Multiple F-actin prehairs are in-
dicated by yellow arrowheads.
(E and F) Multiple hair (red circle) phenotypes
in ck07130 variants (genotypes indicated).
(G) Quantification of the effect of expressing
sqhE20E21 and sqhA20A21 on the ck07130 ho-
mozygous phenotype.
Error bars in (A) and (G) represent standard
errors.

We also examined the effect of loss of Drok function
on MRLC phosphorylation at the cellular level. In wild-
type wing cells, phosho-MRLC is enriched at the cortex
of the pupal wing cells, whereas in Drok2 mutant cells
this perimembrane staining is reduced or absent (Fig-
ures 4D and 4E). Thus, Drok is cell autonomously re-
quired for maintaining the level of cortical phospho-
MRLC in the pupal wing.
Next, we tested whether MRLC/Sqh is an effector for
Drok in regulating hair number in response to Fz/Dsh
signaling. We made use of a series of mutant sqh trans-
genes with point mutations in the primary (Ser-21) and
secondary (Thr-20) phosphorylation sites, changing
them either to glutamic acid (phosphomimetic), or to
nonphosphorylatable alanine. These sqh transgenes are
under control of the endogenous promoter and are ex-
pressed at levels similar to the native protein (Jordan
and Karess, 1997). Remarkably, whereas 100% of Drok2
hemizygous animals die before the wandering third in-
star stage, introducing one copy of a sqh transgene
carrying the E20E21 double mutation (mimicking phos-
phorylation on both sites) resulted in 4% hemizygous
Drok2 survival to adulthood (Figures 4F and 4G). Like-
wise, one copy of an analogous transgene expressing
SqhE21 also resulted in Drok2 hemizygotes surviving
to adulthood (albeit a lower percentage), with a large
fraction surviving to late-stage pupae. No rescue was
observed when transgenes expressing the alanine sub-
stituted forms (SqhA20A21 or SqhA21) were introduced
into the Drok2 background. These observations support
the notion that MRLC is a key target (either directly or

indirectly) for Drok kinase in vivo, since mimicking its
phosphorylation, even in an unregulated fashion, par-
tially rescues Drok2 organismal lethality.
Moreover, the multiple hair defect resulting from Drok
loss of function is almost completely suppressed by the
presence of the sqhE20E21 transgene in the rescued
adults (Figure 4H; from 70% without sqhE20E21 to ,1%
in its presence). Taken together with the modulation of
MRLC phosphorylation by Drok (Figures 4A–4C), these
results demonstrate that the regulation of MRLC phos-
phorylation is a principal function of Drok in regulating
F-actin prehair number.

Nonmuscle Myosin II in Fz/Dsh Signaling
To test whether the phosphorylation state of MRLC can
also modulate Fz/Dsh signaling, we assayed whether
the phosphomimetic and nonphosphorylatable forms of
MRLC can directly modify the dsh1 multiple hair pheno-
type. Introducing one copy of sqhE20E21 reduced the
number of multiple hair cells in dsh1 mutants by 5-fold
(Figure 5A). sqhE21, or sqhA20E21, also suppressed
the dsh1 phenotype by more than 2-fold. In contrast,
introduction of sqhA21 into the dsh1 background en-
hanced the multiple hair phenotype. We also tested the
involvement of MRLC in the Fz/Dsh pathway using the
Fz-overexpression assay. Reducing the wild-type sqh
gene dosage from two to one, by introducing a single
copy of the sqhAX3 null allele (Jordan and Karess, 1997),
resulted in a 2-fold suppression of the multiple hair phe-
notype caused by Fz overexpression (Table 1). These
results support the notion that MRLC functions in the

Cytoskeletal Link of Polarity Signaling
87

PCP pathway to restrict F-actin bundle assembly to a
single site.
MRLC phosphorylation in response to Drok activation
would be predicted to modify the conformation and ele-
vate the catalytic activity of its associated heavy chain,
Zipper (Zip) (Young et al., 1993). We tested whether
Zip also participates in regulating actin distribution/wing
hair number in response to Fz/Dsh. Loss of one copy
of the zip gene enhanced the dsh1 phenotype by 4.5-
fold (Figure 5A), consistent with the genetic interaction
data between fz/dsh and sqh. These results suggest
that myosin II functions positively downstream of Fz/
Dsh in regulating actin prehair development.
The localization of Zip protein in wing cells further
supports its role downstream of Fz/Dsh. At the apical
surface of the pupal wing cell, Zip is asymmetrically
localized to the distal portion of the cell, where prehair
growth initiates (Figure 5B). This distal localization ap-
pears to coincide, temporally, with prehair initiation. To
test whether Zip localization could be modified by Fz/
Dsh signaling, we examined Zip distribution at the apical
surface in dsh1 mutants. Instead of being concentrated
in the distal region of the cell, Zip was concentrated in
the center of the cell (Figure 5C), where prehairs form
in dsh1 mutants (Wong and Adler, 1993).
Finally, we tested whether reduction in myosin II/Zip
activity also results in the multihair phenotype. We made
use of the hypomorphic zip02957 (Spradling et al., 1999),
as zip and sqh null mutations appear to be cell lethal in
the wing (our unpublished observations). As is the case
with Drok, some homozygous zip02957 wing cells possess
multiple F-actin prehairs (Figure 5D).

MyosinVIIA/crinkled also Interacts with Fz/Dsh
Polarity Signaling
We also tested if the gene crinkled (ck) is involved in the
Fz/Dsh signaling pathway regulating wing hair number
because (1) ck mutant cells in the wing lead to multiple
hair and split hair phenotypes (Gubb et al., 1984; Turner
and Adler, 1998), and (2) ck encodes the Drosophila
myosin VIIA protein (Chen et al., 1991; Ashburner et al.,
1999). Mutations in mouse myosinVIIA lead to stereocilia
disorganization and the formation of multiple bundles
of stereocilia (see Eaton, 1997; Self et al., 1998).
Reduction of ck activity potently suppressed the dsh1
multiple hair phenotype (Figure 5A). This result contrasts
with the result that zip1 enhances the dsh1 multiple hair
phenotype, and suggests that the two myosin heavy
chains have opposing effects in regulating prehair as-
sembly.
We then tested both myosin heavy chain genes for
their ability to interact with the hs-fz induced multiple
hair phenotype, and again found that they have oppos-
ing effects. Surprisingly, loss of one copy of zip slightly
but significantly enhanced the late hs-fz multiple hair
phenotype, while loss of one copy of ck markedly sup-
pressed this phenotype (Table 1). These results are the
reverse of what one would expect based on their interac-
tions with dsh1, and suggests the possibility that there
is a signal from Fz to Ck that is independent of Dsh, or
that the multiple hair phenotypes resulting from hypo-
or hyperactivity of the Fz/Dsh pathway arise via distinct
biochemical mechanisms.

Figure 6. Expression of tubP-Drok or sqhE20E21 Transgenes Does
Not Rescue the Orientation Defect in dsh1 Mutants
Adult wings of wild-type (A), dsh1 mutant (B) or dsh1 in the presence
of one copy of either a tubP-Drok (C) or a sqhE20E21 transgene
(D). The images are of the same region in the 2nd posterior “cell”.
Multiple hair cells are circled.

To further assess the nature of the relationship be-
tween the two myosins, we tested the effect of raising
or lowering the activity of MRLC on the ck phenotype.
The multiple hair phenotype in animals homozygous for
a weak ck mutation was enhanced by one copy of the
sqhE20E21 transgene (and hence, a probable increase
in myosin II activity), but not by a sqhA20A21 transgene
(Figures 5E–5G). Taken together, these experiments
suggest that a balance between the activities of myosin
II and myosin VIIA is important in regulating wing hair
number.

Separate Pathways Regulating Wing Hair
Orientation and Number Downstream of Fz/Dsh
Unlike other characterized PCP mutants which affect
both orientation and number of wing hairs (Wong and
Adler, 1993), the primary defect in Drok2 clones appears
to be the presence of multiple hairs per cell, with little
or no wing hair orientation defect. This suggested that
Drok and what lies downstream are involved in transmit-
ting a subset of the Fz/Dsh signal. Supporting this idea,
we found that tubP-Drok and sqhE20E21 suppressed
the multiple hair phenotype of dsh1, but not the hair
mis-orientation phenotype (Figure 6). Additional data
supporting this conclusion came from observing the site
of prehair initiation. As previously reported (Wong and
Adler, 1993), prehairs emerge aberrantly from the center
of dsh1 mutant cells (Figure 3E, inset), rather than from
the distal vertex as seen in wild type cells. Such misposi-
tioning of prehair initiation correlates with the failure to
acquire the proper distal orientation (Wong and Adler,
1993). While tubP-Drok expression suppressed multiple
prehair formation, it did not affect the site of F-actin
initiation in dsh1 (Figure 3F, inset). Finally, the hair orien-
tation defect resulting from Fz overexpression (via hs-fz)
at 24 hours is suppressed by reducing dsh gene dosage

Cell
88

Figure 7. A Model of the Fz/Dsh Polarity Signaling Pathways
Components in bold leading to the regulation of the number of
F-actin-based prehairs are subjects of this study. The JNK cascade
was established previously (Strutt et al., 1997). Our study also im-
plies a separate pathway downstream of Dsh or RhoA to the cy-
toskeleton (dashed arrows) that determines the site/orientation of
the F-actin-based prehairs.

but not that of RhoA, Drok, sqh or ck (data not shown).
Taken together, these observations suggest that sepa-
rate mechanisms allow Fz/Dsh to independently regu-
late the number and the orientation of prehairs, and that
only the former involves Drok signaling.

Discussion

Drok Links Fz/Dsh Signaling
to the Actin Cytoskeleton
Mammalian and C. elegans Rho-kinase/ROCK have
been implicated in regulating actin stress fibers forma-
tion in fibroblasts (Leung et al., 1996; Amano et al., 1997;
Ishizaki et al., 1997) or changes in hypodermal cell shape
during embryonic development (Wissmann et al., 1997).
How Rho-kinase/ROCK is regulated by an extracellular
signal in a physiological process is unknown. We present
several lines of evidence that Drosophila Rho-associated
kinase is required for restricting the number of sites of
F-actin bundle assembly in response to activation of the
Fz/Dsh pathway. Together with the previously estab-
lished genetic link between Fz/Dsh and RhoA (Strutt
et al., 1997), a molecular pathway from Fz/Dsh to the
regulation of actin structure has been established (Fig-
ure 7). Proteins that physically mediate the interaction
between Fz and Dsh, and between Dsh and RhoA, re-
main to be identified.
The data presented here suggest that the Drok/myo-
sin II pathway is involved in regulating the number—but
not orientation—of the wing hair. What then are the
components that regulate wing hair orientation? One
possibility is that a bifurcation of the pathway occurs
at the level of RhoA, with a separate effector pathway
regulating wing hair orientation. In the eye, the JNK

pathway has been implicated in functioning downstream
of RhoA in regulating ommatidial polarity (Strutt et al.,
1997). However, the function of the JNK pathway in the
wing has not been described, and a signaling pathway
that regulates transcription is unlikely to encode the
requisite spatial information necessary for selection of
the site of prehair initiation. Therefore, it is likely that a
separate signal from or upstream of RhoA may control
the selection of the F-actin assembly site, and therefore
the orientation of the wing hair (Figure 7).
Several other genes have been implicated in regulat-
ing wing hair number based on their loss-of-function
phenotypes, including inturned (in), fuzzy(fy), and multi-
ple wing hair (mwh) (reviewed in Shulman et al., 1998).
We believe that these gene products participate in a
distinct branch of the polarity signaling pathway for the
following reasons. First, because they each have signifi-
cant effects on both hair orientation and hair number,
they are unlikely to function downstream of Drok. Sec-
ond, expression of the phosphomimetic Sqh-E20E21,
or the nonactivatable Sqh-A20A21, in mwh or in mutant
backgrounds did not modify their phenotypes (data not
shown). Third, while Drok functions in the eye as well
as in the wing, In, Fy, and Mwh have no apparent role
in PCP signaling in the eye.
The misorientation of ommatidia in Drok2 eye clones
is also consistent with its functioning in the Fz/Dsh/
RhoA pathway (Strutt et al., 1997). It is conceivable that
Drok may act as an effector of RhoA in regulating the
process of ommatidial rotation. Alternatively, loss of
Drok function could lead to a disruption of the actin
cytoskeleton and a consequent loss of the appropriate
cell–cell contacts that support intercellular signaling es-
sential for ommatidial rotation (Mlodzik, 1999). Although
Drok mutants exhibit misrotation of ommatidia, they ac-
quire the proper chiral form. Determination of ommatid-
ial rotation may reflect a Drok-dependent subset of PCP
signaling in the eye that is, in some way, molecularly
analogous to the subset of PCP signaling in the wing
reflected in the regulation of hair number.

Phosphorylation of MRLC as a Major Output
of Drok Signaling In Vivo
Biochemical and cell culture studies have identified
many potential substrates for Rho-kinase/ROCK (re-
viewed in Amano et al., 2000) The relative contribution
of phosphorylation of these different substrates in medi-
ating various functions of Rho-kinase/ROCK is unclear.
We provide strong genetic evidence that phosphoryla-
tion of MRLC at key residues (Ser-21 in Drosophila,
equivalent to Ser-19 in mammals) is a critical output
for Drok signaling (Figure 7). Phosphomimetic MRLC
expression not only suppressed the multiple wing hair
phenotype, but also lethality, of Drok2 mutants. Bio-
chemical and immunostaining experiments further dem-
onstrate that Drok modulates MRLC phosphorylation in
vivo. Previous work has suggested that Drok regulates
phosphorylation of MRLC both by direct phosphoryla-
tion and also by phosphorylation and inhibition of the
myosin binding subunit of myosin phosphatase (MBS)
(Amano et al., 2000). However, we do not know at pres-
ent the relative contribution of direct phosphorylation
by Drok of MRLC, versus phosphorylation of MBS that
indirectly affects MRLC phosphorylation.

Cytoskeletal Link of Polarity Signaling
89

The direct genetic interactions between dsh1 and vari-
ous sqh transgenes further substantiate the notion that
regulation of MRLC phosphorylation is not only a major
output of Drok signaling, but also of Fz/Dsh signaling
to the actin cytoskeleton in regulating hair number.

Possible Mechanisms of Myosin II in Regulating
F-Actin Bundle Assembly
By what mechanism do myosins restrict F-actin bundle
formation? In light of our finding that myosin II is concen-
trated at the site of prehair formation, it seems plausible
that it is actively involved in either the recruitment of
F-actin to the prehair site, or that it directly participates
in the assembly of actin bundles, or both. Studies of
mammalian myosin II provide a precedent for a role in
the formation of F-actin bundles. Phosphorylation of
MRLC promotes a conformational change in myosin II
from a folded to an extended state that readily forms
multivalent bipolar filaments capable of binding multiple
actin filaments (Tan et al., 1992). This is thought to result
in F-actin bundling and stress fiber formation (Chrza-
nowska-Wodnicka and Burridge, 1996).
It appears that in the developing wing, the level of
MRLC phosphorylation/myosin II activity must be within
an optimal range to establish the formation of a single
hair. It is possible that the efficiency of F-actin bundle
formation is regulated by MRLC phosphorylation in a
manner similar to the control of stress fiber formation.
If one further assumes that there are certain bundling
substrates present only at limiting concentrations (e.g.,
F-actin itself), then one would predict that the assembly
of one F-actin bundle would reduce the probability of
forming a second bundle. When MRLC phosphorylation
falls below some threshold level (e.g., in Drok mutant
cells), the efficiency of primary bundle formation is re-
duced, and thus the concentration of the limiting sub-
strate remains at sufficient levels to support the assem-
bly of secondary bundles/prehairs. Conversely, if MRLC
is hyperphosphorylated (e.g., in Fz-overexpressing cells),
the bundling efficiency may increase such that the thresh-
old concentration for bundle formation would be reduced,
thereby increasing the probability of assembling multiple
bundles/prehairs. Future studies will be required to deter-
mine the detailed mechanisms involved.

Interaction of Myosin VIIA with the Fz/Dsh
Pathway and Implications for Stereocilia
Development
In addition to nonmuscle myosin II, which resembles
the myosin II from skeletal muscle, there exists a large
class of unconventional myosins that have different
properties and potential functions in nonmuscle cells
(reviewed in Mermall et al., 1998). For instance, several
different classes of unconventional myosins are ex-
pressed in inner ear epithelium with different subcellular
localization (Hasson et al., 1997). Mutations in three of
the unconventional myosins, myosin VI, VIIA, and XV,
cause hearing/balancing defects in mice, two of which
when mutated in humans result in deafness (reviewed
in Friedman et al., 1999). Of particular interest in the
context of our study is myosin VIIA, mutations in which
are responsible for mouse shaker-1 and human Usher’s
syndrome 1B (Gibson et al., 1995; Weil et al., 1995).

Loss-of-function ck (Drosophila Myosin VIIA) mutants
exhibit a multiple hair and split wing hair phenotype
(Figure 5E; Gubb et al., 1984; Turner and Adler, 1998). We
have shown that ck exhibits strong genetic interactions
with components of the signal transduction pathway
defined in this study, and has opposite effects to that
of myosin II. The seemingly antagonistic relationship
between myosin II and myosinVIIA may suggest a mech-
anism in which the balance of the activities or stoichiom-
etry of these two myosins is critical for the common
process they regulate. For example, myosin II and myo-
sin VIIA may share some common, limiting component(s)
required for their activity. Thus, by reducing the myosin
VIIA dose, myosin II has a larger share of the common
component(s) and thus its activity is upregulated.
Recent evidence suggests that vertebrate homologs
of Dsh and Fz regulate cell morphogenesis using path-
ways analogous to that of the Drosophila PCP pathway
(reviewed in Sokol, 2000). Our findings raise the possibil-
ity that the Fz/Dsh cytoskeletal pathway (Figure 7) may
also be at work in regulating cell polarity in vertebrates,
including the stereocilia formation in the inner ear.

Experimental Procedures

Cloning and Mutant Mapping
Based on sequence similarity between the kinase domains of Dro-
sophila Gek and mammalian Rho-kinase, degenerate RT-PCR was
used to clone a fragment of Drok leading to the isolation of Drok
cDNAs. Two overlapping cDNAs were sequenced on both strands,
the composite of which constitutes an apparent full-length cDNA
of 6.2 kb that agrees with the cDNA sequence reported by Mizuno
et al. (GenBank accession number AF151375). The molecular nature
of the Drok2 mutation was identified by comparing genomic se-
quence of heterozygous Drok2 and parental strains generated by
PCR. To identify the consequence of Drok2 mutation, RT-PCR was
performed on mRNA from hemizygous mutant and control larvae.
Fragments that span from 39 base pairs before the end of exon 1
to 75 base pairs 39 of the point mutation at the splice acceptor site
were amplified and no difference was found in the level or apparent
size of products. Sequencing of these PCR fragments revealed a
single nucleotide deletion in Drok2 mutant.

Transgenic Constructs
tubP-Drok: Full-length Drok cDNA was cloned (KpnI-KpnI) into a
modified pCaSpeR4 vector carrying the tubulin 1a promoter and a
SV40 polyA signal sequence (Lee and Luo, 1999).
UAS-Drok-CAT and UAS-Drok-CAT-KG: The catalytic domain of
Drok (aa 1–454) was cloned in pUAST (Brand and Perrimon, 1993). To
create a kinase-dead version (UAS-Drok-CAT-KG), the conserved
lysine (K116) required for ATP binding was changed to glycine by
site-specific mutagenesis.
sqh transgenes: The sqhE21, A21, and A20A21 lines were pre-
viously described (Jordan and Karess, 1997), and the sqhE20E21
and E20A21 variants were constructed in a similar manner.

Generation of Drok Mutants
Drok was mapped by hybridization to a filter array of P1 clones
(Genome Systems) to be within DSO1670, covered by a duplication
Tp(1;2)r175c. To isolate Drok mutants, y,w,FRT19A /Y;Pin/CyO, P[w1]
flies were treated with 25 mM EMS (Ashburner, 1989), crossed with
C(1)DX/Y; Tp(1;2)r175c/SM1. Single male y,w, FRT19A/Y; Tp(1;2)r175c/
CyO, P[w1] progeny were mated with XX/Y; her/SM1 females to
determine if a lethal mutation covered by the duplication was pres-
ent. Over 1500 such crosses were scored, with 22 lines showing
Tp(1;2)r175c dependence. Two of these lines, Drok1 and Drok2, were
complemented by a tubP-Drok transgene.

Cell
90

Biochemistry
The GST pull-down assay between Drok and activated variants of
purified GST-GTPases was performed as described in Luo et al.
(1997). The binding buffer contained 0.05% Triton-X100. GST-
RhoAV14 and GST-RhoAV14A37 were created by subcloning
RhoAV14 cDNA into pGEX-4T1 between the BamHI and EcoRI sites.
The GST-RhoAV14A37 variant was generated by oligo-directed mu-
tagenesis.
Immunoblots (Figures 4A–4C): Extracts of 1st (A) or 3rd instar larvae
(B and C) were prepared as per Young et al., 1993, but with the
addition of 25 mM NaF, 20 mM Na4P2O7, and 1 mM Na3VO4 to the
extraction buffer. (B) The treated sample was prepared without
phosphatase inhibitors and treated with 400 U l phosphatase (New
England Biolabs) for 30 minutes at 308C. Expression of UAS-Drok-
CAT and UAS-Drok-CAT-KG was induced by heat shock–regulated
Gal4 for 45 min at 388C, followed by a 2 hr incubation at 258C prior
to extraction. Protein concentrations were determined (Bio-Rad Pro-
tein Assay). Thirty two mg of total protein/sample was separated by
SDS-PAGE (14% acrylamide), blotted to a PVDF membrane (Immo-
bilon-P; Millipore), and probed with affinity-purified rabbit anti-phos-
pho-MRLC (Matsumura et al., 1998) diluted 1:200, or an anti-Sqh
antibody (Jordan and Karess, 1997) at 1:200. Detection was per-
formed with a donkey anti-rabbit F(ab)2 fragment conjugated to HRP
(Amerham) at 1:20,000 and ECL reagent (Amersham).

Mosaic Analysis of Drok2 Clones and Histology
FLP/FRT-mediated recombination was used to generate clones ho-
mozygous for Drok2 in the wing and eye imaginal discs, via heat
shock–induced recombination in 1st instar larvae. Homozygous wing
clones in pupae and newly eclosed adults were visualized using
the MARCM system (Lee and Luo, 1999) by the presence of the
membrane marker mCD8GFP. Genotypes: y,w,Drok2 ,FRT19A/tubP-
GAL80, hs-FLP, FRT19A ; UAS-mCD8GFP/1; tubP-Gal4/1 for pupal
and early adult wing clones; y,w,Drok2 ,FRT19A/tubP-GAL80, hs-FLP,
FRT19A for adult eye clones.
At 32 hr, APF wings were dissected and fixed in 4% formaldehyde
in PBT (100 mM phosphate buffer [pH 7.2] 1 0.1% Tween-20).
F-actin was stained with 200 nM Phalloidin-Alexa568nm in PBT. Rabbit
anti-myosin heavy chain (Zipper) (Jordan and Karess, 1997) or anti-
phospho-MRLC antibody was used at 1:1000 or 1:20 in PBT, respec-
tively. Secondary antibody was goat anti-rabbit-FITC (Jackson Labs,
1:200). Images were collected on a Bio-Rad MRC 1024 laser scan-
ning confocal microscope and processed with NIH-Image1.62 and
Adobe Photoshop 5.0.

Genetic Interaction Assays
dsh1 interactions: Multiple hair phenotype was quantified in a rectan-
gular area in the ventral marginal “cell”, delimited on the proximal
end by an orthogonal extending from the notch formed by the costal
cell to wing vein II (wvII) and distally by the 15th stout marginal bristle
(from the proximal end) to wvII. The number of multiple hair cells
was counted and averaged for at least 10 wings per genotype.
hs-Fz interactions: The multiple hair phenotype was induced by
heat shock at either 24 (early) or 30 hours (late) APF, in animals
carrying one copy of hs-Fz (Krasnow and Adler, 1994). Quantification
of the late phenotype was the same as for the dsh1 assay except
that the proximal limit of the area scored was an orthogonal ex-
tending from the most proximal stout marginal bristle to wvII.
ck07130/sqh interaction: The average number of multiple hair cells
were counted within the ventral marginal “cell”, from the notch
formed by the costal cell to the distal end of the wing.

Acknowledgments

We thank M. Mlodzik for providing us with RhoA constructs, the
Bloomington Stock Center for fly stocks, J. Reuter for technical
assistance, and F. Matsumura for his generous gift of purified anti-
phospho-MRLC. We thank M. Simon, C.-H. Yang, D. Kiehart, M.
Cyert, and members of the Luo lab for their valued discussion during
the course of the work. C. W. was supported by a National Institutes
of Health postdoctoral fellowship. This work was supported by
grants from the National Institutes of Health (R01 NS36623) and the
Muscular Dystrophy Association to L. L., from the Cancer Research

Fund of the Damon Runyon-Walter Winchell Foundation, Award
DRS-16 to J. D. A., and from le Ministe` re de l’E´ ducation Nationale
de la Recherche et de la Technologie and the Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique (France) (to A. R. and R. K.). L. L. was a
Klingenstein, McKnight, and Sloan fellow or scholar.

Received September 22, 2000; revised February 9, 2001.

References

Amano, M., Ito, M., Kimura, K., Fukata, Y., Chihara, K., Nakano, T.,
Matsuura, Y., and Kaibuchi, K. (1996). Phosphorylation and activa-
tion of myosin by Rho-associated kinase (Rho-kinase). J. Biol. Chem.
271, 20246–20249.
Amano, M., Chihara, K., Kimura, K., Fukata, Y., Nakamura, N., Matsu-
ura, Y., and Kaibuchi, K. (1997). Formation of actin stress fibers and
focal adhesions enhanced by Rho-kinase. Science 275, 1308–1311.
Amano, M., Fukata, Y., and Kaibuchi, K. (2000). Regulation and
functions of rho-associated kinase. Exp. Cell Res. 261, 44–51.
Ashburner, M. (1989). Drosophila, A Laboratory Handbook (Cold
Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Press).
Ashburner, M., Misra, S., Roote, J., Lewis, S.E., Blazej, R., Davis,
T., Doyle, C., Galle, R., George, R., Harris, N., et al. (1999). An explora-
tion of the sequence of a 2.9-Mb region of the genome of Drosophila
melanogaster. The Adh region. Genetics 153, 179–219.
Axelrod, J.D., Miller, J.R., Shulman, J.M., Moon, R.T., and Perrimon,
N. (1998). Differential recruitment of Dishevelled provides signaling
specificity in the planar cell polarity and Wingless signaling path-
ways. Genes Dev. 12, 2610–2622.
Boutros, M., Paricio, N., Strutt, D.I., and Mlodzik, M. (1998). Dishev-
elled activates JNK and discriminates between JNK pathways in
planar polarity and wingless signaling. Cell 94, 109–118.
Brand, A.H., and Perrimon, N. (1993). Targeted gene expression as
a means of altering cell fates and generating dominant phenotypes.
Development 118, 401–415.
Chen, T.L., Edwards, K.A., Lin, R.C., Coats, L.W., and Kiehart, D.P.
(1991). Drosophila myosin heavy chain at 35BC. J. Cell Biol. 115,
330a.
Chrzanowska-Wodnicka, M., and Burridge, K. (1996). Rho-stimu-
lated contractility drives the formation of stress fibers and focal
adhesions. J. Cell Biol. 133, 1403–1415.
Eaton, S. (1997). Planar polarization of Drosophila and vertebrate
epithelia. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 9, 860–866.
Eaton, S., Wepf, R., and Simons, K. (1996). Roles for Rac1 and Cdc42
in planar polarization and hair outgrowth in the wing of Drosophila. J.
Cell Biol. 135, 1277–1289.
Fanto, M., Weber, U., Strutt, D.I., and Mlodzik, M. (2000). Nuclear
signaling by Rac and Rho GTPases is required in the establishment
of epithelial planar polarity in the Drosophila eye. Current Biol. 10,
979–988.
Friedman, T.B., Sellers, J.R., and Avraham, K.B. (1999). Unconvertio-
nal myosins and the genetics of hearing loss. Amer. J Med. Genet.
89, 147–157.
Gibson, F., Walsh, J., Mburu, P., Varela, A., Brown, K.A., Antonio,
M., Beisel, K.W., Steel, K.P., and Brown, S.D.M. (1995). A type VII
myosin encoded by the mouse deafness gene shaker-1. Nature 374,
62–64.
Gubb, D., and Garcia-Bellido, A. (1982). A genetic analysis of the
determination of cuticular polarity during development in Drosophila
melanogaster. J. Embryol. Exp. Morph. 68, 37–57.
Gubb, D., Shelton, M., Roote, J., McGill, S., and Ashburner, M. (1984).
The genetic analysis of a large transposing element of Drosophila
melanogaster. The insertion of a w1 rst1 TE into the ck locus.
Chromosoma 91, 54–64.
Hall, A. (1998). Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton. Science
279, 509–514.
Hasson, T., Gillespie, P. G., Garcia, J. A., MacDonald, R. B., Zhao,
Y.-d., Yee, A. G., Mooseker, M. S., and Corey, D. P. (1997). Uncon-

den, N., Misra, S., and Rubin, G.M. (1999). The Berkeley Drosophila
genome project gene disruption project. Single P-element insertions
mutating 25% of vital Drosophila genes. Genetics 153, 135–177.
Strutt, D.I., Weber, U., and Mlodzik, M. (1997). The role of RhoA is
tissue polarity and Frizzled signaling. Nature 387, 292–295.
Tan, J.L., Ravid, S., and Spudich, J.A. (1992). Control of nonmuscle
myosins by phosphorylation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61, 721–759.
Theisen, H., Purcell, J., Bennett, M., Kansagara, D., Syed, A., and
Marsh, J.L. (1994). dishevelled is required during wingless signaling
to establish both cell polarity and cell identity. Development 120,
347–360.
Tilney, L.G., and Tilney, M.S. (1992). Actin, filaments, sterocilia and
hair cells: how cells count and measure. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 8,
257–274.
Turner, C.M., and Adler, P.N. (1998). Distinct roles for the actin and
microtubule cytoskeletons in the morphogenesis of epidermal hairs
during wing development in Drosophila. Mech. Dev. 70, 181–192.
Usui, T., Shima, Y., Shimada, Y., Hirano, S., Burgess, R.W., Schwarz,
T.L., Takeichi, M., and Uemura, T. (1999). Flamingo, a seven-pass
transmembrane cadherin, regulates planar cell polarity under the
control of Frizzled. Cell 98, 585–595.
Vinson, C.R., Conover, S., and Adler, P.N. (1989). A Drosophila tissue
polarity locus encodes a protein containing seven potential trans-
membrane domains. Nature 338, 263–264.
Weber, U., Paricio, N., and Mlodzik, M. (2000). Jun mediates frizzled-
induced R3/R4 cell fate distinction and planar polarity determination
in the Drosophila eye. Development 127, 3619–3629.
Weil, D., Blanchard, S., Kaplan, J., Guilford, P., Gibson, F., Walsh,
J., Mburu, P., and Varela, A. (1995). Defective myosin VIIA gene
responsible for Usher syndrome type 1B. Nature 374, 62–65.
Wissmann, A., Ingles, J., McGhee, J.D., and Mains, P.E. (1997).
Caenorhabditis elegans LET-502 is related to Rho-binding kinases
and human myotonic dystrophy kinase and interacts genetically
with a homolog of the regulatory subunit of smooth muscle myosin
phosphatase to affect cell shape. Genes Dev. 11, 409–422.
Wodarz, A., and Nusse, R. (1998). Mechanisms of Wnt signaling in
development. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 14, 59–88.
Wong, L.L., and Adler, P.N. (1993). Tissue polarity genes of Drosoph-
ila regulate the subcellular location for prehair initiation in pupal
wing cells. J. Cell Biol. 123, 209–221.
Young, P.E., Richman, A.M., Ketchum, A.S., and Kiehart, D.P. (1993).
Morphogenesis in Drosophila requires nonmuscle myosin heavy
chain function. Genes Dev. 7, 29–41.
Zheng, L., Zhang, J., and Carthew, R.W. (1995). Frizzled regulates
mirror-symmetric pattern formation in the Drosophila eye. Develop-
ment 121, 3045–3055.

Cytoskeletal Link of Polarity Signaling
91

ventional myosins in inner-ear sensory epithelia. J. Cell Biol. 137,
1287–1307.
Ishizaki, T., Maekawa, M., Fujisawa, K., Okawa, K., Iwamatsu, A.,
Fujita, A., Watnabe, N., Saito, Y., Kakizuka, A., Morii, N., and Naru-
miya, S. (1996). The small GTP-binding protein Rho binds to and
activates a 160 kDa Ser/Thr protein kinase homologous to myotonic
dystrophy kinase. EMBO J. 15, 1885–1893.
Ishizaki, T., Naito, M., Fujisawa, K., Maekawa, M., Watanabe, N.,
Saito, Y., and Narumiya, S. (1997). p160ROCK, a Rho-asociated
coiled-coil forming protein kinase, works downstream of Rho and
induces focal adhesions. FEBS Lett. 404, 118–124.
Jordan, P., and Karess, R. (1997). Myosin light chain-activating
phosphorylation sites are required for oogenesis in Drosophila. J.
Cell Biol. 139, 1805–1819.
Karess, R.E., Chang, X.J., Edwards, K.A., Kulkarni, S., Aguilera, I.,
and Kiehart, D.P. (1991). The regulatory light chain of nonmuscle
myosin is encoded by spaghetti-squash, a gene required for cytoki-
nesis in Drosophila. Cell 65, 1177–1189.
Kimura, K., Ito, M., Amano, M., Chihara, K., Fukata, Y., Nakafuku,
M., Yamamori, B., Feng, J., Nakano, T., Okawa, K., et al. (1996).
Regulation of myosin phosphatase by Rho and Rho-associated ki-
nase (Rho-kinase). Science 273, 245–248.
Klingensmith, J., Nusse, R., and Perrimon, N. (1994). The Drosophila
segment polarity gene dishevelled encodes a novel protein required
for response to the wingless signal. Genes Dev. 8, 118–130.
Krasnow, R.E., and Adler, P.N. (1994). A single frizzled protein has
a dual function in tissue polarity. Development 120, 1883–1893.
Krasnow, R.E., Wong, L.L., and Adler, P.N. (1995). Dishevelled is a
component of the frizzled signaling pathway in Drosophila. Develop-
ment 121, 4095–4102.
Lee, T., and Luo, L. (1999). Mosaic analysis with a repressible cell
marker for studies of gene function in neuronal morphogenesis.
Neuron 22, 451–461.
Leung, T., Chen, X.-Q., Manser, E., and Lim, L. (1996). The p160
Rho-binding kinase ROKa is a member of a kinase family and is
involved in the reorganization of the cytoskeleton. Mol. Cell Biol.
16, 5313–5327.
Luo, L., Lee, T., Tsai, L., Tang, G., Jan, L.Y., and Jan, Y.N. (1997).
Genghis Khan (Gek) as a putative effector for Drosophila Cdc42 and
regulator of actin polymerization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94,
12963–12968.
Matsumura, F., Ono, S., Yamakita, Y., Totsukawa, G., and Yama-
shito, S. (1998). Specific localization of serine 19 phosphorylated
myosin II during cell locomotion and mitosis of cultured cells. J.
Cell Biol. 140, 119–129.
Matsui, T., Amano, M., Yamamoto, T., Chihara, K., Nakafuku, M.,
Ito, M., Nakano, T., Okawa, K., Ewamatsu, A., and Kaibuchi, K.
(1996). Rho-associated kinase, a novel serine/threonine kinase, as
a putative target for the small GTP binding protein Rho. EMBO J.
15, 2208–2216.
Mermall, V., Post, P.L., and Mooseker, M.S. (1998). Unconventional
myosins in cell movement, membrane traffic, and signal transduc-
tion. Science 279, 527–532.
Mizuno, T., Amano, M., Kaibuchi, K., and Nishida, Y. (1999). Identifi-
cation and characterization of Drosophila homolog of Rho-kinase.
Gene 238, 437–444.
Mlodzik, M. (1999). Planar polarity in the Drosophila eye: a multifac-
eted view of signaling specificity and cross-talk. EMBO J. 18, 6873–
6879.
Self, T., Mahony, M., Fleming, J., Walsh, J., Brown, S.D.M., and
Steel, K.P. (1998). Shaker-1 mutations reveal roles for myosin VIIA
in both development and function of cochlear hair cells. Develop-
ment 125, 557–566.
Shulman, J.M., Perrimon, N., and Axelrod, J.D. (1998). Frizzled sig-
naling and the developmental control of cell polarity. Trends Genet.
14, 452–458.
Sokol, S. (2000). A role for Wnts in morphogenesis and tissue polar-
ity. Nature Cell Biol. 2, E1–E2.
Spradling, A.C., Stern, D., Beaton, A., Rhem, E.J., Laverty, T., Moz-

