            [20:02 18/6/03 Bioinformatics-btn159.tex] Page: i322 i322i329 BIOINFORMATICS Vol.
24 ISMB 2008, pages i322i329doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn159 GenoQuery: a new querying module for functional annotation in a genomic warehouse Frdric Lemoine1,2, Bernard Labedan1 and Christine Froidevaux2, 1Institut de Gntique et Microbiologie and 2Laboratoire de Recherche en Informatique, Universit Paris-Sud XI, 91405 Orsay Cedex, France ABSTRACT Motivation: We have to cope with both a deluge of new genome sequences and a huge amount of data produced by high-throughput approaches used to exploit these genomic features.
Crossing and comparing such heterogeneous and disparate data will help improving functional annotation of genomes.
This requires designing elaborate integration systems such as warehouses for storing and querying these data.
Results: We have designed a relational genomic warehouse with an original multi-layer architecture made of a databases layer and an entities layer.
We describe a new querying module, GenoQuery, which is based on this architecture.
We use the entities layer to define mixed queries.
These mixed queries allow searching for instances of biological entities and their properties in the different databases, without specifying in which database they should be found.
Accordingly, we further introduce the central notion of alternative queries.
Such queries have the same meaning as the original mixed queries, while exploiting complementarities yielded by the various integrated databases of the warehouse.
We explain how GenoQuery computes all the alternative queries of a given mixed query.
We illustrate how useful this querying module is by means of a thorough example.
Availability: http://www.lri.fr/lemoine/GenoQuery/ Contact: chris@lri.fr, lemoine@lri.fr 1 INTRODUCTION With the entry in the genomics era, the advances of genome sequencing (700 published microbial genomes in April 2008) and the increasingly massive use of high-throughput approaches have produced a huge amount of data.
We urgently need management systems in order to store and query biological information.
In particular, this is critical in functional annotation of genomes (Ouzounis and Karp, 2002).
Indeed, it is now easy to get the complete sequence of a prokaryotic genome and to detect all its genes (structural annotation).
On the contrary, the functional annotation of its putative coding sequences is increasingly difficult, especially for organisms never studied by experimental biology.
For instance, it is a challenging goal to reconstruct the complete metabolism of a species using uniquely its genomic sequence (Karp et al., 2005).
However, such a reconstruction is crucial to disclose potential drug targets in the case of pathogenic microbes or to exploit novel pathways in the case of species that are potentially useful for bioremediation or bioenergy needs.
Such a To whom correspondence should be addressed.
functional annotation step requires combining various pieces of knowledge and correctly handling heterogeneous data stored in various databases that are either local sources or distributed sources on the web.
Several approaches have been proposed in the field of databases integration.
Portals like SRS (Etzold et al., 1996) and EXPASY (Gasteiger et al., 2003) allow users to query easily multiple sources by means of a single website.
Path-based systems such as Biomediator (Cadag et al., 2007), Bionavigation and BioGuide (Cohen-Boulakia et al., 2006) are based on cross-
