           btn565 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
25 no.
1 2009, pages 613doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn565 Sequence analysis Slidermaximum use of probability information for alignment of short sequence reads and SNP detection Nawar Malhis1,, Yaron S. N. Butterfield1, Martin Ester2 and Steven J. M. Jones1 1Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver and 2School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada Received on July 15, 2008; revised and accepted on October 27, 2008 Advance Access publication October 30, 2008 Associate Editor: Dmitrij Frishman ABSTRACT Motivation: A plethora of alignment tools have been created that are designed to best fit different types of alignment conditions.
While some of these are made for aligning Illumina Sequence Analyzer reads, none of these are fully utilizing its probability (prb) output.
In this article, we will introduce a new alignment approach (Slider) that reduces the alignment problem space by utilizing each read bases probabilities given in the prb files.
Results: Compared with other aligners, Slider has higher alignment accuracy and efficiency.
In addition, given that Slider matches bases with probabilities other than the most probable, it significantly reduces the percentage of base mismatches.
The result is that its SNP predictions are more accurate than other SNP prediction approaches used today that start from the most probable sequence, including those using base quality.
Contact: nmalhis@bcgsc.ca Supplementary information and availability: http://www.bcgsc.
ca/platform/bioinfo/software/slider 1 INTRODUCTION Novel parallel sequencing technologies including sequencing by synthesis (SBS) such as Illumina Sequence Analyzer (for a review, refer to Holt and Jones, 2008), 454 Life Sciences sequencing and Applied Biosystems SOLiD sequencing, coupled with ever decreasing costs, has provided new opportunities to study genomes.
This includes the ability to identify sequence aberrations and chromosomal abnormalities, such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), insertions, deletions and inversions, on a genome-wide scale.
The amount of sequence produced has also provided the computational challenge of developing accurate and reliable software approaches for sequence alignment that can complete within a useful time frame using affordable computer hardware resources.
Here, we focus on the short sequence reads generated by the Illumina Sequence Analyzer G1 and G2 platforms.
Each experiment run typically produces in excess of 1 Gb of nucleotide sequence as short reads (ranging from 27 to 42 nt in length).
The Illumina sequencing by synthesis technology works by first randomly fragmenting DNA of interest, ligating adapters to each end, and then annealing the DNA fragments to a flow cell surface coated To whom correspondence should be addressed.
with complementary oligonucleotides.
The DNA fragments are then amplified at millions of unique locations across the flow cell surface resulting in a random array of clonal clusters of DNA molecules.
Sequencing of the amplified DNA occurs in cycles.
At each cycle, all four fluorescently labelled reversibly terminated nucleotides are added to the reaction allowing the single correct nucleotide to be incorporated by the polymerase at each cluster.
A subsequent laser excitation allows for four images to be generated each of which capture a specific excited wavelength from each of the four fluorescent labels corresponding to a single base type.
Comparing the colour signal intensity of each base for each cluster, probabilities corresponding to the most likely base incorporation are generated and reported in a prb file.
The most probable identity of that base is called according to these probabilities resulting in a final read sequence which is reported in a seq file.
It is important to note that with each subsequent cycle, the sequencing error rate increases primarily due to the fact that the chemical reactions at each cycle do not complete to 100%, resulting in molecules within in each cluster becoming out of synchronization.
This phenomenon, known as dephasing increases the background noise and reduces the accuracy of each base called as the sequencing proceeds.
An important task is to align sequence reads to the appropriate reference genome for the detection of genetic variants.
However, the alignment of these short reads presents a number of challenges due to their short lengths and error rate.
Traditional methods of sequence alignment have worked well with sequences that are long enough to provide high location specificity whilst tolerating a number of mismatching bases (sequencing errors and/or biological SNPs).
For short reads a correct interpretation of the quality of every base call is essential in the correct alignment of reads to the reference and the accurate identification of SNPs.
For example, one base-calling error can result in a no alignment match to the reference genome, a match reporting a false SNP, or a misaligned match to a different region of the genome.
The quality of the alignment and SNP prediction decreases as the number of inaccurate base calls increase.
In general, if a base in the reference sequence has a high enough coverage with a consistent difference from its reference, this base likely represents a polymorphism.
This redundant coverage must be high enough to confidently discriminate true variants from sequencing errors, and to account for the fact that different copies of the same read location might be generated from biological aliases (e.g.diploid or mitochondrial chromosomes).
2008 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
A plethora of alignment tools have been created employing various methods (some of which are described here).
A few make use of the quality information from the Illumina prb files and these typically use the base probability values to evaluate the probability of the called base only.
In this study, we will introduce a new alignment tool, Slider.
Slider is an application for the Illumina Sequence Analyzer output that uses the probability files instead of the sequence files as an input for alignment to a reference sequence or a set of reference sequences.
We will show that this approach is more accurate and more efficient than the currently available software packages.
2 METHODS First, we introduce existing tools and their approach and then describe Sliders algorithm.
2.1 Existing tools Different nucleotide alignment programs are made to best fit different alignment properties which include: sequence length of
