           btn543 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
24 no.
24 2008, pages 28652871doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn543 Structural bioinformatics Predicting small ligand binding sites in proteins using backbone structure Andrew J. Bordner Mayo Clinic, 13400 East Shea Boulevard, Scottsdale, AZ 85259, USA Received on May 13, 2008; revised on September 19, 2008; accepted on October 19, 2008 Advance Access publication October 21, 2008 Associate Editor: Anna Tramontano ABSTRACT Motivation: Specific non-covalent binding of metal ions and ligands, such as nucleotides and cofactors, is essential for the function of many proteins.
Computational methods are useful for predicting the location of such binding sites when experimental information is lacking.
Methods that use structural information, when available, are particularly promising since they can potentially identify noncontiguous binding motifs that cannot be found using only the amino acid sequence.
Furthermore, a prediction method that can utilize low-resolution models is advantageous because high-resolution structures are available for only a relatively small fraction of proteins.
Results: SitePredict is a machine learning-based method for predicting binding sites in protein structures for specific metal ions or small molecules.
The method uses Random Forest classifiers trained on diverse residue-based site properties including spatial clustering of residue types and evolutionary conservation.
SitePredict was tested by cross-validation on a set of known binding sites for six different metal ions and five different small molecules in a nonredundant set of proteinligand complex structures.
The prediction performance was good for all ligands considered, as reflected by AUC values of at least 0.8.
Furthermore, a more realistic test on unbound structures showed only a slight decrease in the accuracy.
The properties that contribute the most to the prediction accuracy of each ligand were also examined.
Finally, examples of predicted binding sites in homology models and uncharacterized proteins are discussed.
Availability: Binding site prediction results for all PDB protein structures and human protein homology models are available atContact: bordner.andrew@mayo.edu Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION Many proteins rely on non-covalently bound metal ions or small molecules for their enzymatic function or regulation of their activity.
The presence and location of these binding sites can therefore give useful clues for deducing the biochemical function of an uncharacterized protein.
As the pace of protein sequence and structure determination quickens (Burley et al., 2008), the assignment of protein function is becoming an increasingly important task.
Computational methods can assist in this search by generating experimentally verifiable predictions of ligand binding sites in proteins.
A number of successful methods have been developed for predicting ligand binding sites by finding characteristic sequence patterns (Andreini et al., 2004; Passerini et al., 2006; Shu et al., 2008; Sigrist et al., 2002).
Such methods are particularly useful when there is no protein structure with detectable sequence similarity.
Although ligands bind to residues that are localized in 3D space, the binding residues are generally not contiguous in the amino acid sequence.
Because of this fact, methods that also utilize structure information, when it is available, are expected to perform better than those that use sequence information alone.
Several distinctive properties of metal ion binding sites can be used for their prediction.
Metal ion binding sites were found to have an outer shell of hydrophobic atomic groups that contains the inner shell of hydrophilic groups that coordinate the ion (Yamashita et al., 1990).
However, as pointed out in that study, this may simply be due to the fact that the coordinating atoms are covalently bound to hydrophobic carbon-containing groups in the protein rather than favorable enthalpic or entropic contributions to binding.
It was also observed that metal binding sites often correspond to statistically significant clusters of negatively charged residues (Zhu and Karlin, 1996).
Furthermore, divalent metal cations have characteristic p
