           btn524 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
24 no.
23 2008, pages 28032804doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn524 Databases and ontologies The Burkholderia Genome Database: facilitating flexible queries and comparative analyses Geoffrey L. Winsor, Bhavjinder Khaira, Thea Van Rossum, Raymond Lo, Matthew D. Whiteside and Fiona S. L. Brinkman Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada V5A 1S6 Received on September 15, 2008; revised on October 3, 2008; accepted on October 4, 2008 Advance Access publication October 7, 2008 Associate Editor: Dmitrij Frishman ABSTRACT Summary: As the genome sequences of multiple strains of a given bacterial species are obtained, more generalized bacterial genome databases may be complemented by databases that are focused on providing more information geared for a distinct bacterial phylogenetic group and its associated research community.
The Burkholderia Genome Database represents a model for such a database, providing a powerful, user-friendly search and comparative analysis interface that contains features not found in other genome databases.
It contains continually updated, curated and tracked information about Burkholderia cepacia complex genome annotations, plus other Burkholderia species genomes for comparison, providing a high-quality resource for its targeted cystic fibrosis research community.
Availability: http://www.burkholderia.com.
Source code: GNU GPL.
Contact: brinkman@sfu.ca.
1 INTRODUCTION Cystic fibrosis (CF) patients are particularly susceptible to serious infection by Burkholderia cepacia complex (BCC) species.
BCC are noted for their inherent resistance to antibiotics and the potential for transmission between patients, resulting in an increased risk of mortality (Mahenthiralingam and Vandamme, 2005).
As with many pathogenic bacterial species, there is significant interest in comparing BCC genomes with each other, and with other species, to provide insight into species-or strain-specific features that may play an important role in virulence and antimicrobial resistance for these CF-relevant pathogens.
Several high-quality generalized genome databases already exist for searching Burkholderia sequence data and annotations, including the Integrated Microbial Genomes (IMG) system (Markowitz et al., 2006), the Comprehensive Microbial Resource (CMR) (Peterson et al., 2001), Pathema (http://pathema.jcvi.org), National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Microbial Genomes (Wheeler et al., 2007) and Microbes Online (Alm et al., 2005).
However, these do not focus on the CF Burkholderia researchers needs and do not integrate a flexible annotation search interface with the ability to track curated annotation updates, and methods for navigating species genomes via precise ortholog assignments.
While these To whom correspondence should be addressed.
generalized databases are valuable resources, more phyla-specific databases are also being developed to address the needs of specific research communities, including providing additional resources not available from the more generalized bacterial databases.
Phylaspecific databases include the Enteropathogen Resource Integration Center and other NIAID Bioinformatics Resource Centers, as well as the Pseudomonas Genome Database that we previously developed (Glasner et al., 2008; Greene et al., 2007; Winsor et al., 2005).
Pathema contains a Burkholderia-specific component, but it is focused on Burkholderia species of biodefence interest that do not include the BCC of interest to the CF research community.
As the number of bacterial genome sequences increases, including those specific to a single species, there is a need to further improve such resources by providing better comparative genome annotation capabilities and orthologous gene links.
We have now built upon the success of the Pseudomonas Genome Database, which offers user-friendly, yet powerful searching of the P. aeruginosa PAO1 genome annotation, coupled with continually updated genome annotations obtained from the Pseudomonas research community (Winsor et al., 2005).
We report here the development of the Burkholderia Genome Database that, in addition to having the capability to track continually updated annotations, has a more flexible search interface and integrates multiple genomes with new comparative genome analysis capabilities.
The database structure and interface facilitates the easy comparison of multiple genome annotations arising from annotation or sequence-based searches, and couples this with improved methods for ortholog identification and contextual visualization.
Resources of specific interest to the BCC research community and CF researchers are also included.
2 IMPLEMENTATION The front-end web application was developed in a SuSe Linux 10.1 environment using a combination of Java Server Pages 2.0, the Struts 1.2.1 framework, the Java 2 Platform (Standard, v 1.4.2), Perl 5, Apache Web Server 2.0 and Apache Tomcat 5.5.
The back-end consists of a MySQL database server (v 14.7).
The database can be easily set up to run under most operating systems.
In addition to information about Burkholderia-specific bioinformatics analysis and related resources, this database also contains the following features that are of more general utility for a microbial genome database.
2008 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
G.L.Winsor et al.2.1 Complex, user-friendly annotation searches The NCBI, CMR, Microbes Online and IMG databases mentioned above allow searching of genome annotations by entering a keyword and selecting from a list of fields including gene/protein name and
