           btn638 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
25 no.
4 2009, pages 474481doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn638 Structural bioinformatics NOEnetUse of NOE networks for NMR resonance assignment of proteins with known 3D structure Dirk Stratmann, Carine van Heijenoort and Eric Guittet Laboratoire de Chimie et Biologie Structurales, ICSN-CNRS, Gif-sur-Yvette, France Received on September 11, 2008; revised on November 18, 2008; accepted on December 9, 2008 Advance Access publication December 12, 2008 Associate Editor: Anna Tramontano ABSTRACT Motivation: A prerequisite for any protein study by NMR is the assignment of the resonances from the 15N 1H HSQC spectrum to their corresponding atoms of the protein backbone.
Usually, this assignment is obtained by analyzing triple resonance NMR experiments.
An alternative assignment strategy exploits the information given by an already available 3D structure of the same or a homologous protein.
Up to now, the algorithms that have been developed around the structure-based assignment strategy have the important drawbacks that they cannot guarantee a high assignment accuracy near to 100%.
Results: We propose here a new program, called NOEnet, implementing an efficient complete search algorithm that ensures the correctness of the assignment results.
NOEnet exploits the network character of unambiguous NOE constraints to realize an exhaustive search of all matching possibilities of the NOE network onto the structural one.
NOEnet has been successfully tested on EIN, a large protein of 28 kDa, using only NOE data.
The complete search of NOEnet finds all possible assignments compatible with experimental data that can be defined as an assignment ensemble.
We show that multiple assignment possibilities of large NOE networks are restricted to a small spatial assignment range (SAR), so that assignment ensembles, obtained from accessible experimental data, are precise enough to be used for functional proteins studies, like proteinligand interaction or protein dynamics studies.
We believe that NOEnet can become a major tool for the structure-based backbone resonance assignment strategy in NMR.
Availability: The NOEnet program will be available under: http://www.icsn.cnrs-gif.fr/download/nmr Contact: carine@icsn.cnrs-gif.fr; eric.guittet@icsn.cnrs-gif.fr Supplementary Information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION In order to resolve the molecular mechanism of proteins function, the structural biology community has made huge efforts to determine 3D structures of proteins at atomic resolution.
Proteins function is not solely inferred from the tridimensional structure of the protein, but also from its interactions with other partners and from its dynamical and energetic properties.
Consequently, even if the tridimensional To whom correspondence should be addressed.
structure of the free protein is known, it is necessary to study proteinligand or proteinprotein interactions and protein dynamics.
Solution nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a method of choice for those studies, through its unique ability to probe local dynamics and local environment changes.
However, to obtain information at atomic resolution, NMR resonances first have to be assigned to their corresponding atoms in the protein.
With the availability of 3D structures for a large number of proteins, structure-based assignment strategies have been proposed.
Several types of experimental NMR data can be correlated with the 3D structure.
NOESY cross peaks (NOEs) between resonances correspond to spatially neighbouring atoms.
Residual dipolar couplings (RDCs) measured in weakly aligning media are correlated with the orientation of the inter-atomic vector with respect to the magnetic field.
Chemical shifts (CS) are nowadays more and more accurately predicted from the knowledge of the 3D structure (Neal et al., 2003; Shen and Bax, 2007).
The comparison of these experimental data with the 3D structure yields the assignment constraints.
This exploitation of the data cannot be done manually due to the important combinatorics to accomplish.
The existing structure-based assignment strategies require several different NMR data sources.
For example, the nuclear vector replacement (NVR) algorithm (Apaydn et al., 2008; Langmead and Donald, 2004; Langmead et al., 2004) uses unambiguous 1HN 1HN NOE-connectivity information, 15N 1HN RDCs obtained in two different alignment media, 15N and 1HN chemical shifts and results from H-D exchange experiment.
It has been tested on two small proteins and one moderate size protein (lysozyme, 129 amino acids).
Another approach (Xiong et al., 2008), called contact replacement, is not based on RDCs but on 1HN 1HN and 1HN 1H NOEs for the identification of the secondary structures.
It also requires a TOCSY experiment for the estimation of the amino acid class of each 15N 1 H HSQC peak.
The TOCSY data are analyzed by the program RESCUE (Pons and Delsuc, 1999) that classifies each 15N 1 H HSQC peak in one of 10 amino acid classes with an accuracy higher than 88%.
The contact replacement approach has been tested on three moderate size proteins (up to 166 amino acids) with experimental data.
The overall assignment accuracy varied from 60% to 80%, which is not sufficient in our opinion, as a typical NMR user will only trust automated assignment strategies, if they yield accuracies near to 100%.
The low accuracy of the contact replacement approach is probably due to the use of highly ambiguous NOE data obtained from a 3D NOESY experiment, as well as to the translation of the RESCUE output into hard constraints.
2008 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Both approaches, the NVR and the contact replacement, will be difficult to apply to large proteins, the first because of increased ambiguity of RDC assignment constraints and the second because of the increased overlap in TOCSY spectra.
The PEPMORPH approach (Erdmann and Rule, 2002) has been tested on synthetic datasets of proteins with a size up to 414 amino acids.
It combines NOE and RDC data, it relies on unambiguous 1HN 1HN NOEs and two RDCs per residue of the spin pairs 15N 13C,15N 13 C. The authors represent the NOE data and the 3D structure as mathematical graphs and the algorithm matches the NOE graph onto the 3D structure graph to obtain the assignment.
Unfortunately, the PEPMORPH approach has only been tested on synthetic datasets that were highly idealized in comparison to realistic experimental datasets.
The complete list of structure-based assignment strategies is to our knowledge given by the following
