           btn662 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
25 no.
5 2009, pages 643649doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn662 Data and text mining Biomarker discovery in MALDI-TOF serum protein profiles using discrete wavelet transformation Theodore Alexandrov1,, Jens Decker2, Bart Mertens3, Andre M. Deelder4, Rob A. E. M. Tollenaar5, Peter Maass1 and Herbert Thiele2 1Center for Industrial Mathematics, University of Bremen, D-28334 Bremen, 2Bruker Daltonik GmbH, D-28359 Bremen, Germany, 3Department of Medical Statistics and Bioinformatics, Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC), 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands, 4Department of Parasitology and 5Department of Surgery, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands Received on July 01, 2008; revised on December 22, 2008; accepted on December 23, 2008 Associate Editor: Burkhard Rost ABSTRACT Motivation: Automatic classification of high-resolution mass spectrometry proteomic data has increasing potential in the early diagnosis of cancer.
We propose a new procedure of biomarker discovery in serum protein profiles based on: (i) discrete wavelet transformation of the spectra; (ii) selection of discriminative wavelet coefficients by a statistical test and (iii) building and evaluating a support vector machine classifier by double cross-validation with attention to the generalizability of the results.
In addition to the evaluation results (total recognition rate, sensitivity and specificity), the procedure provides the biomarker patterns, i.e.the parts of spectra which discriminate cancer and control individuals.
The evaluation was performed on matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) serum protein profiles of 66 colorectal cancer patients and 50 controls.
Results: Our procedure provided a high recognition rate (97.3%), sensitivity (98.4%) and specificity (95.8%).
The extracted biomarker patterns mostly represent the peaks expressing mean differences between the cancer and control spectra.
However, we showed that the discriminative power of a peak is not simply expressed by its mean height and cannot be derived by comparison of the mean spectra.
The obtained classifiers have high generalization power as measured by the number of support vectors.
This prevents overfitting and contributes to the reproducibility of the results, which is required to find biomarkers differentiating cancer patients from healthy individuals.
Availability: The data and scripts used in this study are available atContact: theodore@math.uni-bremen.de Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common malignancies and remains a principal cause of cancer-related morbidity and mortality.
The early detection of cancer is essential for a successful To whom correspondence should be addressed.
treatment.
Currently, the colonoscopy is used to detect early stage lesions, but this is an invasive and relatively expensive method.
Therefore, a different method would be desirable relaying on easily accessible body fluids, like serum.
A sensitive blood test might not only detect early stage malignancies, but also premalignant lesions (not part of this study), thereby increasing the chance of survival considerably.
The use of mass spectrometry for searching serum biomarkers in cancer diagnostics was suggested by Petricoin et al.(2002) but was factually flawed.
Second-generation studies discovered the importance of avoiding bias and overfitting as well as the need of validation (Ransohoff, 2004).
Here a procedure is presented for biomarker extraction from matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) serum protein profiles constructed with attention to generalizability of the achieved results.
Recently, de Noo et al.(2006) demonstrated the feasibility of mass spectrometry based protein profiling for the discrimination of CRC patients from healthy individuals, using quite simple classification methods.
This motivated us to develop an advanced procedure of biomarker extraction using the ideas proposed in Schleif et al.(2007): (i) discrete wavelet transformation (DWT) of the spectra, (ii) features (wavelet coefficients) selection by statistical testing and (iii) support vector machine (SVM) classification, see Supplementary Figure 1 for an overall scheme.
Our new procedure presented in this article goes significantly beyond that of Schleif et al.(2007): (i) The actual approach does not only give a classification of spectra, but also supports the location and scoring of spectral features which are putative biomarkers.
For this goal, we propose additional wavelet reconstructions to visualize the results; (ii) The classifier assessment is now using a double cross validation scheme to avoid a possible bias of the results; (iii) The feature selection is also included within the double cross validation to avoid potential biases of the performance estimation and (iv) Finally, we investigated the role of the statistical testing and compared different tests and adjustments.
In addition to the KolmogorovSmirnov (KS) test we also used a MannWhitney (MW) test for feature selection and also applied a Benjamini Yekutieli (BY) multiple test adjustment to get more confidence about the influence of the feature selection techniques.
Finally, we added a 2009 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
T.Alexandrov et al.Table 1.
Patient characteristics and distribution across plates Patients Controls Number 64 48 Mean age (range) 67.2 (3789) 52.2 (2978) Male/female ratio 35/29 21/27 Number on plate 1/2/3 25/22/17 17/16/15 detailed analysis of the robustness of the classification as a function of the number of selected features and the number of resulting support vectors.
This is helpful to estimate the generalizability of the resulting classification model.
Our procedure was evaluated on new publicly available datasets obtained according to the randomized block design, which helps to minimize impact of potential confounding factors on the experimental side and, thus also to avoid bias.
Being aware of the problem of non-reproducibility of promising results in high-throughput mass spectrometry (Check, 2004; Coombes et al., 2005; Ransohoff, 2004), we assessed the generalization power of the constructed classifiers as follows.
For different types of the feature selection, the conservativeness was investigated as considering fewer features reduces the risk of overfitting.
Moreover, we thoroughly analyzed the generalization error of the classifiers measured as the number of support vectors used for the classification (Bartlett and Shawe-Taylor, 1999).
2 METHODS 2.1 Serum protein profiling Serum samples were obtained from a total of 66 CRC patients one day before surgery and 50 healthy volunteers (Table 1).
All stages of disease were present in the patient group in comparable proportions.
The TumorNodes-Metastases (TNM) stages are I-IIIc according to the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual (6th edn).
Moreover, patients without invasive carcinoma but no premalignant cases were included.
Informed consent was obtained from all patients and the Medical Ethical Committee approved the study.
Blood was collected in a 10 cc serum separator vacutainer tube and centrifuged 30 min later at 3000 r.p.m.
for 10 min.
Serum samples were distributed into 0.5 ml aliquots and stored at 70C until the experiment.
The isolation of peptides from serum was performed using the magnetic beads based hydrophobic interaction chromatography (MB-HIC) kit from Bruker Daltonics (Bremen, Germany), according to the manufacturers protocol.
Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (0.3 g/l in ethanol:acetone 2:1) was used as matrix.
All sample preparation steps were performed on a 8-channel Hamilton STAR pipetting robot (Hamilton, Martinsried, Germany).
Using a randomized block design, correcting for demographic and pathological variables, all samples were spotted in quadruple on 3 plates (Table 1).
The plates were measured on three consecutive days, Tuesday to Thursday.
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry measurements were performed using an Ultraflex TOF/TOF instrument (Bruker Daltonics), equipped with a SCOUT ion source and measured in linear mode.
All unprocessed spectra were exported in standard 8-bit ASCII format.
They consisted of approximately 65 400 mass-to-charge ratio (m/z)-values, covering a domain of 96011 170 Da.
For more information, see de Noo et al.(2006).
2.2 Low-level analysis The data have been exported using ClinProTools (CPT) software (version 2.2, Bruker Daltonics) where we performed recalibration, top-hat baseline correction (all with default parameters), outlier detection, and as in the reference paper, data reduction with factor 4.
We found two additional 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000 11000 100 50 0 50 Mean spectra for the cancer and control groups m/z value in te ns ity   CONTROL CANCER Fig.1.
Mean spectra for the cancer and control group (inverted, gray spectrum) after low-level processing.
bior3.7 wavelet scaling function for bior3.7 wavelet A1 D1 An1 An DnDn1 Fig.2.
Scheme of calculation of APPDWT and CONVDWT coefficients, the bior3.7 wavelet and its scaling function.
Ai(Di) denote approximation (detail) coefficients of the i-th level, n is the maximum level (10 in our case).
Note that An belongs to both the APPDWT and CONVDWT coefficients.
outliers in the control group compared with the reference paper, but included one more cancer spectrum in the dataset for classification.
The interpolation of all cancer and control spectra on one grid has been done using Matlab.
At the end, we had 64 cancer and 48 control spectra of length 16 331 covering a domain of 96011 163 Da.
The mean spectra both for the cancer and control groups are depicted in Figure 1.
2.3 Discrete Wavelet Transformation DWT is an important tool in signal processing, in particular for its superior properties of denoising and compression.
The central idea of DWT is to find a lossless multi-scale representation of data by means of wavelet coefficients.
Informally speaking, each coefficient represents a contribution for some scale and position.
A vast literature on DWT is available, covering both theoretical and applied issues, see e.g.Mallat (1999).
DWT has been useful for MS data processing for many years, see a review of Leung et al.(1998) for early
