           btp077 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
25 no.
7 2009, pages 979980doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp077 Databases and ontologies Allergen Atlas: a comprehensive knowledge center and analysis resource for allergen information Joo Chuan Tong1, Shen Jean Lim2, Hon Cheng Muh3, Fook Tim Chew3 and Martti T. Tammi2,3, 1Data Mining Department, Institute for Infocomm Research, 1 Fusionopolis Way, #21-01 Connexis, South Tower, Singapore 138632, 2Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine and 3Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, 14 Science Drive 4, Singapore 117543 Received on November 21, 2008; revised and accepted on February 5, 2009 Advance Access publication February 11, 2009 Associate Editor: Dmitrij Frishman ABSTRACT Summary: A variety of specialist databases have been developed to facilitate the study of allergens.
However, these databases either contain different subsets of allergen data or are deficient in tools for assessing potential allergenicity of proteins.
Here, we describe Allergen Atlas, a comprehensive repository of experimentally validated allergen sequences collected from in-house laboratory, online data submission, literature reports and all existing generalpurpose and specialist databases.
Each entry was manually verified, classified and hyperlinked to major databases including SwissProt, Protein Data Bank (PDB), Gene Ontology (GO), Pfam and PubMed.
The database is integrated with analysis tools that include: (i) keyword search, (ii) BLAST, (iii) position-specific iterative BLAST (PSI-BLAST), (iv) FAO/WHO criteria search, (v) graphical representation of allergen information network and (vi) online data submission.
The latest version contains information of 1593 allergen sequences (496 IUIS allergens, 978 experimentally verified allergens and 119 new sequences), 56 IgE epitope sequences, 679 links to PDB structures and 155 links to Pfam domains.
Availability: Allergen Atlas is freely available at http://tiger.dbs.nus.
edu.sg/ATLAS/.
Contact: martti@nus.edu.sg.
1 INTRODUCTION In the last decade, a variety of specialized databases have been developed to facilitate the study of allergens (Brusic et al., 2003).
Some of these databases contain basic allergen sequences and related information (Bairoch et al., 2004; Gendel, 1998), some have basic sequence comparison tools (Wu et al., 2006), while others have additional tools (Hileman et al., 2002) for the assessment of allergenicity based on the FAO/WHO expert group recommendations (Gendel, 2004).
Each of these databases has a different focus with emphasis on different groups of allergens.
Databases such as Bioinformatics for Food Safety (Gendel, 1998), Food Allergy Research and Resource Program (Hileman et al., 2002) and International Union of Immunological Societies (IUIS) Nomenclature Sub-Committee Allergen Database (King et al., 1994) are rich in content but contain different subsets of allergen To whom correspondence should be addressed.
sequences.
The majority of these databases either lack complete information on available allergens or are deficient in bioinformatic tools for analyzing the stored sequences.
Other databases, including Allergome (Mari et al., 2005) and SDAP (Ivanciuc et al., 2003) contain putative allergens annotated using sequence similarity to the verified allergens.
To fill this important gap in existing resources, we report Allergen Atlas, a comprehensive repository of allergen data collected from in-house laboratory, online data submission, literature reports and all existing general-purpose and specialist databases.
The database is integrated with a suite of bioinformatic tools to facilitate data analysis, visualization and retrieval, including keyword and sequence similarity searches.
The main purpose of Allergen Atlas is to support molecular studies of allergens, assessment of allergic responses and of allergic cross-reactivity.
2 METHODS 2.1 Construction and Implementation Allergen Atlas is a manually curated PostgreSQL (www.postgresql.org) database hosted on a Linux server.
It contains experimentally determined allergen information from in-house laboratory, online submission, literature reports and all existing general-purpose and specialist databases.
The most important characteristics of allergens were extracted, manually verified, classified and stored in the database.
Each entry is annotated with the following information, where available: (i) allergen name, (ii) scientific and common names of the source organisms, (iii) type, (iv) sequence, (v) bibliographic
