           btp050 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
25 no.
6 2009, pages 780786doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp050 Systems biology Benchmarks for identification of ordinary differential equations from time series data Peter Gennemark1,2, and Dag Wedelin3 1Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Gteborg, SE-412 96 Gteborg, 2Department of Mathematics, Uppsala University, SE-751 06 Uppsala and 3Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Gteborg, Sweden Received on September 07, 2008; revised on December 05, 2008; accepted on December 29, 2008 Advance Access publication January 28, 2009 Associate Editor: Trey Ideker ABSTRACT Motivation: In recent years, the biological literature has seen a significant increase of reported methods for identifying both structure and parameters of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) from time series data.
A natural way to evaluate the performance of such methods is to try them on a sufficient number of realistic test cases.
However, weak practices in specifying identification problems and lack of commonly accepted benchmark problems makes it difficult to evaluate and compare different methods.
Results: To enable better evaluation and comparisons between different methods, we propose how to specify identification problems as optimization problems with a model space of allowed reactions (e.g.reaction kinetics like MichaelisMenten or S-systems), ranges for the parameters, time series data and an error function.
We also define a file format for such problems.
We then present a collection of more than 40 benchmark problems for ODE model identification of cellular systems.
The collection includes realistic problems of different levels of difficulty w.r.t.
size and quality of data.
We consider both problems with simulated data from known systems, and problems with real data.
Finally, we present results based on our identification algorithm for all benchmark problems.
In comparison with publications on which we have based some of the benchmark problems, our approach allows all problems to be solved without the use of supercomputing.
Availability: The benchmark problems are available at www.odeidentification.org Contact: peterg@chalmers.se Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION We consider the problem of identifying both the structure and the parameters of an ordinary differential equation (ODE) system from time series data.
In recent years, there has been a significant increase in the number of reported methods approaching this problem in the biological literature (see Table 1 and the
