            G:\fpp\tex\journals\oup\BioInfo\Bioinfo-25(9)issue\btp033.dvi [16:07 31/3/2009 Bioinformatics-btp033.tex] Page: 1189 11891191 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
25 no.
9 2009, pages 11891191doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp033 Sequence analysis Jalview Version 2a multiple sequence alignment editor and analysis workbench Andrew M. Waterhouse1,,, James B. Procter1,, David M. A. Martin1, Michle Clamp2 and Geoffrey J. Barton1, 1School of Life Sciences Research, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK and 2Broad Institute, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA Received and revised on November 24, 2008; accepted on January 8, 2009 Advance Access publication January 16, 2009 Associate Editor: Jonathan Wren ABSTRACT Summary: Jalview Version 2 is a system for interactive WYSIWYG editing, analysis and annotation of multiple sequence alignments.
Core features include keyboard and mouse-based editing, multiple views and alignment overviews, and linked structure display with Jmol.
Jalview 2 is available in two forms: a lightweight Java applet for use in web applications, and a powerful desktop application that employs web services for sequence alignment, secondary structure prediction and the retrieval of alignments, sequences, annotation and structures from public databases and any DAS 1.53 compliant sequence or annotation server.
Availability: The Jalview 2 Desktop application and JalviewLite applet are made freely available under the GPL, and can be downloaded from www.jalview.org Contact: g.j.barton@dundee.ac.uk 1 INTRODUCTION Sequences of DNA, RNA and proteins are the fundamental currency of modern biological research that links the different levels of the biological hierarchy, from gene to 3D structure.
Multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) permit the identification of common features between species or identify functionally important residues.
MSAs provide the foundation for a range of computational methods including the prediction of protein secondary structure and solvent accessibility, functional sites and interaction sites.
MSAs are also the essential first step in studying molecular phylogeny and the identification of genomic rearrangements.
In journal publications, MSAs provide a convenient framework for displaying common features and complex annotations relating to sequences and their functions.
It is therefore important to obtain the best alignment possible.
Many multiple alignment techniques exist (Notredame, 2007), but no single method is perfect for all situations (Blackshields et al., 2006; Raghava et al., 2003).
As a consequence, all alignments To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.
Present address: Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Omics Science Center and the Functional RNA Research Program, Frontier Research System, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho Tsurumiku Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
require inspection and interpretation, and often adjustment by hand, in order to produce an alignment that best represents the biological context of the sequences.
Editing tools are essential for this task, not least because they provide visual feedback on an alignments quality in the light of all known and computationally predicted annotation.
Jalview Version 1.0 (Clamp et al., 2004) was an alignment editor first developed in 1996 as an advance over static alignment visualization tools such as ALSCRIPT (Barton, 1993).
As well as alignment editing, colouring and generation of figures as postscript or HTML, it included methods for alignment conservation analysis, phylogenetic tree construction and a simple linked view of 3D structure that could colour residues in the same way as the alignment.
Many alignment formats were supported, and feature annotation extracted from SwissProt (Boeckmann et al., 2003) flat-files could be plotted on the alignment to highlight important regions of a sequence.
Jalview V1.0 gained a strong following, and was best known in its lightweight web applet form which was adopted as an alignment viewing/editing tool by many web sites worldwide including major databases such as PFAM (Finn et al., 2008) and SRS (Etzold et al., 1996).
It has also been embedded in standalone analysis tools such as ModView (Ilyin et al., 2003).
However, the original program had many limitationsonly one multiple alignment could be edited at a time, and an alignments colouring and tree-based conservation analysis could only be exported as a figure, not stored and returned to later.
Introduction of new functionality to the program was also difficult.
Jalview 1s software architecture was developed for optimum performance within the constraints of the Java runtime environment; and the addition of extensions could become complex and lead to unmaintainable code.
In summary, Jalview V.1.0s capabilities are now insufficient for the larger, longer and more detailed analysis tasks that a researcher may now routinely perform.
Stability, usability and extensibility are now also of prime importance for software used in research, and to this end, we re-engineered the original Jalview code to develop Jalview Version 2 (JV2).
2 IMPLEMENTATION The new JV2 software architecture and alignment-rendering model provides the foundation for two JV2 program flavours: JalviewLite (JVL) and Jalview Desktop (JVD).
JVL is a web optimized, Java 1.1 compliant applet that replaces Jalview V1.0 where it is used on a 2009 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[16:07 31/3/2009 Bioinformatics-btp033.tex] Page: 1190 11891191 A.M.Waterhouse et al.Figure Generation Clickable HTML Clickable HTML ImagesImages Line ArtLine Art Multiple Sequence Alignment Multiple Sequence Alignment Analysis Pairwise alignment Consensus Conservation & Clustering Secondary Structure Prediction Secondary Structure Prediction Interactive Editing Trees Annotation Features Sequences PDB GFF Jalview Features NewickNewick Structures Alignments Visualization Jalview Annotation Standard Formats FASTA MSF CLUSTAL PILEUP BLC PFAM Distributed Annotation System PCA Multiple Sequence Alignment PFAM Seed/Family Alignments Multiple Sequence Alignment PDB entries from MSD Multiple Sequence Alignment EMBL and Uniprot entries from EBI Function Bioinformatic data Web Service Built-in Analysis Data File Output File Fig.1.
Capabilities of the Jalview 2 desktop application.
Ovals depict major capabilities: visualization, interactive editing, analysis and WYSIWYG figure generation.
Arrows connect bioinformatics data handled by JV2 with flat-file or web-service data sources.
Analysis includes built-in alignment conservation and tree building algorithms, and web services for MSA and secondary structure prediction methods.
The screenshot of the application shows two sets of sequences for proteins in the lactate dehydrogenase family.
One contains an alignment of protein sequences retrieved from the Uniprot database, the other their coding sequences retrieved from the EMBL database.
Interactive highlighting shows the region corresponding to the amino acid or codon position near the mouse pointer in both the alignment windows and the Jmol structure display of a PDB record associated with one protein.
web page.
In contrast, JVD is a fully-fledged desktop application that can be installed easily on the users machine and launched in batch or interactive mode from the command line, or started via Java WebStart (Java 1.4 or later).
The capabilities of the JVD that are summarized in Figure 1 and described below include the ability to generate high-quality alignment figures for publication, and to exploit web services for data retrieval and analysis.
JVL and JVD both utilize Jmol, an open source molecular graphics viewer, to present linked views of PDB files associated with an aligned sequence.
The core JV2 functionality present in JVL and JVD provides significantly enhanced editing and viewing capabilities when compared to JV1.
Interactive editing, colouring and annotation can be performed via the mouse or in a keyboard-editing mode.
Alignment edits can be undone, and any number of independent views may be created in tabs or as separate windows opened on the same alignment.
Navigation in a view is facilitated by an overview window, and each view also has its own layout and display settings.
Specific sequences or columns can be hidden from a view, and arbitrary regions may be selected for analysis either by the built-in algorithms or remote web services, cut or copied to another alignment, or defined as named groups and coloured with one of 11 built-in or user-defined alignment colour schemes, or shaded by conservation or quantitative alignment annotation.
Annotation rows may be interactively created and displayed below the columns of the alignment.
They may contain labels, secondary structure symbols, coloured histograms or line graphs.
Sequence features may also be overlaid onto an alignment.
Non-positional information, such as sequence database accession numbers and literature
