           btp025 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
25 no.
5 2009, pages 690691doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp025 Databases and ontologies MatrixDB, a database focused on extracellular proteinprotein and proteincarbohydrate interactions Emilie Chautard1, Lionel Ballut1, Nicolas Thierry-Mieg2, and Sylvie Ricard-Blum1, 1UMR 5086 CNRS-Universit Lyon 1, 7 passage du Vercors, 69367 Lyon Cedex 07 and 2TIMC-IMAG, UMR 5525 CNRS-Universit Grenoble 1, Facult de Mdecine, 38706 La Tronche Cedex, France Received on October 23, 2008; accepted on January 8, 2009 Advance Access publication January 15, 2009 Associate Editor: Burkhard Rost ABSTRACT Summary: MatrixDB (http://matrixdb.ibcp.fr) is a database reporting mammalian proteinprotein and proteincarbohydrate interactions involving extracellular molecules.
It takes into account the full interaction repertoire of the extracellular matrix involving full-length molecules, fragments and multimers.
The current version of MatrixDB contains 1972 interactions corresponding to 4412 experiments and involving 259 extracellular biomolecules.
Availability: MatrixDB is freely available at http://matrixdb.ibcp.fr Contact: nicolas.thierry-mieg@imag.fr; s.ricard-blum@ibcp.fr Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION Most of the cells in multicellular organisms are surrounded by an extracellular matrix (ECM), which is comprised of proteins (500 genes) and complex polysaccharides termed glycosaminoglycans (GAGs).
GAGs play crucial roles either within the ECM or at the cell surface (Rodgers et al., 2008).
A global view of the extracellular network is required to understand how the ECM conveys information, and how its assembly is regulated.
Interactions involving extracellular biomolecules are under-represented in interaction databases, which mainly focus on interactions occurring inside the cell and report few proteincarbohydrate interactions.
Furthermore a number of extracellular proteins are multimeric, and are able to form supramolecular assemblies either alone (Ricard-Blum et al., 2005) or in association with other molecules (Kielty, 2006).
This is important because the oligomerization state may modulate the ability of proteins to interact with other molecules (Jokinen et al., 2004).
Enzymatic cleavage of full-length extracellular biomolecules also affects the interaction network by releasing fragments with specific molecular recognition properties referred to as matricryptins (Davis et al., 2000, Ricard-Blum et al., 2005).
Matricryptins are enzymatic fragments of ECM containing exposed biologically active cryptic sites (matricryptic sites) that are revealed after structural or conformational alteration of these molecules.
Matricryptic sites and matricryptins have been reported within protein components of the ECM as well as in GAGs (Davis et al., 2000).
We have built a database to report proteinprotein and proteincarbohydrate interactions involving extracellular molecules.
MatrixDB takes into account all the To whom correspondence should be addressed.
above features and mainly focuses on mammalian molecules.
It integrates data from four major interaction databases, in-house literature curation and binding experiments performed with protein and polysaccharide arrays.
The current version of MatrixDB contains 1972 interactions involving 259 extracellular biomolecules.
MatrixDB is a member of the International Molecular Exchange (IMEx) consortium.
2 BUILDING MATRIXDB 2.1 Biomolecule sources Protein data were imported from the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (Bairoch et al., 2005) and identified by UniProtKB/SwissProt accession numbers.
In order to list all the partners of a protein, interactions are associated by default to the accession number of the human protein.
The actual source species used in experiments is indicated in the page reporting interaction data.
Intracellular and membrane proteins were included to obtain a comprehensive network of the partners of extracellular molecules.
Indeed, ECM proteins and GAGs bind to a number of membrane proteins or cell-associated proteoglycans and some of them interact with intracellular partners upon internalization (Dixelius et al., 2000).
ECM proteins were identified by the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot keyword extracellular matrix and by the GO terms extracellular matrix, proteinaceous extracellular matrix and their child terms.
The proteins annotated with the GO terms extracellular region and extracellular space, which are used for proteins found in biological fluids, were not included because circulating molecules do not directly contribute to the extracellular scaffold.
Additionally, 96 proteins were manually (re-)annotated through literature curation.
These new or corrected annotations will be submitted to UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot.
Glycan-binding proteins were annotated with cross-
