            G:\fpp\tex\journals\oup\BioInfo\Bioinfo-25(13)issue\btp284.dvi [18:05 15/6/2009 Bioinformatics-btp284.tex] Page: 1594 15941601 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
25 no.
13 2009, pages 15941601doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp284 Genome analysis Approximate Bayesian feature selection on a large meta-dataset offers novel insights on factors that effect siRNA potency Jochen W. Klingelhoefer1,, Loukas Moutsianas2, and Chris Holmes2,3, 1Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3QU, 2Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TG and 3MRC Harwell, Oxon, OX11 0RD, UK Received on January 28, 2009; revised on April 19, 2009; accepted on April 22, 2009 Advance Access publication May 6, 2009 Associate Editor: Alison ABSTRACT Motivation: Short interfering RNA (siRNA)-induced RNA interference is an endogenous pathway in sequence-specific gene silencing.
The potency of different siRNAs to inhibit a common target varies greatly and features affecting inhibition are of high current interest.
The limited success in predicting siRNA potency being reported so far could originate in the small number and the heterogeneity of available datasets in addition to the knowledgedriven, empirical basis on which features thought to be affecting siRNA potency are often chosen.
We attempt to overcome these problems by first constructing a meta-dataset of 6483 publicly available siRNAs (targeting mammalian mRNA), the largest to date, and then applying a Bayesian analysis which accommodates feature set uncertainty.
A stochastic logistic regression-based algorithm is designed to explore a vast model space of 497 compositional, structural and thermodynamic features, identifying associations with siRNA potency.
Results: Our algorithm reveals a number of features associated with siRNA potency that are, to the best of our knowledge, either under reported in literature, such as anti-sense 53 motif UCU, or not reported at all, such as the anti-sense 5-3 motif ACGA.
These findings should aid in improving future siRNA potency predictions and might offer further insights into the working of the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC).
Contact: cholmes@stats.ox.ac.uk Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION RNA interference (RNAi) is a post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) mechanism which inhibits gene expression.
It is mediated by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) or by transcripts that form stemloops (short hairpin RNA, shRNA).
During the process of RNAi, dsRNA/shRNA is split by the Ribonuclease III enzyme Dicer into 19-nt dsRNA molecules with 2-nt 3-overhangs, named short interfering RNA (siRNA, depicted in Figure 1).
The siRNA then interacts with the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), specifically with its catalytic component, To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be considered as joint First authors.
Fig.1.
Structure of short interfering RNA (siRNA).
Both guide and passenger strands are displayed and the guide strand nucleotides are numbered in 5 to 3 direction.
the Argonaute protein.
RISC-Argonaute separates the two strands of the siRNA molecule into the guide strand (anti-sense to the targeted mRNA), which is loaded into the Argonaute protein, and the passenger strand (sense to the targeted mRNA), which is released into the cytoplasm and subsequently degraded (Lodish et al., 2004).
In a following step, the RISCsiRNA complex probes cytoplasmic mRNAmolecules for sequence complementarity to the loaded siRNA guide strand.
Matching mRNA molecules are cut around the center of the siRNAmRNA interaction site (cleavage site) by the Argonaute protein, effectively inhibiting the expression of the respective gene product.
Wang et al.have recently published a crystallographic structure of the complex, taken from an eubacterium (Wang et al., 2008).
Not long after its discovery, it was known that not all siRNAs are equally potent (Holen et al.2002).
The search for potent siRNAs and for features that could explain their silencing capabilities has since become the focus of numerous research groups in the field.
Initially, most groups conducted experiments on smaller sets of mRNAs.
They measured the capability of different siRNAsequences to silence their respective gene products and tried to identify features that could be linked to the reported siRNA potency.
Until recently, the focus was on compositional or thermodynamic features, both of which are sequence-based.
Compositional features describe the occurrences of certain nucleotides at certain positions of the siRNA sequences, whereas thermodynamic features are concerned with binding free energies and stabilities of the sequences.
A third group of features used in literature are structure-based ones (Shao et al., 2006, 2007; Vickers et al., 2003).
These include secondary structure characteristics of both the siRNA and its mRNA target.
According to Patzel et al., siRNAs with no defined secondary structure correlate with increased potency (Patzel et al., 2005).
Moreover, one would expect target accessibility to be decisive for whether an otherwise 2009 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[18:05 15/6/2009 Bioinformatics-btp284.tex] Page: 1595 15941601 Approximate Bayesian feature selection well-designed siRNA can bind to its complementary part on the mRNA sequence (Ding et al., 2004).
Researchers who incorporated mRNA characteristics in their feature set reported that, although they appear to be correlated with siRNA potency when no additional features were selected, they seemed to offer little to the predictive strength of their models, when added to an existing set of sequencebased features (Katoh and Suzuki, 2007; Peek, 2007).
Others, however, did report correlation of site accessibility with siRNA potency (Shao et al., 2006).
Some researchers prefer to work on purpose-build datasets produced by them (Katoh and Suzuki, 2007; Reynolds et al., 2004; Shao et al., 2006; Ui-Tei et al., 2004), which are usually small and target only a few mRNAs.
By contrast, others perform their analysis on combined data from heterogeneous sources (Holen, 2006; Matveeva et al., 2007; Saetrom, 2004; Shabalina et al., 2006; Vert et al., 2007).
The latter is becoming increasingly popular, as the amount of publicly available data steadily increases.
The large dataset by Huesken et al.(Huesken et al., 2005) can be seen as a landmark towards this direction.
A problem with studying heterogeneous datasets though is the variability in the biological methods employed, as well as in the information provided to the scientific community.
As an example, earlier studies tended to employ 19-nt sequences (Ui-Tei et al., 2004), while more recent studies use 21-nt siRNA sequences, taking the 2-nt 3 siRNA overhangs into account.
These 2-nt overhangs appear to be correlated with siRNA potency (Huesken et al., 2005); however, this correlation cannot be tested on a 19-nt dataset.
Matveeva et al.encounter this problem in their recent study (Matveeva et al., 2007), as they build two prediction models based on a 21-nt dataset, but can only test them on three 19-nt datasets.
Another problem encountered when combining data from heterogeneous sources is the lack of detailed information regarding the target sequence, such as which particular transcript was targeted and what the exact sequence of that transcript is.
Such issues render the incorporation of structural mRNA information into a model challenging.
Having gathered the experimental data, a variety of statistical methods can be employed in an attempt to determine which features of a candidate siRNA sequence influence its potency.
These include simple linear regression-based methods (Matveeva et al., 2007; Shabalina et al., 2006; Ui-Tei et al., 2004; Vert et al., 2007) as well as more complex methods like neural networks (Huesken et al., 2005; Shabalina et al., 2006), Euler graphs (Pancoska et al., 2004), Support Vector Machines (Ladunga, 2007; Peek, 2007; Saetrom, 2004; Teramoto et al., 2005), genetic programming (Saetrom, 2004) and disjunctive rule merging (Gong et al., 2008).
With the performance of linear regression-based methods shown to be comparable to most of the more complex methods (Matveeva et al., 2007; Shabalina et al., 2006; Vert et al., 2007), linear regression has proven to be a reasonable choice, given its simplicity of concept and implementation and the interpretability of the results it produces.
For these reasons, it was decided to be employed in this study.
We have investigated an approximate Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo feature selection algorithm using a Bayesian Information Criteria (BIC) (cf.
Kass and Raftery, 1995) to approximate the Bayes factor for a logistic regression model on a large meta-dataset of 6483 siRNAs that we constructed employing the most widely used, publicly available datasets (we focus only on siRNAs that target mammalian mRNA).
As far as the authors are aware this is the largest study of its kind to date.
By following a purely data-driven approach, we hoped to confirm most of the recent findings, to resolve cases with contrasting evidence from different studies and to discover novel features that associate with siRNA potency.
A stochastic approach was considered essential, in order to efficiently explore the vast feature space of 497 compositional, thermodynamic and structural features that were put together to be tested for association with siRNAs potency.
These covered most, if not all, of the features reported in recent studies, resulting in the most extensive set of features worked on so far.
As a result, we present an efficient algorithm which succeeds in identifying novel features that significantly affect siRNA potency while performing comparably to most successful recent prediction methods (see Supplementary Material for more details).
We then employ our algorithm to suggest 10 potent siRNAs for each of the human mRNA listings in the NCBI RefSeq database (Pruit et al., 2007; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/RefSeq).
These results can be found at our website.
2 METHODS 2.1 Consensus format for siRNA sequences The following set of rules was chosen in this study, defining how siRNA sequences and the measurement of their respective silencing efficacy are presented: siRNA sequences are stated as anti-sense sequences from 5 to 3 (Figure 1) Potency (synonymous to efficiency and efficacy) refers to the ability of an siRNA to inhibit (synonymous to knock-down and down-regulate) a gene product Product level refers to the percentage of the gene product remaining after siRNA-mediated RNA interference Product levels of zero and one are assigned to fully potent and nonpotent siRNAs, respectively Only 19-nt siRNA sequences are employed in this study (3 siRNA overhangs are neglected) Compositional features are represented with the initial of the base followed by its position on the anti-sense strand, e.g.U7 means Uracil at nucleotide position 7 of the siRNA anti-sense strand.
2.2 Features Four hundred and ninety-seven features have been included in our systematic study spanning position-dependent nucleotide p
