            G:\fpp\tex\journals\oup\BioInfo\Bioinfo-25(19)issue\btp452.dvi [14:29 31/8/2009 Bioinformatics-btp452.tex] Page: 2455 24552465 BIOINFORMATICS REVIEW Vol.
25 no.
19 2009, pages 24552465doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp452 Sequence analysis Upcoming challenges for multiple sequence alignment methods in the high-throughput era Carsten Kemena and Cedric Notredame Centre For Genomic Regulation (Pompeus Fabre University), Carrer del Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain Received on April 3, 2009; revised on June 24, 2009; accepted on July 16, 2009 Advance Access publication July 30, 2009 Associate Editor: Jonathan Wren ABSTRACT This review focuses on recent trends in multiple sequence alignment tools.
It describes the latest algorithmic improvements including the extension of consistency-based methods to the problem of templatebased multiple sequence alignments.
Some results are presented suggesting that template-based methods are significantly more accurate than simpler alternative methods.
The validation of existing methods is also discussed at length with the detailed description of recent results and some suggestions for future validation strategies.
The last part of the review addresses future challenges for multiple sequence alignment methods in the genomic era, most notably the need to cope with very large sequences, the need to integrate large amounts of experimental data, the need to accurately align non-coding and non-transcribed sequences and finally, the need to integrate many alternative methods and approaches.
Contact: cedric.notredame@crg.es 1 INTRODUCTION An ever increasing number of biological modeling methods depend on the assembly of accurate multiple sequence alignments (MSAs).
Traditionally, the main applications of sequence alignments have included phylogenetic tree reconstruction, Hidden Markov Modeling (profiles), secondary or tertiary structure prediction, function prediction and many minor but useful applications such as PCR primer design and data validation.
With the notable exception of ribosomal RNA, a large majority of these applications are based on the analysis of protein sequences, possibly back-translated into nucleic acid sequences in the context of phylogenetic analysis.
While this type of approaches still constitutes the vast majority of published applications for MSAs, recent biological discoveries coupled with the massive delivery of functional, structural and genomic data are rapidly expanding the potential scope of alignment methods.
In order to make the best of the available data, sequence aligners will have to evolve and become able to deal with a very large number of sequences or integrate highly heterogeneous information types such as evolutionary, structural and functional data.
Merely aligning all the known orthologs of a given gene will soon require aligning several thousand sequences, and the massive re-sequencing effort currently underway (Siva, 2008) could even mean that within a few To whom correspondence should be addressed.
decades, multiple comparison methods may be required to align billions of closely related sequences.
An MSA is merely a way to organize data so that similar sequence features are aligned together.
A feature can be any relevant biological information: structure, function or homology to the common ancestor.
The goal is either to reveal patterns that may be shared by many sequences, or identify modifications that may explain functional and phenotypic variability.
The features one is interested in and the way in which these features are described ultimately define the correct alignment, and in theory, given a set of sequences, each feature type may define a distinct optimal alignment.
For instance, a structurally correct alignment is an alignment where aligned residues play similar role in the 3D structure.
Given a set of distantly related sequences, there may be more than one alignment equally optimal from a structural point of view.
An alternative to structural conservation is homology (meant in a phylogenetic sense).
In that case, the alignment of two residues is a statement that these two residues share a similar relation to their closest common ancestor.
Aside from evolutionary inertia, there is no well defined reason why a structure and a homology-based alignment of the same sequences should be identical.
Likewise, in a functionally correct alignment, residues having the same function need to be aligned, even if their similarity results from convergent evolution.
Overall, a multiple sequence alignment is merely a way of confronting and organizing the specific data one is interested in.
Until recently, this notion was mostly theoretical, sequence information being almost the only available data.
Alignments were optimized for their sequence similarity, in the hope that this one-size-fits all approach would fare well for most applications.
The situation has now changed dramatically and the amount of data that could be integrated when building an MSA is rising by the day.
It includes new sequences coming from large scale genome sequencing, with a density of information that will make it more and more possible to reconstruct evolutionary correct alignments (Frazer et al., 2007).
Other high-throughput-based projects are delivering functional data in the form of transcript structure (Birney et al., 2007) and structural data is following a similar trend thanks to coordinated efforts like targetDB (Chandonia et al., 2006).
Another ongoing trend is the delivery of large-scale functional data, resulting from to the use of robotic techniques.
These make it possible to gather large amounts of functional information associated with homologous sequences (Fabian et al., 2005).
This data is usually applied to Quantitative Structure andActivity Relationships analysis, but it could just as well 2009 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[14:29 31/8/2009 Bioinformatics-btp452.tex] Page: 2456 24552465 C.Kemena and C.Notredame be used when comparing protein sequences.
Finally, the massive use of ChIp-Chip data makes it possible to reveal important protein/DNA interaction, thus allowing the enrichment of genomic data with functional data, an extra layer of information that could certainly be incorporated in sequence alignment strategies such as the ones we report here.
These trends have not gone un-noticed and over the last years, regular efforts have been made at developing and improving multiple sequence alignments methods so that they could take advantage of newly available data.
Three areas have been actively explored: (i) accuracy improvement, achieved through the use of consistencybased methods (Do et al., 2005; Notredame et al., 2000); (ii) an expansion of MSA methods scope, thanks to the development of template-based approaches (Armougom et al., 2006b; Pei and Grishin, 2007; Pei et al., 2008; Wallace et al., 2006; Wilm et al., 2008), a natural development of consistency-based methods that makes it possible to efficiently integrate alternative methods and alternative types of data; and (iii) large-scale alignments (Edgar, 2004a; Katoh and Toh, 2008; Lassmann and Sonnhammer, 2005b).
Most of the MSA methods currently available have been described and compared at length in several very complete reviews (Edgar and Batzoglou, 2006; Notredame, 2007; Pei 2008; Wallace et al., 2005a).
In this specific review, we will mostly focus on the latest developments in an attempt to identify the main trends of this very active research field.
We will also discuss an important challenge: the development of adequate benchmarking techniques, informative enough with respect to all potential applications of MSA methods, especially the reconstruction of accurate phylogenies.
The urgency of this issue recently received a striking illustration with two highimpact papers dealing with the complex relationship that exist between MSA reconstruction and accurate phylogenetic estimation (Loytynoja and Goldman, 2008; Wong et al., 2008).
2 TRADITIONAL ISSUES OF ACCURATE MULTIPLE SEQUENCE ALIGNMENT COMPUTATION Multiple sequence alignment computation stands at a cross-road between computation and biology.
The computational issue is as complex to solve as it is straightforward to describe: given any sensible biological criterion, the computation of an exact MSA is NP-Complete and therefore impossible for all but unrealistically small datasets (Wang and Jiang, 1994).
MSA computation therefore depends on approximate algorithms or heuristics and it is worth mentioning that almost every conceivable optimization technique has been adapted into a heuristic multiple sequence aligner.
Over the last 30 years, >100 multiple sequence alignment methods have been published, based on all kind of heuristics, including simulated annealing (Abhiman et al., 2006), genetic algorithms (Gondro and Kinghorn, 2007; Notredame and Higgins, 1996), Tabu search (Riaz et al., 2005), branch and bound algorithms (Reinert et al., 1997), Hidden Markov Modeling (Eddy, 1995) and countless agglomerative approaches including the progressive alignment algorithm (Hogeweg and Hesper, 1984), by far the most widely used nowadays.
The biological issue surrounding MSAs is even more complex: given a set of sequences, we do not know how to estimate similarity in a way that will guaranty the biological correctness of an alignment, whether this correctness is defined in evolutionary, structural or functional terms.
In fact, one could argue that being able to compare the biological features coded by a DNA sequence implies having solved most of the ab initio problems associated with genetic information interpretation, including protein structure prediction.
But, these problems are not solved and in practice multiple alignments are estimated by maximizing identity, in the hope that this simplistic criterion will be sufficiently informative to yield models usable for most type of biological inference.
The objective function thus maximized is usually defined with a substitution matrix and a gap penalty scheme.
The substitution matrix is relatively sophisticated when it comes to proteins, but barely more than an identity matrix for DNA and RNA.
For a long time, the maximization was carried out using a combination of dynamic programming (DP) and log odds scoring scheme, but over the last year, Bayesian techniques have been implemented that rely on pair-Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) and take advantage of a better defined statistical framework (Durbin et al., 1998).
While DP-and HMM-based approaches are mostly interchangeable, the last ones make it easier to explore the parameter space using off-the-shelves statistical tools such as BaumWelch and Viterbi training.
HMM modeling also offers easy access to a wider range of scoring possibilities, thanks to posterior decoding, thus making it possible to assess complex alignment scoring schemes.
For instance, a significant share of the improvements measured in the ProbCons (Do et al., 2005) algorithm over other consistencybased packages seems to result from the use of a bi-phasic penalty scheme (Table 1), pre-defined as a finite state automata (FSA) and parameterized by applying the BaumWelsch algorithm on BaliBase.
Sequence identity is only a crude substitute to biological homology, and in practice, it has often been argued that structurally correct alignments are those more likely to be useful for further biological modeling.
Similarity-based MSA methods have therefore been carefully tuned in order to produce structurally correct MSAs.
This tuning (or validation) has relied on the systematic usage of structure-based reference multiple sequence alignments.
This procedure has now been in use for more than a decade and has been a major shaping force on this entire field of research.
We will now review the most common validation procedures with their associated databases.
3 ACCURACY ESTIMATION USING STRUCTURE-BASED REFERENCE ALIGNMENTS The first systematic validation of a multiple sequence alignment using reference alignments was carried out by McClure (1994).
McClure was evaluating her alignments by assessing the correct alignment of pre-defined functional motifs.
Shortly after, Notredame and Higgins (1996) made the first attempt to systematically use structure-based alignments while evaluating the biological accuracy of the SAGA package.
The validation was carried out on a relatively small dataset named 3D-ali (Pascarella et al., 1996).
A few years later, Thompson developed a purpose built dataset named BaliBase I (Thompson et al., 1999).
The main specificity of BaliBase was to address a wide range of different issues related to multiple sequence alignments.
This included the alignment of distantly related homologues, the ability of alternative methods to deal with long insertions/deletions and their ability to properly integrate outliers.
Its main weakness was the questionable accuracy of some alignments and the relatively small size (82) of the dataset.
Most of 2456 [14:29 31/8/2009 Bioinformatics-btp452.tex] Page: 2457 24552465 Multiple sequence alignment methods in the high-throughput era Table 1.
Benchmarking of a selection of methods on the RV11 Balibase dataset.
BaliBase/RV11 is made of 38 datasests consisting of seven or more highly divergent protein sequences (<20% pair-wise identity on the reference alignment) Method Version Score Mode Templates RV11 Sever 3DPSI-Coffee 7.05 Consistency Accurate Profile + Structure 61.00 www.tcoffee.org PROMAL-3D Server Consistency Default Profile + Structure 58.66 prodata.swemd.edu/promals3d PROMALS Server Consistency Default Profile 55.80 prodata.swemd.edu/promals3d PSI-Coffee 7.05 Consistency Psicoffee Profile 53.71 www.tcoffee.org M-Coffee4 7.05 Consistency Muscl+Kal.
+ ProbC + TC 41.63 www.tcoffee.org T-Coffee 7.05 Consistency Default 42.30 www.tcoffee.org ProbCons 1.1 Consistency Default 40.80 probcons.stanford.edu ProbCons 1.1 Consistency Monophsic Penalty 37.53 probcons.stanford.edu Kalign 2.03 It + Matrix Default 33.82 msa.cgb.ki.se MUSCLE 3.7 It + Matrix Default 31.37 www.drive5.com/muscle Mafft 6.603b It + Matrix Default 26.21 align.genome.jp/mafft Prank 0.080715 Matrix Default 26.18 www.ebi.ac.uk Prank 0.080715 Matrix +F 24.82 www.ebi.ac.uk ClustalW 2.0.9 Matrix Default 22.74 www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw All packages were ran using the default parameters.
Servers were ran in August 2008. these issues have been addressed in the latest version of BaliBase (BaliBase 3) (Thompson et al., 2005) and this database is now one of the most widely used reference standard.
Nonetheless, BaliBase remains a handmade dataset, with potential arbitrary and uneven biases resulting from human intervention.
The main alternative to BaliBase is Prefab (Edgar, 2004b), a very extensive collection of over a 1000 pairs of homologous structures, each embedded in a collection of 50 homologs (25 for each structure) gathered by PSIBLAST.
In Prefab, the reference alignment is defined as the portions of alignments consistently aligned by two structural aligners: CE (Shindyalov and Bourne, 1998) and DALI (Holm and Sander, 1995).
Prefab, however, is not a multiple sequence alignment collection since each dataset only contains a pair of structures thus making it a less stringent than BaliBase where accuracy can be tested on entire multiple alignment columns rather than pairs of residues.
Other commonly used databases for protein multiple sequence alignments include OXBench (Raghava et al., 2003), HOMSTRAD (Stebbings and Mizuguchi, 2004) and SABmark (Van Walle et al., 2005).
One may ask why so many resources for addressing an apparently simple question.
The answer probably lies in the complexity of structural alignments.
While reasonably accurate structure-based alignments are easy enough to generate, owing to the strength of the structural signal, it is nonetheless very hard to objectively assess the relative merits of alternative structure-based alignments (Kolodny et al., 2005).
Several alternative
