            G:\fpp\tex\journals\oup\BioInfo\Bioinfo-25(19)issue\btp422.dvi [17:55 3/9/2009 Bioinformatics-btp422.tex] Page: 2566 25662572 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
25 no.
19 2009, pages 25662572doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp422 Gene expression aGEM: an integrative system for analyzing spatial-temporal gene-expression information Natalia Jimnez-Lozano,, Joan Segura, Jos Ramn Macas, Juanjo Vega and Jos Mara Carazo GN7 of the National Institute for Bioinformatics (INB) and Biocomputing Unit of the National Centre for Biotechnology (CNB-CSIC), Darwin 3, Campus de Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain Received on October 20, 2008; revised and accepted on July 7, 2009 Advance Access publication July 9, 2009 Associate Editor: David Rocke ABSTRACT Motivation: The work presented here describes the anatomical Gene-Expression Mapping (aGEM) Platform, a development conceived to integrate phenotypic information with the spatial and temporal distributions of genes expressed in the mouse.
The aGEM Platform has been built by extending the Distributed Annotation System (DAS) protocol, which was originally designed to share genome annotations over the WWW.
DAS is a client-server system in which a single client integrates information from multiple distributed servers.
Results: The aGEM Platform provides information to answer three main questions.
(i) Which genes are expressed in a given mouse anatomical component?
(ii) In which mouse anatomical structures are a given gene or set of genes expressed?
And (iii) is there any correlation among these findings?
Currently, this Platform includes several well-known mouse resources (EMAGE, GXD and GENSAT), hosting gene-expression data mostly obtained from in situ techniques together with a broad set of image-derived annotations.
Availability: The Platform is optimized for Firefox 3.0 and it is accessed through a friendly and intuitive display: http://agem.cnb.csic.es Contact: natalia@cnb.csic.es Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at http://bioweb.cnb.csic.es/VisualOmics/aGEM/home.html and http://bioweb.cnb.csic.es/VisualOmics/index_VO.html and Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION Gene expression is the process by which heritable information from a gene is made into a functional gene product, such as protein or RNA.
Precise regulation of spatio-temporal gene expression is crucial during the development of an organism.
It is essential to know the exact timing and location of gene transcripts when studying the functions of genes involved in developmental processes.
There is a broad range of freely accessible gene-expression databases (GXDs).
Each is devoted either to a whole organism To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors.
[ZFIN for zebrafish, BDGP and FlyBase for Drosophila, MEPD for Medaka, Anissed for Ciona, XDB3 for Xenopus, GXD and EMAGE for mouse (Haudry et al., 2008)], or to a specific part of the organism at a specific developmental stage or during the period between two developmental stages.
Thus, gene-expression data are broadly dispersed among many research groups distributed around the world.
An effort at integration is needed to share the results and analyses among all groups in order to obtain a general and complete landscape of the gene-expression field.
During recent years, several initiatives have tried to address the issue of data integration.
They can be grouped into two main movements.
The first is devoted to constructing a main repository that collects all the information available for a single organism (e.g.A.C. elegans database: ACeDB, http://www.acedb.org/) or for many organisms (Ensembl; Hubbard et al., 2007).
The basis of this kind of effort is centralization.
In contrast, the foundation for the second type of initiative is decentralization, which occurs when research projects and institutions maintain and provide their own data separately (Cuticchia, 2000; Letovsky et al., 1998; Shoman et al., 1995, Skupski et al., 1999) This integration model requires a protocol that will allow the user to retrieve information in a robust manner.
The platform described in this article exploits decentralization by using the Distributed Annotation System (reference DAS).
DAS defines a simple protocol that enables clients to retrieve data and annotations from multiple and disperse servers in a homogeneous form.
It describes how data should be represented and communicated.
Data sources in DAS are implemented as web services using eXtensible Markup Language (XML) for data representation and the hyper-text transfer protocol (HTTP) for data transport.
DAS clients send out HTTP requests to the DAS servers in charge of processing the queries and returning an HTTP response that contains an XML representation of the resources.
The platform described in this article is a DAS system that integrates the following resources: EMAGE, GXD, GENSAT and OMIM.
These resources will now be explained.
GXD and EMAGE databases were the result of an innovative project started in 1994 in the UK MRC Human Genetics Unit in Edinburgh, together with the Jackson Laboratory in the USA (Ringwald et al., 1994).
This project (named EMAP: Edinburgh Mouse Atlas Project) was devoted to creating 3D grey-level voxel images from several mouse developmental stages (named 2009 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[17:55 3/9/2009 Bioinformatics-btp422.tex] Page: 2567 25662572 Integrative system for analyzing spatial-temporal gene-expression information Theiler Stages; Theiler, 1989), to which image-mapped geneexpression data from in situ experiments were related.
Obviously, this correspondence was only possible thanks to the development of a well curated mouse anatomical ontology, which describes the anatomical terms for each of the 26 embryonic Theiler Stages (EMAP ontology; Baldock and Burger, 2005).
This ontology is designed to capture the structural changes that occur during embryonic development and consists of a set of 26 hierarchies, one for each developmental stage.
Each stage is characterized by the internal and external morphological features that are recognizable in an embryo during that period of development (Burger et al., 2004).
GXD first full production version was released in 1999 (Ringwald et al., 1999).
GXD is a database component of the Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) database resource http://www.informatics.jax.org, the community model organism database for the laboratory mouse.
GXD currently stores gene-expression data from in situ and other techniques such as northern blotting, real-time polymerase chain reaction, etc., and refers not only to the mouse embryo (Theiler Stages 126) but also to the adult mouse (postnatal mouse corresponding to Theiler Stage 28).
The GXD uses the EMAP ontology together with a compatible anatomical dictionary for the adult mouse (MA ontology; Hayamizu et al., 2005).
EMAGE database was launched in 2003 (Baldock et al., 2003) in the framework of EMAP project to provide spatially mapped geneexpression data referred only to mouse embryo (Venkataraman et al., 2008).
More recently, Gong and co-workers have created the Geneexpression Nervous System Atlas (GENSAT; Gong et al., 2003), a resource of gene-expression data relating to the developing and adult mouse nervous system at the cellular level, with data supplied by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
The aim of the GENSAT project is to map the expression of genes in the mouse central nervous system (CNS), using both in situ hybridization and transgenic mouse techniques.
It is a collection of pictorial gene-expression maps of the mouse brain and spinal cord.
GENSAT catalogs images of histological sections of the developing (embryonic days 10.5 and 15.5) and adult mouse brain, in which tags such as Enhanced Green Fluorescence Protein have been used to visualize the relative degrees of in situ expression of a wide array of genes (Wheeler et al., 2008).
Unlike EMAGE and GXD, annotations in GENSAT are not referred to a well-established ontology but to a vocabulary that includes anatomical terms together with cellular and sub-cellular types.
Of course, this new set of spatial gene-expression data must be related to the wealth of existing biological information already organized into a wide variety of databases.
As an example, in this work we have used OMIM, the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database (OMIM; Hamosh et al., 2002) to link genes involved in disease to (mouse) gene-expression data from the EMAGE, GXD and GENSAT databases.
OMIM catalogs all known diseases with a genetic component, and links them whenever possible to the relevant genes in the human genome.
It also provides
