            G:\fpp\tex\journals\oup\BioInfo\Bioinfo-25(22)issue\btp523.dvi [09:46 26/10/2009 Bioinformatics-btp523.tex] Page: 3026 30263027 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
25 no.
22 2009, pages 30263027doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp523 Systems biology Saint: a lightweight integration environment for model annotation Allyson L. Lister1,2,, Matthew Pocock2, Morgan Taschuk1,2 and Anil Wipat1,2, 1Centre for Integrated Systems Biology of Ageing and Nutrition, Newcastle University and 2School of Computing Science, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK Received on June 8, 2009; revised on August 4, 2009; accepted on August 26, 2009 Advance Access publication September 7, 2009 Associate Editor: Alex Bateman ABSTRACT Summary: Saint is a web application which provides a lightweight annotation integration environment for quantitative biological models.
The system enables modellers to rapidly mark up models with biological information derived from a range of data sources.
Availability and Implementation: Saint is freely available for use on the web at http://www.cisban.ac.uk/saint.
The web application is implemented in Google Web Toolkit and Tomcat, with all major browsers supported.
The Java source code is freely available for download at http://saint-annotate.sourceforge.net.
The Saint web server requires an installation of libSBML and has been tested on Linux (32-bit Ubuntu 8.10 and 9.04).
Contact: helpdesk@cisban.ac.uk; a.l.lister@ncl.ac.uk Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION Quantitative modelling is at the heart of systems biology.
Model description languages such as the Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML; Hucka et al., 2003) or CellML (Lloyd et al., 2008) allow the relationships between biological entities to be captured and the dynamics of these interactions to be described mathematically.
Currently, however, many dynamic models include only the mathematical information required to run simulations, and do not explicitly contain the full biological context.
The efficient exchange, reuse and integration of models is aided by the presence of biological information in the model.
Model annotations are necessary to describe how the model has been generated and to define the meaning of the components that make up the model in a computationally accessible fashion.
If biological information about a model is added consistently and thoroughly, the model becomes useful not just for simulation, but also as an input in other computational tasks and as a reference for researchers.
Without a biological context, models are only easily understandable by their creators.
Interested third parties must rely on extra documentations such as publications or possibly incomplete descriptions of species and reactions included in an SBML elements name or identifier.
Without computationally amenable biological annotations, it is difficult to create software tools that determine the biological pathway or reaction being modelled.
To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The addition of biological annotations to a model is usually a manual, time-consuming process; there is no single resource that encompasses all suitable data sources.
A modeller usually has to visit many web sites, applications and interfaces in order to identify relevant information, and may not be aware of all potentially useful databases.
Because modellers add information manually, it is very difficult to annotate exhaustively.
Whilst annotations are vital for model sharing and reuse, they do not contribute to the mathematical content of a model and are not critical to its successful functioning.
The addition of biological knowledge must be performed quickly and easily in order to make annotation worthwhile to a modeller.
A large number of tools1 are available for the construction, manipulation and simulation of models, but there is currently a lack of tools to facilitate rapid and systematic model annotation.
While web sites and applications specializing in integrating disparate data sources exist, such as BioMart (Smedley et al., 2009) and Pathway Commons,2 none are designed to put information directly into a model.
In this article, we describe a lightweight SBML model annotation tool called Saint, specifically designed to identify and integrate biological information relevant to computational models.
Saint is an application which supports the addition of basic annotation to SBML entities and identifies new reactions which may be valuable for extending a model.
Whilst the addition of biological annotation does not modify the behaviour of the model, the incorporation of new reactions or species adds new features that can later be built upon to potentially change the models output.
2 IMPLEMENTATION On the client side, Saint is a web application implemented in Google Web Toolkit3 and hosted on a Tomcat4 server, with a query translation service connecting to a number of external web services running on the server side.
New annotation is presented to the user in a single integrated view after retrieval by the server-side queries.
Reactions and associated species are added directly to the SBML model, whereas the majority of the remaining biological annotation is added to Annotation elements according to the Minimal Information Required in the Annotation of Biochemical Models (MIRIAM) specification (Le Novre et al., 2005).
1http://sbml.org/SBML_Software_Guide 2http://www.pathwaycommons.org 3http://code.google.com/webtoolkit/ 4http://tomcat.apache.org/ The Author(s) 2009.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.5/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[09:46 26/10/2009 Bioinformatics-btp523.tex] Page: 3027 30263027 Saint MIRIAM annotations are resource annotations that are added to SBML in a standardized way which link external resources such as ontologies and data sources to a model.
MIRIAM, among other things, defines an annotation scheme accessible via web services which specifies the format and set of standard data types which should be used for these URIs (Laibe and Le Novere, 2007).
The use of the MIRIAM format provides a standard structure for explicit links between the mathematical and biological aspects of an SBML model.
Saint facilitates the biological annotation of SBML models by using query translation to present an integrated view of data sources and suggested ontological terms.
Data sources include UniProtKB (The UniProt Consortium, 2008), STRING (Jensen et al., 2008) and Pathway Commons.
Supported ontologies and standards include MIRIAM, the Systems Biology Ontology (SBO; Le Novre, 2006) and Gene Ontology (GO; Ashburner et al., 2000).
Query translation within Saint occurs when the query for each species is translated into a set of queries over these resources web services.
Data are matched to a species through syntactic equivalence between the query term and the external data source.
The combined query results are then displayed in the web browser.
If a model is valid, Saint displays the parts of the model available for annotation.
The display is organized around species, which are the main target of annotation.
Saint makes use of the Google Web Toolkit to provide both asynchronous calls to external resources and cross-browser compatibility.
New annotation can be viewed by the modeller, even if the other species are not annotated yet.
The modeller can select or delete annotations as it suits their model, or hide entire species from consideration.
When the modeller is satisfied with the new state of the model, it can be converted back to SBML and saved.
Parsing and validation of the models are handled with libSBML (Bornstein et al., 2008).
As an example, a Saccharomyces cerevisiae model containing a species with a single, simple identifier of cdc13 is loaded into Saint.
Saint suggests the SBO term macromolecule (SBO:0000245), which is added as an sboTerm attribute of that species element, as the best SBO match to a protein.
This term was suggested both because cdc13 was found within UniProtKB and because the Pathway Commons interaction set identified the species as a protein.
Saint also suggests the UniProtKB accession P32797, and GO terms including nuclear telomere cap complex (GO:0000783) and single-stranded telomeric DNAbinding(GO:0043047) as retrieved from UniProtKB.
This information is stored within the model via MIRIAM annotations.
Extensions to the model are also suggested.
For each species, new reactions and their associated species and species
