            G:\fpp\tex\journals\oup\BioInfo\Bioinfo-26(1)issue\btp602.dvi [12:30 2/12/2009 Bioinformatics-btp602.tex] Page: 111 111119 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
26 no.
1 2010, pages 111119doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp602 Data and text mining Evaluation of linguistic features useful in extraction of interactions from PubMed; Application to annotating known, high-throughput and predicted interactions in I2D Yun Niu1,2,, David Otasek1 and Igor Jurisica1,3,4, 1Ontario Cancer Institute, UHN, 101 College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, 2Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China, 3Department of Computer Science and 4Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada Received on November 26, 2008; revised on October 2, 2009; accepted on October 16, 2009 Advance Access publication October 22, 2009 Associate Editor: Burkhard Rost ABSTRACT Motivation: Identification and characterization of proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) is one of the key aims in biological research.
While previous research in text mining has made substantial progress in automatic PPI detection from literature, the need to improve the precision and recall of the process remains.
More accurate PPI detection will also improve the ability to extract experimental data related to PPIs and provide multiple evidence for each interaction.
Results: We developed an interaction detection method and explored the usefulness of various features in automatically identifying PPIs in text.
The results show that our approach outperforms other systems using the AImed dataset.
In the tests where our system achieves better precision with reduced recall, we discuss possible approaches for improvement.
In addition to test datasets, we evaluated the performance on interactions from five human-curated databasesBIND, DIP, HPRD, IntAct and MINT where our system consistently identified evidence for 60% of interactions when both proteins appear in at least one sentence in the PubMed abstract.
We then applied the system to extract articles from PubMed to annotate known, high-throughput and interologous interactions in I2D.
Availability: The data and software are available at:Contact: yniu@uhnres.utoronto.ca; juris@ai.utoronto.ca Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION Identification and characterization of proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) is one of the key aims in biological research.
Although numerous PPIs have been manually curated into databases such as BIND (Bader et al., 2001), DIP (Xenarios et al., 2000), HPRD (Peri et al., 2003), IntAct (Kerrien et al., 2007) and MINT (Zanzoni et al., 2002), information about many PPIs is still only available through the PubMed database.
The PubMed database contains over 17 million papers, making complete coverage by manual curation difficult.
Several systems have been developed to make the curation To whom correspondence should be addressed.
process more accurate, faster and effective (Donaldson et al., 2003; Hoffmann and Valencia, 2004).
Information extraction (IE) aims to identify prespecified types of relations from unstructured text, and thus can help in automated PPI detection (Bunescu and Mooney, 2005; Fundel et al., 2007; Romano et al., 2006; Temkin and Gilder, 2003; Yakushiji et al., 2005).
An IE approach to PPI detection has two major and relatively independent subtasks: entity recognition and relation detection.
First, protein names must be identified in text.
Entity recognition is challenging due to nonstandard name forms, multiple synonyms for most proteins and the ambiguity of protein names across organisms.
Second, interaction identification, i.e.relation detection, identifies protein pairs in the sentence with additional support for their physical interaction.
Since the two problems are usually addressed by different computational techniques, they are often investigated separately.
In this article, we use entity recognition from (Otasek et al., 2006), and focus on relation detection.
Our goal is to systematically evaluate multiple linguistic features, context features, keywords and patterns as cues in the automatic extraction of interaction relation to improve our understanding of how individual features or their combination affect system performance.
We then applied the system to find evidence for PPIs in the I2D database.
This annotation of PPIs resulted in: (i) identifying more evidence for curated PPIs and providing more biological context for them, and (ii) providing some level of validation for PPIs detected by high-throughput methods and predicted computationally (human interpretation and curation of extracted evidence is still required).
Most automatic relation detection approaches use pattern matching techniques (Bunescu et al., 2005; Hao et al., 2005; Jang et al., 2006; Plake et al., 2005; Romano et al., 2006; Yakushiji et al., 2005), in which a set of syntax patterns are usually developed to specify how an interaction is described in literature.
A pattern, serving as a rule, is a sequence of words, or part-of-speech tags, describing an interaction.
The locations of the two interaction partners are defined in each pattern.
In the pattern matching process, a sentence matches the rule if it satisfies the word constraints in the given order.
When a pattern is found in a sentence, the text at defined locations will be extracted as the two interaction partners.
The pattern-based method is intuitively straightforward and conceptually simple.
However, manually constructing patterns is The Author(s) 2009.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.5/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[12:30 2/12/2009 Bioinformatics-btp602.tex] Page: 112 111119 Y.Niu et al.a time-consuming process, and is not feasible to cover all the possibilities or compute and evolve all the necessary rules.
Thus, several alternative approaches have been proposed (Bunescu and Mooney, 2005; Fundel et al., 2007; LLL, 2005; Temkin and Gilder, 2003).
Fundel et al.(2007) made use of rules based on dependency parse trees of sentences.
Grammar-based approaches use a parser with grammar production rules for the detection of interactions (Temkin and Gilder, 2003).
The rules were derived by manually analyzing sentences that contain interactions in a corpus.
Bunescu and Mooney (2005) developed a machine learning approach that explores a sequence kernel measuring the similarity of two sentences by evaluating the common string sequences that they contain.
Systems that participated in the 4th Learning Language in Logic Workshop (LLL, 2005) explored knowledge representation methods to detect PPIs.
Despite the substantial success of automatic PPI detection approaches, there is still a need to improve the precision and recall of the process.
In the BioCreAtIvE 2 interaction pairs extraction subtask, the best results of all the participating systems (measured by precision and recall) were about 0.30 (BioCreAtIvE, 2006).1 We aim to improve automatic PPI detection by combining multiple linguistic clues via machine learning.
While systems using linguistic features achieve good performance in extracting social, part-of and locational relations between entities such as person, organization and location (Zhou et al., 2005), they have not been fully explored for identifying PPIs.
Nielsen (2006) built a system to detect PPIs, using manually identified interaction words and some lexical and context features.
The system was evaluated on a small corpus containing 255 relations.
Mitsumori et al.(2006) only applied context features.
Haddow and Matthews (2007) explored n-grams and context features.
In the BioCreAtIvE 2 interaction pairs extraction subtask, Erkan et al.(2006) used features from dependency trees, while Huang et al.(2007) used profile features.
In this article, we evaluate the contribution that context, lexical and syntactic information, as well as keywords and patterns have on PPI detection.
In addition, we propose a new feature, interaction sentence, and evaluate its contribution to improving accuracy.
Our goal is to identify the most important features for detecting interaction relations in sentences, and after validation, apply the system to validate curated, high-throughput and predicted PPIs.
The evaluation results on the AImed dataset (Bunescu and Mooney, 2005) show that our approach outperforms other systems.
Automatic interaction extraction may directly contribute to our knowledge of PPIs.
For instance, it can be used to enhance human-curated databases (e.g.BIND, DIP, HPRD, IntAct and MINT), since in these databases an interaction is often supported by a few or only one PubMed
