            C:\Documents and Settings\senthil.d\Desktop\Bioinfo-26(9)issue\btq127.dvi [14:01 18/4/2010 Bioinformatics-btq127.tex] Page: 1176 11761184 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
26 no.
9 2010, pages 11761184doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq127 Structural bioinformatics Advance Access publication April 5, 2010 Alignment-free local structural search by writhe decomposition Degui Zhi1,,, Maxim Shatsky1,2 and Steven E. Brenner1,2 1Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, UC Berkeley and 2Physical Biosciences Division, LBNL, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA Associate Editor: Anna Tramontano ABSTRACT Motivation: Rapid methods for protein structure search enable biological discoveries based on flexibly defined structural similarity, unleashing the power of the ever greater number of solved protein structures.
Projection methods show promise for the development of fast structural database search solutions.
Projection methods map a structure to a point in a high-dimensional space and compare two structures by measuring distance between their projected points.
These methods offer a tremendous increase in speed over residuelevel structural alignment methods.
However, current projection methods are not practical, partly because they are unable to identify local similarities.
Results: We propose a new projection-based approach that can rapidly detect global as well as local structural similarities.
Local structural search is enabled by a topology-inspired writhe decomposition protocol that produces a small number of fragments while ensuring that similar structures are cut in a similar manner.
In benchmark tests, we show that our method, writher, improves accuracy over existing projection methods in terms of recognizing scop domains out of multi-domain proteins, while maintaining accuracy comparable with existing projection methods in a standard single-domain benchmark test.
Availability: The source code is available at the following website:Contact: dzhi@compbio.berkeley.edu Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on July 19, 2009; revised on February 25, 2010; accepted on March 19, 2010 1 INTRODUCTION In the era of structural genomics, comparing a large number of structures can be a dauntingly time-consuming task.
Therefore, a number of databases store precomputed structural similarities to accelerate structural comparison queries (Dietmann et al., 2001; Madej et al., 1995; Shindyalov and Bourne, 1998).
However, such approaches have several limitations.
First, these databases are not always updated in a timely fashion due to the sheer burden of computational requirements.
Even if one applies a program that can compare two structures in 1 s, it would take more than 1 year to perform all-versus-all comparisons of 7897 proteins from the 40% To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Present address: Department of Biostatistics, Ryals Public Health Bldg 327, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
non-redundant protein set of Astral 1.71 (Chandonia et al., 2004), which is only a subset of over 50 000 solved protein structures in the PDB (Berman et al., 2000).
The second drawback of existing structural similarity databases is that they offer a rigid classification of structural relationships according to some predefined set of parameters.
This precludes production of alternate classifications, such as building phylogenies for a particular subset of proteins while applying different scoring functions.
In addition, analysis of a large number of artificial structures, such as clustering of models generated by structure prediction efforts, demands ultrafast structure comparison.
Therefore, there is an increasingly compelling need for tools that can rapidly compare a large set of structures.
Similarity of protein structures is typically measured via structural alignment, whose goal is to find a three-dimensional (3D) transformation that brings into correspondence the largest number of atoms between two structures.
The quality of a 3D superposition is often measured by the number of matched C atoms and the distances between the matched atoms.
The exact solution for the pairwise structural alignment is computationally expensive (Ambuhl et al., 2000).
Therefore, heuristic approaches have been developed to find good solutions with remarkable efficiency (for a review see, Eidhammer et al., 2000).
Even so, typical superpositionbased heuristic programs are still too slow for many purposes: they take hours to perform a one-versus-all structural query.
For example, running combinatorical extension (CE; Shindyalov and Bourne, 1998) for one protein structure against 2930 non-redundant structures would take about 1 h on a modern desktop computer (Kolodny et al., 2005) and thus several CPU-months to complete an all-versus-all comparison.
A major speed increase for structural comparison was achieved by considering schemes of reduced representation of protein structures, instead of their full 3D coordinates of atoms.
The most popular scheme for reduced structure representation is the secondary structure element (SSE), and a number of structure matching methods based on SSEs have been developed since the 1990s (Alexandrov and Fischer, 1996; Dror et al., 2003; Harrison et al., 2003; Holm and Sander, 1995; Koch et al., 1996; Madej et al., 1995; Mizuguchi and Go, 1995; Rufino and Blundell, 1994).
Since the 1980s, ideas from differential geometry and topology have been explored to encode 3D structures into 1D representations (Levitt, 1983; Rackovsky and Scheraga, 1984).
Like a comparison of protein amino acid sequences, a 1D representation allows much faster structure comparison than a full 3D alignment.
More recently, several groups developed alternative 1D methods using innovative shape descriptors, such as discrete torsion angles (Gong et al., 2005), turning angles between smoothed backbone segments with The Author(s) 2010.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[14:01 18/4/2010 Bioinformatics-btq127.tex] Page: 1177 11761184 Alignment-free local structural search a certain distance (Zhi et al., 2006), shape symbols (Ison et al., 2005) or residue connectivity profiles (Teichert et al., 2007) [see (Shu et al., 2008) for a recent review of 1D methods].
Indeed, these methods can handle one-versus-all queries in a matter of minutes with a somewhat lower accuracy.
However, they are still not fast enough for all-versus-all structure comparisons of datasets of current scale.
The ultimate reduction of running times are achieved by a new approach called projection methods, or 0D methods (Hasegawa and Holm, 2009).
The philosophy behind this approach is that the evaluation of overall structural similarity does not require an explicit specification of a 3D transformation and a residue-toresidue correspondence.
Instead this approach maps a complete structure into a fixed length vector, corresponding to a point in a high-dimensional space, where each dimension encodes some transformation-invariant structural feature.
Similarity between structures thus can be evaluated by the geometric distance of their projection points.
Since the mapping step only needs to be done once and the comparison step demands little computation, projection methods can drastically speed up structural comparison.
A typical one-versus-all query with projection methods takes only a fraction of second.
A non-exhaustive list of examples of projection methods are: the PRIDE/PRIDE2 method (Gaspari et al., 2005), which uses histogram of C distances; the LCM method (Lisewski and Lichtarge, 2006), which uses histogram of backbone distances between contacting C atoms; the SGM method (Rgen and Fain, 2003), which uses Gauss integrals (GIs); the LFF method (Choi et al., 2004), which uses descriptors of SSE pairs; and the SSE footprints method (Zotenko et al., 2006), which uses descriptors of SSE triples.
Projection methods can serve as fast filters for comprehensive structure search systems.
Current practical structural search programs typically use SSE matching programs as filters before engaging full alignment.
For example, DaliLite (Holm and Park, 2000) employs 3D-lookup (Holm and Sander, 1995) and Vorolign (Birzele et al., 2007) employs SSE alignment algorithm (SSEA, McGuffin et al., 2001) as fast filters.
Projection methods are typically even faster than these SSE-based methods and thus have potential to be fast structural search filters.
However, there are several challenges preventing current projection methods from being practical.
First, since current projection methods use a single vector encoding global properties of the structurewe call them global projection methodsthey are unable to detect local structural similarities.
For example, they cannot detect the similarity between a single-domain protein to one of the domains in a multi-domain protein.
Second, certain relatively small structural changes in a protein structure, e.g.loop movement or loop indels, may cause significant changes in some type of global descriptors, e.g.GIs (Rgen and Fain, 2003).
Conversely, some structures coincidentally share similar global features and thus introduce false positives.
Here, we propose a new projection-based scheme, writher, for structural comparison that will allow for the detection of local similarities.
In this scheme, we view a structure as an ensemble of representative fragments.
We employ the writhe decomposition, a novel procedure that decomposes a structure into fragments based on its intrinsic topological characteristics.
Instead of using one global descriptor for the entire structure, we consider a set of descriptors for all representative segments.
The conceptual novelty of our approach lies in that this representation allows for a comprehensive yet rapid approach to structural comparison: the similarity between pairs of segments is measured in rapid constant time, in the same fashion as in SGM (Rgen and Fain, 2003), and the global or local similarities are evaluated by scoring functions integrating similarities of individual fragments.
To control the number of fragments to be matched, we apply a database-indexing scheme to efficiently retrieve only the fragments that are potentially similar to the query.
We test our method in two ways: a standard single-domain benchmark test and also a multi-domain test, where a set of multidomain proteins are queried against a database of single-domain structures.
We compare the performance of writher against existing projection methods.
In addition, we also compare writher with leading non-projection-based structure comparison filters.
Our test result shows that writher outperforms all these competing methods in the multi-domain test, while it has a comparable accuracy in the standard single-domain test.
We believe that writher offers a key advance toward building a practical structure comparison tool for the richness of structures available.
2 METHODS 2.1 Preliminaries Rgen and Fain (2003) pioneered the application of GIs (also known as Vassiliev knot invariants) as topological descriptors of protein structure.
To be self-contained, we include a brief description of the GIs for protein structures below adapted from Rgen and Fain (2003).
Readers are referred to Rgen and Fain (2003) and
