            G:\bioinformatics\Bioinfo-26(10)issue\btq143.dvi [20:49 22/4/2010 Bioinformatics-btq143.tex] Page: 1381 13811383 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
26 no.
10 2010, pages 13811383doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq143 Systems biology Advance Access publication April 5, 2010 Payao: a community platform for SBML pathway model curation Yukiko Matsuoka1,2, Samik Ghosh1, Norihiro Kikuchi3 and Hiroaki Kitano1,4,5, 1The Systems Biology Institute, Tokyo, 2JST ERATO Kawaoka Infection-induced Host-response Network Project, Tokyo, 3Mitsui Knowledge Industry Co. Ltd, Tokyo, 4Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, Okinawa and 5Sony Computer Science Laboratories, Tokyo, Japan Associate Editor: Jonathan Wren ABSTRACT Summary: Payao is a community-based, collaborative web service platform for gene-regulatory and biochemical pathway model curation.
The system combines Web 2.0 technologies and online model visualization functions to enable a collaborative community to annotate and curate biological models.
Payao reads the models in Systems Biology Markup Language format, displays them with CellDesigner, a process diagram editor, which complies with the Systems Biology Graphical Notation, and provides an interface for model enrichment (adding tags and comments to the models) for the access-controlled community members.
Availability and implementation: Freely available for model curation service at http://www.payaologue.org.
Web site implemented in Seaser Framework 2.0 with S2Flex2, MySQL 5.0 and Tomcat 5.5, with all major browsers supported.
Contact: kitano@sbi.jp Received on January 21, 2010; revised on March 12, 2010; accepted on March 30, 2010 1 INTRODUCTION Creating an extensive model of gene-regulatory and biochemical networks with the latest data is a painstaking task.
Curation is essential to creating an accurate model.
Yet as science and technology advances rapidly, once curated models soon become out-of-date and need to be revised constantly.
Many pathways and networks are now available online via pathway databases, such as Reactome, BioModels.net, Panther Pathways and many pathway editors are available (Bauer-Mehren et al., 2009).
What is needed is a framework to facilitate tracking and update mechanism for modelers and researchers in the community to contribute to the collaborative model building and curation process.
WikiPathways (Pico et al., 2008) is an effort for such a collaborative platform in the Wiki style.
While the Wiki system has its strength in collaborative editing and version tracking, it does not provide access control or explicit community tagging mechanisms.
In a community-driven model enrichment environment, it is effective to differentiate privileges to special interest group (SIG) members for curation activitiescommenting on existing tags, adding tags to models, annotating individual component inside a model and validating the annotations.
In view of the complexity of biological pathways and the expertise of biologists in different areas, To whom correspondence should be addressed.
a community platform for biology requires an exquisite balance of federated resource sharing and quality control of information by a SIG of experts in the particular pathway or process.
An access control privilege system allows the community to share and disseminate the knowledge, while enabling a dedicated SIG to maintain high-quality, curated information.
To provide such a curation framework, we have developed a system called Payao.
The system is named after a fish aggregating device, an artificial floating raft where fish congregate and popular in Okinawa/Philippine area.
Payao aims to become a biological knowledge aggregating system, which enable a community to work on the same models simultaneously, insert tags as pop-up balloon to the parts of the model, exchange comments, record the discussions and eventually update the models accurately and concurrently.
The current workflow for pathway curation has two phases working in a cyclical manner, as shown in Figure 1: pathway editing using biological pathway editors (CellDesigner) and communitydriven pathway enrichment and knowledge sharing.
Payao serves for enrichment phase of the curation.
Payao is a web-based platform, providing an interface for adding tags and comments to the components (such as Species, Reactions and specified area) of the model, as well as community management functionality.
The information on the users and tag data is stored in a relational database (RDBMS) on the server.
Payao adopts community standards, accepting Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML; Hucka et al., 2003) format models and displays them in Systems Biology Graphical Notation (Le Novere et al., 2009) compliant CellDesigner (Funahashi et al., 2008) graphical notation.
Curation data on Payao can be easily reintegrated into the original model via CellDesigner.
Fig.1.
Workflow of community pathway curation.
The Author(s) 2010.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[20:49 22/4/2010 Bioinformatics-btq143.tex] Page: 1382 13811383 Y.Matsuoka et al.2 PLATFORM Payao consists of the server application, client user interface and database.
The server application has been implemented in Java on Seaser Framework 2.0 with S2Flex2.
Tomcat 5.5 was used as the servlet container to build the web application.
The client user interface has been implemented in ActionScript on Flex framework 2.0.1, which allows us to build a Rich Internet Application to visualize SBML models.
The server communicates with the client via the Action Message Format (AMF3) protocol on S2Flex2, which enables us to translate between Java Objects in Seaser and Action Script Object in Flex.
The server can handle CellDesigner models including SBML models and the visual information using CellDesigner API ver.4.0.
It parses SBML files sent from client to create CellDesigner models, and provides the information as CellDesigner Plugin classes.
The client application receives the model information and draws the model.
MySQL 5.0 is used to store information on user, model and tags/comments in the database.
3 FEATURES As Payao accepts pathway models stored in SBML format and uses CellDesigner APIs for visualization, the most suitable SBML editor for Payao is CellDesigner.
In SBML format, models can capture details of biochemical process descriptions, not only proteinprotein interactions.
Adopting SBML format enables the models to be easily used as the base of computational data analysis or simulation of dynamic behaviors.
The Payao platform enriches the model curation process by providing a host of features for user management, tagging and model updates [detailed are available for reference in (Payao User guide, 2009)].
3.1 Community management Forming a community is an important step for curation.
Different expertise groups can contribute variety of information to the model.
As web-based Payao can be accessible from all physical locations, it enables experts across the world to communicate in a collaborative curation effort.
Community is formed around a pathway model.
It is the model owner who sets access control over the registered model.
In the Payao system, access controls can be set by specifying the privileges to individuals as well as to user categories, such as guest, login user and model user (who are invited to access the model by the model owner).
This enables a user to stage the curation process, initiate the curation within a small group (e.g.SIG) and then switch the access control of the model for public viewing.
3.2 Model management The model owner registers and manages the SBML model.
Upon registration, the model owner specifies the basic model information including, thumbnail image,
