            G:\bioinformatics\Bioinfo-26(14)issue\btq250.dvi [11:00 16/6/2010 Bioinformatics-btq250.tex] Page: 1800 18001801 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
26 no.
14 2010, pages 18001801doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq250 Data and text mining Advance Access publication May 26, 2010 A UIMA wrapper for the NCBO annotator Christophe Roeder1,, Clement Jonquet2, Nigam H. Shah2, William A. Baumgartner Jr1, Karin Verspoor1 and Lawrence Hunter1 1Center for Computational Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO and 2Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research, Stanford University School of Medicine, MSOB Room X-215, 251 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305-5479, USA Associate Editor: Alfonso Valencia ABSTRACT Summary: The Unstructured Information Management Architecture (UIMA) framework and web services are emerging as useful tools for integrating biomedical text mining tools.
This note describes our work, which wraps the National Center for Biomedical Ontology (NCBO) Annotatoran ontology-based annotation serviceto make it available as a component in UIMA workflows.
Availability: This wrapper is freely available on the web at http://bionlp-uima.sourceforge.net/ as part of the UIMA tools distribution from the Center for Computational Pharmacology (CCP) at the University of Colorado School of Medicine.
It has been implemented in Java for support on Mac OS X, Linux and MS Windows.
Contact: chris.roeder@ucdenver.edu Received on February 1, 2010; revised on April 12, 2010; accepted on May 9, 2010 Integration and ease of installation are increasingly important concerns as the number of biomedical text mining tools grows in size and complexity.
Many tools are deployed as web services to avoid complex installation.
The National Center for Biomedical Ontology (NCBO)s Annotator (Jonquet, 2009) is one such tool.
It integrates many biomedical ontologies into a concept annotation service available on the web.
Instead of installing the tool locally, users outside of the NCBO can simply embed a web service client in their applications.
However, challenges for a bioinformatician extend beyond using a single service.
Pipelines of tools are often assembled to accomplish a greater goal like identifying and annotating protein protein interaction events.
These tools work with different data formats for input and output, making the creation of a processing pipeline cumbersome.
The Unstructured Information Management Architecture (UIMA) (Ferruci, 2006) is a framework for integrating such tools into a common data representation and interface.
It provides a mechanism for running the tools in unison and extensions for scaling to larger processing loads.
UIMA is commonly used in the biomedical natural language processing (NLP) community, and recognition of ontology concepts is an important component of many text mining applications.
Hence, adaptation of the NCBO Annotator to UIMA will likely result in broad adoption of the Annotator in biomedical text mining research.
Once a tool has been adapted to UIMA, it can be used in many different assemblies or pipelines with other tools also adapted To whom correspondence should be addressed.
to UIMA.
The Center for Computational Pharmacology (CCP) at the University of Colorado School of Medicine has a collection of such adaptations or wrappers (Baumgartner, 2008), and has successfully used UIMA in the development of systems for participating in the BioCreative and BioNLP shared tasks.
The CCP has now also adapted the NCBO Annotator to UIMA, making it available to UIMA projects.
The NCBO Annotator automatically processes a piece of raw text to annotate (or tag) it with relevant ontology concepts and return the annotations (Jonquet, 2009).
The Annotator accesses over 200 biomedical ontologies from the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/) and the NCBO BioPortal (http://bioportal.bioontology.org/).
The biomedical ontologies used by the Annotator can be thought of as enriched term lists that include relationships and synonyms.
One of the ontologies available is the Gene Ontology (GO), (http://www.geneontology.org/) which can be used to find
