            G:\bioinformatics\Bioinfo-26(17)issue\btq357.dvi [15:32 30/7/2010 Bioinformatics-btq357.tex] Page: 2195 21952197 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
26 no.
17 2010, pages 21952197doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq357 Sequence analysis Advance Access publication July 13, 2010 PriorsEditor: a tool for the creation and use of positional priors in motif discovery Kjetil Klepper and Finn Drabls Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway Associate Editor: Dmitrij Frishman ABSTRACT Summary: Computational methods designed to discover transcription factor binding sites in DNA sequences often have a tendency to make a lot of false predictions.
One way to improve accuracy in motif discovery is to rely on positional priors to focus the search to parts of a sequence that are considered more likely to contain functional binding sites.
We present here a program called PriorsEditor that can be used to create such positional priors tracks based on a combination of several features, including phylogenetic conservation, nucleosome occupancy, histone modifications, physical properties of the DNA helix and many more.
Availability: PriorsEditor is available as a web start application and downloadable archive from http://tare.medisin.ntnu.no/priorseditor (requires Java 1.6).
The web site also provides tutorials, screenshots and example protocol scripts.
Contact: kjetil.klepper@ntnu.no Received on April 21, 2010; revised on June 17, 2010; accepted on June 30, 2010 1 INTRODUCTION Computational discovery of transcription factor binding sites in DNA sequences is a challenging problem that has attracted a lot of research in the bioinformatics community.
So far more than a hundred methods have been proposed to target this problem (Sandve and Drabls, 2006) and the number of publications on the topic is steadily increasing.
There are two general approaches for discovering potential transcription factor binding sites with computational tools.
One is to examine regulatory regions associated with a group of genes that are believed to be regulated by the same factors and search for patterns that occur in all or most of these sequences.
This approach, often referred to as de novo motif discovery, can be used when we have no prior expectations as to what the binding motifs might look like.
One concern with this approach, however, is that it might be necessary to consider rather long sequence regions to ensure that the target sites are indeed covered.
Since binding motifs for transcription factors are usually short and often allow for some degeneracy, the resulting signal-to-noise ratio can be quite low, making it difficult to properly discriminate motifs from background.
Another problematic issue is that DNA sequences inherently contain a lot of repeating patterns, such as tandem repeats and transposable elements, which To whom correspondence should be addressed.
can draw focus away from the target binding motifs when searching for similarities between sequences.
The other general motif discovery approach, called motif scanning, searches for sequence matches to previously defined models of binding motifs, for instance in the form of position weight matrices (PWMs; Stormo, 2000).
The main drawback with motif scanning is that it tends to result in an overwhelming number of false positive predictions.
According to the futility theorem put forward by Wasserman and Sandelin (2004), a genome-wide scan with a typical PWM could incur in the order of 1000 false hits per functional binding site, which would make such an approach practically infeasible for accurate determination of binding sites.
The problem here lies not so much in the predicted binding patterns themselves, since many of these would readily be bound by transcription factors in vitro.
In vivo, however, most such binding sites would be nonfunctional, perhaps because the chromatin conformation around the sites precludes access to the DNA (Segal et al., 2006) or because the target factors require the cooperative binding of additional factors nearby to properly exert their regulatory function (Ravasi et al., 2010).
One way to improve accuracy in motif discovery is to try to narrow down the sequence search space as much as possible beforehand, for instance, by masking out portions of the sequences that resemble known repeats or considering only sequence regions that are conserved between related species (Duret and Bucher, 1997).
Kolbe et al.(2004) introduced a measure they called Regulatory Potential which combines phylogenetic conservation with distinctive hexamer frequency profiles to identify possible regulatory regions.
This measure calculates a score for each position along the sequence, and regions receiving higher scores are deemed more likely to have a regulatory role.
Regulatory Potential can be considered as an example of a positional prior since each position is associated with an a priori probability of possessing some specific property.
Positional priors can be used as an aid in motif discovery by assigning high prior values to regions that we consider more likely to contain functional binding sites and then focus the search on these regions.
Besides conservation and oligonucleotide frequencies, other features that can be relevant for assigning prior values include: localized physical properties of the DNA double helix, distance from transcription start site or other binding sites, ChIP-chip and ChIP-seq data, and potentially tissuespecific epigenetic factors such as the presence of nucleosomes and associated histone modifications.
Many of the aforementioned features have previously been applied and shown to improve the performance of motif discovery by themselves (see e.g.Bellora The Author(s) 2010.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[15:32 30/7/2010 Bioinformatics-btq357.tex] Page: 2196 21952197 K.Klepper and F.Drabls Fig.1.
The top left panel in this screenshot shows examples of some of the features that can be used as a basis to create positional priors.
These features are visualized as data tracks in the main panel for a selected set of sequences.
The bottom-most track contains predicted matches to TRANSFAC and JASPAR motifs in regions with non-zero RegulatoryPotential7X scores.
et al., 2007; Segal et al., 2006; Whitington et al., 2009), and it has also been demonstrated that further gain can be achieved by integrating information about multiple features (see e.g.Ernst et al., 2010; Lhdesmki et al., 2008).
We present here a program called PriorsEditor, which allows users to easily construct positional priors tracks by combining various types of information and utilize these priors to potentially improve the motif discovery process (Fig.1).
2 SOFTWARE DESCRIPTION The first step in constructing a priors track with PriorsEditor is to specify the genomic coordinates for a set of sequences one wishes to analyze.
Next, data for various features can be imported to annotate these genomic segments.
PriorsEditor supports three types of feature data.
The first type, numeric data, associates a numeric value with each position in the sequence and can be used to represent features such as phylogenetic conservation scores, DNA melting temperatures and nucleosome-positioning p
