            G:\bioinformatics\Bioinfo-ECCB(suppl-26)\btq384.dvi [10:59 28/8/2010 Bioinformatics-btq384.tex] Page: i561 i561i567 BIOINFORMATICS Vol.
26 ECCB 2010, pages i561i567doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq384 Improving disease gene prioritization using the semantic similarity of Gene Ontology terms Andreas Schlicker, Thomas Lengauer and Mario Albrecht Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Department of Computational Biology and Applied Algorithmics, Campus E1.4, 66123 Saarbrcken, Germany ABSTRACT Motivation: Many hereditary human diseases are polygenic, resulting from sequence alterations in multiple genes.
Genomic linkage and association studies are commonly performed for identifying disease-related genes.
Such studies often yield lists of up to several hundred candidate genes, which have to be prioritized and validated further.
Recent studies discovered that genes involved in phenotypically similar diseases are often functionally related on the molecular level.
Results: Here, we introduce MedSim, a novel approach for ranking candidate genes for a particular disease based on functional comparisons involving the Gene Ontology.
MedSim uses functional annotations of known disease genes for assessing the similarity of diseases as well as the disease relevance of candidate genes.
We benchmarked our approach with genes known to be involved in 99 diseases taken from the OMIM database.
Using artificial quantitative trait loci, MedSim achieved excellent performance with an area under the ROC curve of up to 0.90 and a sensitivity of over 70% at 90% specificity when classifying gene products according to their disease relatedness.
This performance is comparable or even superior to related methods in the field, albeit using less and thus more easily accessible information.
Availability: MedSim is offered as part of our FunSimMat web service (http://www.funsimmat.de).
Contact: mario.albrecht@mpi-inf.mpg.de Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION More than 1800 human hereditary disorders are known to be caused by mutations in a single gene (OConnor and Crystal, 2006).
However, most of these diseases are very rare.
In contrast, many diseases of major importance to public health, like cancer, diabetes and cardiovascular disorders, are influenced by simultaneous alterations in several genes (Gibson, 2009).
In order to identify genes involved in such multi-factorial diseases, genomic linkage and association studies are performed (Altshuler et al., 2008; Cordell and Clayton, 2005; Teare and Barrett, 2005).
The genomic regions resulting from these studies may comprise as many as several hundreds of candidate disease genes, most of them unrelated to the disease of interest.
Experimental testing of the complete list of candidate genes is generally impractical because of the time and cost involved in such an extensive procedure.
Therefore, several To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Present address: The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Division of Molecular Biology, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands studies examined the specific properties of genes and their products known to be associated with human genetic disorders and explored networks linking diseases based on the involved genes (Feldman et al., 2008; Goh et al., 2007; Jimenez-Sanchez et al., 2001; Lee et al., 2008; van Driel et al., 2006).
In particular, the discovered relationships between properties of genes and gene products as well as their involvement in genetic disorders are exploited by a number of bioinformatics approaches for ranking and prioritizing disease gene candidates (Ala et al., 2008; Ideker and Sharan, 2008; Kann, 2007, 2010; Navlakha and Kingsford, 2010; Oti and Brunner, 2007; Tranchevent et al., 2010; Turner et al., 2003; van Driel and Brunner, 2006; van Driel et al., 2006; Yu et al., 2008).
Most computational approaches rely on the integration of several sources of heterogeneous data such as sequence features, gene expression data and proteinprotein interactions (PPIs).
For example, PROSPECTR is a sequence-based approach that uses decision trees trained on features such as the length of gene and protein sequences and the number of exons (Adie et al., 2005).
The subsequent method SUSPECTS by the same authors combines sequence features with gene expression, protein domains and Gene Ontology (GO) term similarity of candidates and known disease proteins (Adie et al., 2006).
Endeavour is another method that relies on the integration of biological evidence resulting from many different kinds of data, for instance, PPIs, pathways, gene expression and sequence similarity (Aerts et al., 2006).
The characteristics of known disease genes were extracted from each data source separately to rank candidate genes; the resultant ranking lists were then combined to a final overall ranking.
Recently, several methods have been published (Chen et al., 2009; Franke et al., 2006; Ortutay and Vihinen, 2009; Ozgr et al., 2008; Shriner et al., 2008) that build on both interaction networks and GO annotations (Ashburner et al., 2000).
In particular, Chen et al.(2009) applied different algorithms originating from the analysis of social and web networks to disease gene prioritization.
They concluded that methods using functional annotation are generally better than network-based methods, but that network data provide some valuable information.
Ortutay and Vihinen (2009) integrated GO annotation and protein interactions for finding genes involved in immunodeficiencies.
To this end, three different network topology parameters were computed pertaining to an interaction network of genes known to be related to the immune system.
For each of these parameters, a set of genes was selected from the gene network and then subjected to GO enrichment analysis.
Genes received higher priority if they were annotated with enriched terms and achieved some significant network parameter value.
A number of methods for disease gene prioritization uses similarity measures for phenotypes, which leverage cross-
