            G:\bioinformatics\Bioinfo-26(24)issue\btq589.dvi [15:27 18/11/2010 Bioinformatics-btq589.tex] Page: 3131 31313132 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
26 no.
24 2010, pages 31313132doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq589 Gene expression Advance Access publication October 19, 2010 MiRonTop: mining microRNAs targets across large scale gene expression studies Kevin Le Brigand1,2,, Karine Robbe-Sermesant1,2,, Bernard Mari1,2 and Pascal Barbry1,2, 1Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut de Pharmacologie Molculaire et Cellulaire, UMR6097, 06560 Sophia-Antipolis and 2University of Nice Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France Associate Editor: David Rocke ABSTRACT Summary: Current challenges in microRNA (miRNA) research are to improve the identification of in vivo mRNA targets and clarify the complex interplay existing between a specific miRNA and multiple biological networks.
MiRonTop is an online java web tool that integrates DNA microarrays or high-throughput sequencing data to identify the potential implication of miRNAs on a specific biological system.
It allows a rapid characterization of the most pertinent mRNA targets according to several existing miRNA target prediction approaches.
It also provides useful representations of the enrichment scores according to the position of the target site along the 3-UTR, where the contribution of the sites located in the vicinity of the stop codon and of the polyA tail can be clearly highlighted.
It provides different graphs of miRNA enrichment associated with up-or downregulated transcripts and different summary tables about selections of mRNA targets and their functional annotations by Gene Ontology.
Availability: http://www.microarray.fr:8080/miRonTop/index Contact: barbry@ipmc.cnrs.fr Received on August 5, 2010; revised on October 12, 2010; accepted on October 13, 2010 1 INTRODUCTION MiRNAs appear capable to block translation and also stimulate mRNA degradation, with translational repression often preceding mRNA degradation.
Several mechanisms of miRNA action, including block of cap binding or elongation, increased ribosome drop-off rate or increased de-adenylation, have already been proposed (Guo et al., 2010).
It remains, however, that target recognition follows a complex set of rules dominated by the existence of a perfect match between 6 and 8 nt located in the 5 region of the miRNA (called the seed) and the target mRNA (Grimson et al., 2007).
The ability of miRNAs to interact with many targets and the possibility for some of them to share a same target increase tremendously the complexity of many biological networks.
In that context, an experimental validation of in silico predictions appears quite necessary.
Many available target prediction softwares combine a search for a perfect seed match between miRNA and 3-untranslated region (3-UTR) and a conservation of the interaction across species.
In fact, comparison of results To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.
obtained with several of these computational tools show significant divergences.
MiRonTop aims at detecting influence of miRNAs on gene expression profiles by analyzing potential overrepresentation of specific miRNAs targets across an experimental gene set.
Other tools have been recently described to explore miRNA influence on datasets (Alexiou et al., 2010; Antonov et al., 2009; van Dongen et al., 2008).
MiRonTop provides several novel and complementary information including (i) the possibility to screen and compare miRNA signatures using different target prediction tools; (ii) options to calculate enrichment scores according to the spatial distribution of predicted targets sites along the transcript, since true sites may be preferentially located in close vicinity of stop codons and polyadenylation sites (Chi et al., 2009; Majoros and Ohler, 2007); and (iii) access to Gene Ontology functional annotations of the different gene lists.
Overall, these different modes of representation increase the sensitivity of the research in order to define a set of either mRNA or miRNAs associated with the selected experiment.
2 IMPLEMENTATION 2.1 Description of the interface MiRonTop takes as input the results of a global mRNA expression data.
An acceptable format corresponds to a tab-delimited text file containing a unique identifier (HGNC gene symbol, NCBI gene ID, Affymetrix or Agilent probe identifiers), a signal intensity, a log2 ratio between two experimental conditions and a statistical value (P-value or odds ratio).
MiRonTop maintains a relational database linking DNA microarray probes identifiers with NCBI gene IDs, which are used as
