            G:\bioinformatics\Bioinfo-27(7)issue\btr064.dvi [13:20 17/3/2011 Bioinformatics-btr064.tex] Page: 1017 10171018 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
27 no.
7 2011, pages 10171018doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr064 Sequence analysis Advance Access publication February 16, 2011 FIMO: scanning for occurrences of a given motif Charles E. Grant1, Timothy L. Bailey2, and William Stafford Noble1,3, 1Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA, 2Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia and 3Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA Associate Editor: John Quackenbush ABSTRACT Summary: A motif is a short DNA or protein sequence that contributes to the biological function of the sequence in which it resides.
Over the past several decades, many computational methods have been described for identifying, characterizing and searching with sequence motifs.
Critical to nearly any motif-based sequence analysis pipeline is the ability to scan a sequence database for occurrences of a given motif described by a position-specific frequency matrix.
Results: We describe Find Individual Motif Occurrences (FIMO), a software tool for scanning DNA or protein sequences with motifs described as position-specific scoring matrices.
The program computes a log-likelihood ratio score for each position in a given sequence database, uses established dynamic programming methods to convert this score to a P-value and then applies false discovery rate analysis to estimate a q-value for each position in the given sequence.
FIMO provides output in a variety of formats, including HTML, XML and several Santa Cruz Genome Browser formats.
The program is efficient, allowing for the scanning of DNA sequences at a rate of 3.5 Mb/s on a single CPU.
Availability and Implementation: FIMO is part of the MEME Suite software toolkit.
A web server and source code are available atContact: t.bailey@imb.uq.edu.au; william-noble@uw.edu Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on December 17, 2010; revised on January 26, 2011; accepted on February 1, 2011 1 INTRODUCTION A DNA or protein sequence motif is a short pattern that is conserved by purifying selection.
In DNA, a motif may correspond to a protein binding site; in proteins, a motif may correspond to the active site of an enzyme or a structural unit necessary for proper folding of the protein.
Thus, sequence motifs are one of the basic functional units of molecular evolution.
Consequently, identifying and understanding these motifs is fundamental to building models of cellular processes at the molecular scale and to understanding the mechanisms of human disease.
We describe here a software tool, called FIMO (Find Individual Motif Occurrences, pronounced femo), that carries out in an efficient, statistically rigorous fashion one of the core functions required for any motif-based sequence analysis: scanning a collection of To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Table 1.
Comparison of motif search functionality Method Scans DNA Scans proteins Supports custom backgrounds Reports P-values Performs multiple testing correction Source code freely available Web accessible GFF/ WIG output XML/ HTML output MotifScanner   MotifViz   STORM  TRED  RSAT    Patser    PoSSuMsearch    MATCH  FIMO
