            btr134.dvi [13:27 1/4/2011 Bioinformatics-btr134.tex] Page: 1299 12991306 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
27 no.
9 2011, pages 12991306doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr134 Systems biology Advance Access publication March 16, 2011 Customizable views on semantically integrated networks for systems biology Jochen Weile1, Matthew Pocock1, Simon J. Cockell2, Phillip Lord1, James M. Dewar3, Eva-Maria Holstein3, Darren Wilkinson3,4, David Lydall3,5, Jennifer Hallinan1 and Anil Wipat1,3, 1School of Computing Science, Faculty of Science Agriculture and Engineering, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, 2Bioinformatics Support Unit, Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, 3Centre for Integrative Systems Biology of Ageing and Nutrition, Institute for Ageing and Health, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE4 5PL, 4School of Mathematics and Statistics, Faculty of Science Agriculture and Engineering, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU and 5Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK Associate Editor: Olga Troyanskaya ABSTRACT Motivation: The rise of high-throughput technologies in the postgenomic era has led to the production of large amounts of biological data.
Many of these datasets are freely available on the Internet.
Making optimal use of these data is a significant challenge for bioinformaticians.
Various strategies for integrating data have been proposed to address this challenge.
One of the most promising approaches is the development of semantically rich integrated datasets.
Although well suited to computational manipulation, such integrated datasets are typically too large and complex for easy visualization and interactive exploration.
Results: We have created an integrated dataset for Saccharomyces cerevisiae using the semantic data integration tool Ondex, and have developed a view-based visualization technique that allows for concise graphical representations of the integrated data.
The technique was implemented in a plug-in for Cytoscape, called OndexView.
We used OndexView to investigate telomere maintenance in S. cerevisiae.
Availability: The Ondex yeast dataset and the OndexView plug-in for Cytoscape are accessible at http://bsu.ncl.ac.uk/ondexview.
Contact: anil.wipat@ncl.ac.uk Supplementary information: Supplementary data is available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on August 27, 2010; revised on February 10, 2011; accepted on March 9, 2011 1 INTRODUCTION 1.1 Systems biology and integrative bioinformatics Systems biology considers multiple aspects of an organisms structure and function at the same time, using the plethora of data that is publicly available online.
Biologists have access to heterogeneous data covering many different aspects of biology; 1230 entries are listed in the 2010 database issue of Nucleic Acids Research (http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/content/38/suppl_1).
For model organisms To whom correspondence should be addressed.
such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the abundance of freely available data has long since exceeded the point at which it can be analysed manually.
Most data sources still exist in isolation, each with its own specialization and focus (Stein, 2002).
In many cases, databases lack semantic links to each other, even when they are providing data about the same entities.
This partitioning of knowledge is a particular problem for systems biology, hampering the examination of the emergent behaviours inherent in complex biological systems.
The problem of using distributed, heterogeneous datasets is addressed by the subdiscipline of integrative bioinformatics.
There are many different approaches to the integration and querying of large heterogeneous datasets.
Early XML-based approaches (Achard et al., 2001) were soon replaced by more sophisticated methods.
Federated approaches, such as the distributed annotation system (DAS) (Prlic et al., 2007) establish a central view on the data by translating each internal query into a set of external queries in order to retrieve the required data from the outside sources on the fly (Heimbigner and McLeod, 1985).
Semantic web approaches, as endorsed by the Open Biological and Biomedical Ontologies foundry (OBO) (Smith et al., 2007) or as implemented in YeastHub (Cheung et al., 2005), establish a network of interlinked ontologies using a set of controlled vocabularies (Brinkley et al., 2006).
Data warehousing approaches such as BioMART (Haider et al., 2009) EcoCyc (Keseler et al., 2010) and SAMBA (Tanay et al., 2004), convert and incorporate data from their external sources into their own database schema and provide custom queries.
1.2 Ondex Ondex is a graph-based data integration framework (Kohler et al., 2006), which takes a semantic warehousing approach.
Links between entities in different datasets may be directly extracted from the available data sources, inferred as part of the integration, or generated by external tools, such as BLAST (Altschul et al., 1990).
These data can subsequently be matched and interlinked with each other semantically.
The result is a semantically enriched dataset, with which users can interact and also visualize.
The Author(s) 2011.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[13:27 1/4/2011 Bioinformatics-btr134.tex] Page: 1300 12991306 J.Weile et al.Ondex incorporates data into a network of entities termed concepts, connected by relations, all of which can carry attributes.All concepts, relations and attributes have types, which are organized in a hierarchical fashion.
For example, the concept type Protein is a subtype of Molecule, which is itself a subtype of Thing.
This hierarchy means that every Protein concept is also a Molecule and a Thing.
Similarly, the relation type catalyzes is a subtype of actively_participates_in.
Therefore, every statement that p::Protein catalyzes r::Reaction means that p actively_participates_in r. Adding this type of information means that the computer stores not only data, but also its meaning, providing a semantic representation of the data.
A special kind of attribute that all concepts in the an Ondex graph have is the cross-reference (called concept accession in Ondex).
Concept accessions make it easy to connect concepts originating from different sources.
For example, if an Ondex dataset contains two Gene concepts which have been imported from two different data sources, but which share the same concept accession, Ondex can connect these concepts with a new relation of type same_as, and can at a later time merge these concepts into a single concept.
All concepts and relations also have attached provenance information stating their origin and any associated evidence codes.
The process of integrating data into this data structure is performed by the Ondex workflow engine, which employs a plugin architecture.
Parsers, mapping methods and other plugins can be developed using an open API (Taubert et al., 2007) and can subsequently be used in workflows.
In this work, we describe a mechanism to collapse groups of concepts into a simpler, more easily visualized and conceptualized representation.
We have implemented this mechanism as a plugin for Cytoscape, called OndexView, which facilitates the focused analysis of parts of a large, complex network.
We demonstrate the value of this approach by applying it to an investigation into the systems biology of telomere maintenance in the bakers yeast S. cerevisiae.
1.3 Telomere maintenance and BMH1/2 Telomeres are structures composed of the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes together with their capping nucleoprotein complexes.
These structures appear to play a major role in the ageing process (Blasco, 2007; Cheung and Deng, 2008).
Without the capping proteins, chromosome ends appear as double-stranded breaks to the cells DNA damage detection mechanism, triggering a checkpoint response and ultimately cell cycle arrest (Longhese, 2008; Sandell and Zakian, 1993).
With each cell division, telomeres shorten (Longhese, 2008).
When telomere length falls under a certain threshold, the checkpoint response is triggered.
This mechanism appears to contribute to the establishment of a cells finite lifespan.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is an excellent subject for studying telomere biology, because it is one of the simplest and most well-studied eukaryotic model organisms, and telomere biology is highly conserved across eukaryotes.
In S. cerevisiae, an important component of the telomere maintenance mechanism is the protein Cdc13, which binds to the single-stranded DNA overhangs of telomeres.
Cdc13 has two major functions: capping the telomeric DNA and recruiting telomerase (Garvik et al., 1995; Nugent et al., 1996), which is part of the telomere repair mechanism.
CDC13 is an essential gene, so it is difficult to characterize using knock-out mutants.
However, there is a temperature-sensitive mutant called cdc13-1.
This mutant has a wild-type phenotype below 26C, but above this temperature telomeres become uncapped, the checkpoint response is induced and the cells stop dividing (Weinert and Hartwell, 1993).
Epistatic interactions between cdc13-1 and every non-essential gene of the S. cerevisiae genome have been studied (Addinall et al., 2008) using a high-throughput synthetic genetic array (SGA) assay (Tong et al., 2001).
Addinall and co-workers identified a large number of genes which appear to genetically interact with cdc13-1.
The biological function of many of these genes is already understood, but the role of others requires further investigation.
A particularly challenging problem is the phenotype of the two paralogues BMH1 and BMH2.
The deletion of the gene BMH1 strongly suppresses the cdc13-1 phenotype, while the deletion of its paralogue BMH2 suppresses cdc13-1 rather weakly.
BMH1 and BMH2 share 91.6% sequence identity.
They both encode 14-3-3 proteins, a class of proteins which usually occur as dimers and which bind to phosphoproteins (Chaudhri, 2003).
Members of the 14-3-3 family have a variety of different functions in eukaryotes, including directly modifying the functionality of their target proteins, mediating and controlling transport processes between the cytoplasm and different organelles and serving as scaffolds for interactions between different proteins (Tzivion et al., 2001).
An important role for BMH1 and BMH2 in the regulation of carbohydrate metabolism has also been suggested (Bruckmann et al., 2007).
It is not immediately obvious why BMH1 and BMH2 behave differently despite their close homology.
Clearly, the difference in phenotype between two such closely homologous genes cannot be understood by studying the genes in isolation; a systems biology approach is essential.
In order to investigate this problem, we used Ondex to integrate five publicly available data sources as well as a homology dataset generated from BLAST results.
We then enriched this data with semantic links between the concepts from the different data sources.
In addition, we developed a novel, view-based visualization approach which we used to analyse this large, complex dataset.
This analysis produced several testable hypotheses.
2 METHODS 2.1 Data sources We integrated six different data sources using Ondex.
Genomics data, as well as the latest Gene Ontology (Ashburner et al., 2000) annotations, were obtained from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) (Cherry et al., 1997).
A yeast regulatory network was acquired from Balaji et al.(2006).
A curated model of the yeast metabolic network was sourced from Herrgard et al.(2008).
A yeast proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network and a network of known genetic interactions (GI) were taken from the BioGRID database (Stark et al., 2006).
The BioGRID data includes the GIs reported by Addinall et al.(2008).
Homology links between genes were created using BLAST (Altschul et al., 1990) with an 85% sequence identity threshold (Table 1).
Further information regarding the data sources can be found in the Supplementary Material.
2.2 Integration The source datasets were integrated to form a combined Ondex Saccharomyces knowledge network.
A metadata model was designed for the knowledge network to capture the semantics of concept and relationship 1300 [13:27 1/4/2011 Bioinformatics-btr134.tex] Page: 1301 12991306 Customizable views on integrated networks Table 1.
Data sources used in this work Data Source Version/date Genome SGD 11/02/2010 GO annotations SGD 11/02/2010 Interactome BioGRID v2.0.61 Regulatory network Balaji et al.(2006) NA Metabolic network Herrgard et al.(2008) v1.0 Homology BLAST (id.>85%) NA NA= not applicable.
Fig.1.
Simplified schematic of the data structure underlying the Ondex Saccharomyces knowledge network.
Circles represent concept types, and lines represent relations between them.
types found within the different datasets (Fig.1).
This model provides information about how certain concept types inherit features from one another (for example, an Enzyme is always a Protein), and allows such concepts to be treated as both concept types in the downstream workflow.
Ondex parsers for each data source produce an Ondex-compatible representation of the data.
For example, the BioGRID parser creates an appropriately typed concept for every reported gene, protein and RNA in the database, and an interaction concept of a corresponding type for every interaction.
All genes, proteins and RNAs that take part in an interaction are linked to that interaction concept with a participates_in relation.
A mapping algorithm based on matching cross-
