            btr252.dvi [13:39 14/5/2011 Bioinformatics-btr252.tex] Page: 1704 17041705 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
27 no.
12 2011, pages 17041705doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr252 Sequence analysis Advance Access publication April 19, 2011 FR-HIT, a very fast program to recruit metagenomic reads to homologous reference genomes Beifang Niu, Zhengwei Zhu, Limin Fu, Sitao Wu and Weizhong Li Center for Research in Biological Systems, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA Associate Editor: Martin Bishop ABSTRACT Summary: Fragment recruitment, a process of aligning sequencing reads to reference genomes, is a crucial step in metagenomic data analysis.
The available sequence alignment programs are either slow or insufficient for recruiting metagenomic reads.
We implemented an efficient algorithm, FR-HIT, for fragment recruitment.
We applied FR-HIT and several other tools including BLASTN, MegaBLAST, BLAT, LAST, SSAHA2, SOAP2, BWA and BWA-SW to recruit four metagenomic datasets from different type of sequencers.
On average, FR-HIT and BLASTN recruited significantly more reads than other programs, while FR-HIT is about two orders of magnitude faster than BLASTN.
FR-HIT is slower than the fastest SOAP2, BWA and BWA-SW, but it recruited 15 times more reads.
Availability: http://weizhongli-lab.org/frhit.
Contact: liwz@sdsc.edu Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on February 19, 2011; revised on April 8, 2011; accepted on April 11, 2011 1 INTRODUCTION Metagenomic data provide a more comprehensive picture for our understanding of the microbial world.
An important step of such understanding is to compare the raw sequencing reads against the available microbial genomes to analyze the phylogenetic composition, genes and functions of the samples.
Such a procedure, referred to as fragment recruitment, was introduced in the Global Ocean Sampling (GOS) metagenomics study (Rusch et al., 2007).
Sequences from metagenomic samples exhibit great differences from the available genomes.
Although there are thousands of available complete microbial genomes, they hardly cover the broad and diverse species in many metagenomic samples.
A typical metagenomic dataset may have hundreds or thousands of species, and many of them are novel.
Therefore, it is critical for fragment recruitment methods to align reads to homologous genomes.
In the GOS study, BLAST (Altschul et al., 1997) was used for fragment recruitment.
However, it is too slow to handle large datasets.
The explosion of next-generation sequencing data stimulated the development of new mapping programs, such as SOAP (Li et al., 2008), Bowtie (Langmead et al., 2009), BWA (Li and Durbin, 2009) and many others.
These programs are several orders of magnitude times faster than BLAST, but they can only identify very stringent similarities that tolerate only a few To whom correspondence should be addressed.
mismatches and gaps.
So these mapping programs are insufficient for fragment recruitment.
The slightly slower programs like BLAT (Kent, 2002), SSAHA2 (Ning et al., 2001) and LAST (Kielbasa et al., 2011) can recruit more reads than the mapping programs, but their fragment recruiting capacities are still limited.
In this article, we present a new fragment recruitment method, FR-HIT.
Given reference genomes, metagenomic reads and sequence identity and alignment length cutoffs, the goal of FR-HIT is to align the most reads to
