            K:\bioinformatics\Bioinfo-27(15)issue\btr349.dvi [17:48 6/7/2011 Bioinformatics-btr349.tex] Page: 2027 20272030 BIOINFORMATICS DISCOVERY NOTE Vol.
27 no.
15 2011, pages 20272030doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr349 Sequence analysis Advance Access publication June 11, 2011 Pathogen detection using short-RNA deep sequencing subtraction and assembly Ofer Isakov, Shira Modai and Noam Shomron Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel Associate Editor: Ivo Hofacker ABSTRACT Motivation: Early and accurate detection of human pathogen infection is critical for treatment and therapeutics.
Here we describe pathogen identification using short RNA subtraction and assembly (SRSA), a detection method that overcomes the requirement of prior knowledge and culturing of pathogens, by using degraded small RNA and deep sequencing technology.
We prove our approachs efficiency through identification of a combined viral and bacterial infection in human cells.
Contact: nshomron@post.tau.ac.il Received on February 18, 2011; revised on May 18, 2011; accepted on June 2, 2011 1 INTRODUCTION Early and accurate detection of microbial pathogens in both clinical and environmental samples is critical for effective public health care, treatment and therapeutics.
Most pathogen detection methods [polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification or microarrays] rely on prior knowledge of the exact sequence of the potential pathogen, or the ability to cultivate the pathogen (for microbial cultures), which is unreasonable in many cases (Douglas, 2005; Straub et al., 2005).
An alternative detection technique recently offered, which circumvents these limitations, is the sequencing of infected cells and the subsequent comparison of these sequences to a reference pathogen library for identification (MacConaill et al., 2008).
Given the massive increase in nucleic acid sequence databases of all organisms, and the advancement in massive parallel sequencing technologies, sequencing possibly infected samples evolves as an increasingly prominent and logical alternative for pathogen characterization.
The major advantages of this approach are the unbiased detection of all known pathogens, overcoming the requirement for cultivation of slow-growing and fastidious microbial agents; the ability to recognize pathogens, even at minute expression levels; simultaneous identification of several microbial agents in a co-infected sample; and the rapid turnaround and processing.
2 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Here we introduce a novel approach for pathogen detection using short reads, generated by deep sequencing of short RNA extracts.
This three step approach includes: (i) alignment of the short reads against the human reference genome; (ii) subtraction and assembly of the remaining unmapped reads; and (iii) categorization To whom correspondence should be addressed.
and identification of the pathogen infection, based on nucleic acid databases.
We term our approach short RNA subtraction and assembly (SRSA).
We applied our method to Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infected cells, precisely identifying the infected cells and the infecting agents.
In order to identify minute quantities of non-host organisms, we chose to analyze RNA in sizes that maximize the pathogen-tohost nucleotide ratio.
Utilizing small RNA (2050 nt) for pathogen detection, rather than the currently used cDNA and ESTs (Weber et al., 2002), has several apparent advantages.
Specific short RNA extracts provide a larger pathogen-to-host ratio than DNA samples since host DNA is usually several orders of magnitude larger than pathogen DNA/RNA, and thus much more abundant in the sample.
An increased non-host RNA quantity is achieved due to a higher RNA degradation rate in bacteria (Rauhut et al., 1999) and the presence of fragmented viral sequences (due to RNA interference) (Obbard et al., 2009) leading to prevalent bacterial and viral RNA at lower molecular weights.
Unambiguous mapping of short RNAs to the human genome is preferred to circumvent splicing events of longer transcripts, since the proportion of reads spanning splice junctions is minute.
This also increases our confidence in the unmapped reads being derived from non-human origin.
Finally, short RNA extraction excludes the highly abundant host RNA species (e.g rRNA and tRNA) that can potentially over-cloud non-short RNA experiments.
All infected tissue contains nucleic acids from both the host and the infecting agent.
It has been shown that mapping long sequence reads from a transcript sample against the human genome and analyzing the non-human reads has the potential of identifying non-human pathogen genes (Xu et al., 2003).
These transcript subtraction methods utilize thousands of long sequence reads (>200 nt), produced by standard Sanger sequencing or Roche 454 sequencer.
They were not, however, applied on reads shorter than 200 nt, like the ones produced by currently more common sequencing platforms, such as the Illumina Genome Analyzer or HiSeq 2000, that produce millions of short reads (<100 nt) in a single run (Voelkerding et al., 2009).
Methods utilizing short RNA sequencing and assembly were previously applied mainly for viral detection and classification in plants and invertebrates.
Kreuze et al.(2009) sequenced and assembled viral small RNA in sweet potato without the need for subtraction of the host-derived sequences.
However, this method would not suit mammalian samples, as skipping the subtraction step could result in excess of, or over-clouding by, host-derived reads (>90%).
Briese et al.(2009) selected larger RNA products (>70 bp) from clinical samples taken from human serum and tissue and, following assembly, they were able to detect and classify a new The Author(s) 2011.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[17:48 6/7/2011 Bioinformatics-btr349.tex] Page: 2028 20272030 O.Isakov et al.strain of infecting Arenavirus.
However, the majority of their viral sequences were obtained from the serum sample, where competing cellular abundant RNA species are absent.
This approach would likely reduce the pathogen-to-host-ratio in non-serum samples and as a consequence limit detection sensitivity.
Wu et al.(2010) applied an approach termed vdSAR to assemble previously sequenced small RNA libraries from invertebrates, in order to both demonstrate their sequence overlap, and to classify the infecting viral agents.
However, dealing with mammalian genomes and a large number of sequencing reads (>10 million) necessitates a host-based sequence subtraction step for increasing accuracy.
Thus, our approach is unique, as we utilize short RNA subtraction and assembly in mammalian-derived cells, to maximize pathogen-to-host-ratio; demonstrate recognition of both viral and bacterial infecting agents; and suggest a possible siRNA-related immune response.
Short sequence reads present a confounding problem of multiple organisms alignment (Trapnell et al., 2009a) and thus inconclusive identification of the organisms.
In order to identify the non-human sequences and target to which organism it aligns, we applied de novo sequencing (sequence assembly), using an assembly software [Velvet (Zerbino et al., 2008)] to produce longer consensus sequences from our given short read sample.
These longer assembled reads were then compared to known organisms
