            btr377.dvi [10:15 15/7/2011 Bioinformatics-btr377.tex] Page: 2314 23142315 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
27 no.
16 2011, pages 23142315doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr377 Systems biology Advance Access publication June 23, 2011 KEGGtranslator: visualizing and converting the KEGG PATHWAY database to various formats Clemens Wrzodek, Andreas Drger and Andreas Zell Center for Bioinformatics Tuebingen (ZBIT), University of Tuebingen, 72076 Tbingen, Germany Associate Editor: Trey Ideker ABSTRACT Summary: The KEGG PATHWAY database provides a widely used service for metabolic and nonmetabolic pathways.
It contains manually drawn pathway maps with information about the genes, reactions and relations contained therein.
To store these pathways, KEGG uses KGML, a proprietary XML-format.
Parsers and translators are needed to process the pathway maps for usage in other applications and algorithms.
We have developed KEGGtranslator, an easy-to-use stand-alone application that can visualize and convert KGML formatted XML-files into multiple output formats.
Unlike other translators, KEGGtranslator supports a plethora of output formats, is able to augment the information in translated documents (e.g.MIRIAM annotations) beyond the scope of the KGML document, and amends missing components to fragmentary reactions within the pathway to allow simulations on those.
Availability: KEGGtranslator is freely available as a Java Web Start application and for download at http://www.cogsys.cs.unituebingen.de/software/KEGGtranslator/.
KGML files can be downloaded from within the application.
Contact: clemens.wrzodek@uni-tuebingen.de Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on March 10, 2011; revised on May 24, 2011; accepted on June 19, 2011 1 INTRODUCTION Many academic researchers, who want to use pathway-based information, utilize the KEGG PATHWAY database (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000).
The database, established in 1995, contains manually created maps for various pathways.
These maps are visualized on the web and can be downloaded free of charge (for academics) as XML-files in the KEGG Markup Language (KGML).
The elements in a pathway XML-file (such as reactions or genes) are usually identified by a KEGG identifier only.
Thus, KEGG PATHWAY is strongly related to other KEGG databases that resolve and further describe the identifiers.
However, the content of these KGML-formatted XML-files itself is limited.
Gene names are often encoded as barely readable abbreviations and elements are only annotated by a single KEGG identifier.
By improving the annotation and translating the KGML-files to other file formats, researchers could use the KEGG database for many applications: individual pathway pictures could be created; pathway simulation To whom correspondence should be addressed.
and modeling applications could be executed; graph-operations on the pathways or stoichiometric analyses could be performed (see, e.g.Heinrich and Schuster, 2006, chapter 3); or the KEGG pathway database could be used for gene set enrichment analyses.
For these purposes, only a few converters are available: KEGGconverter (Moutselos et al., 2009) or KEGG2SBML (Funahashi et al., 2004) offer command-line or web-based conversion of KGML-files to SBML-files.
KEGGgraph (Zhang and Wiemann, 2009) is able to convert KGML-files to R-based graph structures.
None of these tools has a graphical user interface, is capable to validate and autocomplete KEGG reactions, adds standard identifiers (such as MIRIAM URNs) to pathway elements, or is able to write KGML files in multiple ouput formats.
Along with this work, the command-line toolbox SuBliMinaL (N.Swainston et al., submitted for publication) overcomes some of these limitations.
We here present KEGGtranslator, which reads and completes the content of an XML-file by retrieving online-annotation of all genes and reactions using the KEGG API.
KGML-files can be converted to many output formats.
Minor deficiencies are corrected (e.g.the name of a gene), new information is added (e.g.multiple MIRIAM identifiers for each gene and reaction (Novre et al., 2005), or SBO terms describing the function) and some crucial deficiencies (like missing reactants) are addressed.
2 TRANSLATION OF KGML-FILES In the first step of a translation, KEGGtranslator reads a given XMLfile and puts all contained elements into an internal data structure.
To get further information and annotation, the KEGG database is queried via the KEGG API for each element in the document (pathway, entries, reactions, relations, substrates, products, etc.).
This completes the sparse XML-document with comprehensive information.
For example, multiple synonyms and identifiers of many external databases (Ensembl, EntrezGene, UniProt, ChEBI, Gene Ontology, DrugBank, PDBeChem and many more) are being assigned to genes and other elements.
After this initial step, various preprocessing operations are performed on the pathway.
The user may choose to let KEGGtranslator correct various deficiencies automatically: Remove white nodesKEGG uses colors in the visualization of a pathway to annotate organism-specific orthologous genes.
Nodes in green represent biological entities that occur in the current organism.
Nodes in white represent biological entities, corresponding to genes that occur in this pathway in other species, but not in the current one.
Translating all those nodes into new models, without caring for the node color, would lead to a model, that contains invalid genes in the pathway.
Remove orphans isolated nodes without any reactions or relations are usually unnecessary for further simulations.
Autocomplete reactionsanother major deficiency are incomplete reactions.
The XML-files only contain those components of a reaction, that are needed for the graphical representation of the pathway.
Reactants that are not necessary for the visualization are usually skipped The Author(s) 2011.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[10:15 15/7/2011 Bioinformatics-btr377.tex] Page: 2315 23142315 KEGGtranslator in the KGML format.
Thus, the given chemical equation is sometimes incomplete (see Fig.1).
KEGGtranslator is able to lookup each reaction and amend the missing components to reactions.
This leads to more complete and functionally correct pathway models, which is very important, e.g.for stoichiometric simulations.
After these preprocessing steps, KEGGtranslator branches between two different conversion modes for the actual translation: a functional translation (SBML) and a graphical translation (e.g.GraphML, GML).
Depending on the chosen output format, KEGGtranslator determines how to continue with the conversion.
The functional translation is performed by converting the KGML document to a JSBML data structure (Drger et al., 2011).
The focus lies on generating valid and specification-conform SBML (Level 2 Version 4) code that eases, e.g.a dynamic simulation of the pathway.
Multiple MIRIAM URNs and an SBO term, which describes best the function of the element, is assigned to each entry of the pathway (pathway
