            [09:55 23/11/2011 Bioinformatics-btr573.tex] Page: 3306 33063312 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
27 no.
23 2011, pages 33063312doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr573 Data and text mining Advance Access publication October 13, 2011 Extraction of data deposition statements from the literature: a method for automatically tracking research results Aurlie Nvol, W. John Wilbur and Zhiyong Lu National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, Maryland, 20894 USA Associate Editor: Martin Bishop ABSTRACT Motivation: Research in the biomedical domain can have a major impact through open sharing of the data produced.
For this reason, it is important to be able to identify instances of data production and deposition for potential re-use.
Herein, we report on the automatic identification of data deposition statements in research articles.
Results: We apply machine learning algorithms to sentences extracted from full-text articles in PubMed Central in order to automatically determine whether a given article contains a data deposition statement, and retrieve the specific statements.
With an Support Vector Machine classifier using conditional random field determined deposition features, articles containing deposition statements are correctly identified with 81% F-measure.
An error analysis shows that almost half of the articles classified as containing a deposition statement by our method but not by the gold standard do indeed contain a deposition statement.
In addition, our system was used to process articles in PubMed Central, predicting that a total of 52 932 articles report data deposition, many of which are not currently included in the Secondary Source Identifier [si] field for MEDLINE citations.
Availability: All annotated datasets described in this study are freely available from the NLM/NCBI website at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Fellows/Neveol/DepositionDataSets.zip Contact: aurelie.neveol@nih.gov; john.wilbur@nih.gov; zhiyong.lu@nih.gov Supplementary Information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on July 22, 2011; revised on September 20, 2011; accepted on October 8, 2011 1 INTRODUCTION Research in the biomedical domain aims at furthering our knowledge of biological processes and improving human health.
Major contributions toward this goal can be achieved by sharing the results of research efforts with the community, including datasets produced in the course of the research work.
While such sharing behavior is encouraged by funding agencies and scientific journals, recent work has shown that the ratio of data sharing is still modest compared with actual data production.
For instance, Ochsner et al.(2008) found the deposition rate of microarray data to be <50% for work published in 2007.
Piwowar and Chapman (2007) show that data deposition results in increased citation of papers reporting on data production.
While this To whom correspondence should be addressed.
should serve as an incentive to deposit data and announce it to the community, in a more recent study these same authors (Piwowar and Chapman, 2010) show that data deposition is significantly associated with high-profile journals and experienced researchers.
In the course of this work, these authors have found the identification of data deposition statements to be a challenging task that can be addressed using natural language processing and machine learning methods (Piwowar and Chapman, 2008a).
Information about the declaration of data deposition in research papers can be used in different ways.
First, for data curation: databases such as MEDLINE use accession numbers for certain databases as metadata that can be searched with PubMed queries using the [si] field.
Journals can benefit from such a tool to check whether their data deposition policies are enforced.
This aspect is also important for researchers looking to re-use datasets and build on existing work.
Second, for the analysis of emerging research trends: the type of data produced gives indications on current important research topics.
In a study based on the analysis of Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) indexing, Moerchen et al.(2008) show that such metadata may be used to predict future research trends, including recommendations of main headings to be added to the MeSH thesaurus.
Our longterm research interest is in assessing the value of using deposition statements for predicting future trends of data production.
The initial step of automatically identifying deposition statements could then lead to an assessment of the need for storage space of incoming data in public repositories.
In this study, we aim at identifying articles containing statements reporting the deposition of biological data.
As explained above, the study of data deposition has generated a growing interest in the past few years.
In response to a Nature Methods editorial (Anonymous, 2008) describing the deposition of data such as genome sequence or microarrays as routine, Ochsner et al.(2008) used a manually built query to retrieve articles likely to report the production of microarray data in 2007 publications.
They manually analyzed 398 articles reporting the production of microarray data and concluded that only 50% report deposition of microarray data in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) or other databases.
Piwowar and Chapman (2008a) further studied the links existing between microarray data deposition in public repositories (e.g.GEO and ArrayExpress) and reports of data deposition in the literature.
They used machine learning to build a query suitable for retrieving research articles in PubMed Central reporting on data deposition.
Piwowar and Chapman (2008b) also addressed the classification of articles (at the article level) for data sharing in five databases (GenBank, Protein DataBank, GEO, ArrayExpress, Stanford Microarray Database).
The authors compared pattern matching versus machine learning.
The best results were obtained with a J48 decision tree on ArrayExpress (96% F-measure), The Author(s) 2011.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[09:55 23/11/2011 Bioinformatics-btr573.tex] Page: 3307 33063312 Extraction of data deposition statements although the corresponding dataset was rather small: 29 documents including 12 positive results.
Overall performance on the five databases was 69% F-measure.
Kim et al.(2010) compared Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Bayes classifiers for the identification of sentences containing database accession numbers.
This task was tailored to the specific need for curation of accession numbers in databases such as MEDLINE.
These authors discussed the errors linked to ambiguity of accession numbers with other reference numbers such as PMIDs.
However, they did not discuss or investigate the occurrence of accession numbers for purposes other than data deposition.
For instance, accession numbers can be given in sentences reporting the re-use of previously deposited data.
They can also be used in sentences discussing datasets that were produced separately from the context of the experiments reported in the article.
Finally, in an effort to bridge the gap between specific gene or genomic regions and related research articles, Haeussler et al.(2011) show that the extraction of short DNA sequences from full-text articles can be used to automatically map articles to GenBank entries without relying on mentions of gene names or accession numbers.
In our work, we propose to identify articles reporting data deposition through the classification of sentences.
The general topics of text classification and specifically sentence classification have been well studied in the past decade (Sebastiani, 2002).
In the biomedical domain, many tasks can be approached as a sentence classification problem.
Often, the small number of classes studied makes the problem amenable to the use of machine learning methods.
For instance, several efforts aiming at the retrieval of text passages as evidence for biological or clinical phenomena performed sentence classification.
Demner-Fushman et al.(2005) addressed the classification of MEDLINE abstract sentences between seven clinical outcome categories in order to automatically identify outcome-related information in the medical text.
They reported the precision of the top ranked sentence between 50% and 60% depending on category.
Kim et al.(2011) used the same dataset for classifying sentences for evidence-based medicine.
Their best performance for SVM classification was 81% F-measure obtained for the outcome category of sentences in structured abstracts.
Results for unstructured abstracts and other categories were less successful.
Polajnar et al.(2011) addressed the identification of MEDLINE abstract sentences denoting protein protein interaction as a binary classification problem.
Using SVM classifiers and protein annotations as features, they reported best F-measure performance of 70%.
While these efforts were limited to abstracts, other work used full-text articles.
In the BioCreative II challenge (Krallinger et al., 2008), the interaction sentences subtask required participants to retrieve passages of up to three consecutive full-text sentences providing evidence for protein protein interaction.
The best performing team obtained 20% precision when automatically extracted passages were compared with evidence sentences manually selected by curators.
These results reflect the difficulty of the task of extracting evidence statements from full-text articles.
2 MATERIAL AND METHODS In this study, we are interested in identifying statements declaring the deposition of biological data (such as microarray data, protein structure, gene sequences) in public repositories.
In the rest of this article, we will refer to such statements as deposition statements.
We take these statements as a primary method of identifying articles reporting on research that produced the kind of data deposited in public repositories.
(1) and (2) show examples of such statements, with varying degrees of specificity.
In (1) both the data and location are referred to in a highly specific manner [i.e.the sequence of labA and DDBJ/GenBank/EMBL databases (accession no AB281186)], whereas in (2) data and deposition location are both very general (the microarray data and MIAMExpress).
While the mention of data, public repositories and accession numbers are strong indicators of deposition statements, (3) and (4) show that these elements can also occur when authors refer to previous work.
In the remainder of this article, we will refer to statements that do not report the deposition of data in public repositoriessuch as (3) and (4) as non-deposition statements.
(1) The sequence of labA has been deposited in the DDBJ/GenBank/ EMBL databases (accession no AB281186) (PMID 17210789).
(2) The microarray data were submitted to MIAMExpress at the EMBLEBI (PMID 18535205).
(3) Histone TAG Arrays are a repurposing of a microarray design originally created to represent the TAG sequences in the Yeast Knockout collection (Yuan et al., 2005; NCBI GEO Accession Number GPL1444) (PMID 18805098).
(4) Therefore, the primary sequence of native Acinetobacter CMO is identical to the gene sequence for chnB deposited under accession number AB006902 (PMID 11352635).
Figure 1 gives an overview of the annotated datasets used in the training and test phases of this work.
The various datasets shown on Figure 1 are provided as Supplementary Material and are also freely available to the research community from the NLM/NCBI website.
The following sections describe details of the datasets and experiments.
In Section 2.1, we describe the method used to collect the training datasets, and the analysis of deposition sentences that we carried out in order to gain an understanding of the variety and common characteristics of these statements.
In Sections 2.2 and 2.3, we explain how the training datasets were used to automatically identify deposition elements and perform sentence classification.
Finally, in Section 2.4 we present the test set and in Section 2.5 we describe the experiments performed on the test set.
2.1 Training corpus collection and analysis Corpus collection: to gain a better understanding of the variety of deposition statements across data types, journals and databases, we compiled a corpus of deposition statements based on previous work by Piwowar and Chapman (2008a) and Ochsner et al.(2008) that we extended.
Specifically, 112 microarray deposition statements from 105 articles were obtained using the existing corpora.
After a manual review of these statements, two strategies were devised to collect additional statements.
Our regular expression strategy consisted in two steps.
First, the Ochsner et al.query1 was used to retrieve 2008 articles in PubMed Central.
Second, articles were segmented into sentences and sentences likely to report data deposition were retrieved if they met the three following criteria: (i) sentence length was between 50 and 500 characters to avoid section titles and sentence segmentation errors; (ii) sentence contained a mention of GEO 1 (microarray[All Fields] OR genome-wide[All Fields] OR microarrays[All Fields] OR expression profile[All Fields] OR expression profiles[All Fields] OR transcription profiling[All Fields] OR transcriptional profiling[All Fields]) AND (Endocrinology[jour] OR Mol Endocrinol[jour] OR J Biol Chem[jour] OR Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A[jour] OR Mol Cell Biol[jour] OR Nature[jour] OR Nat Med[jour] OR Nat Cell Biol[jour] OR Nat Genet[jour] OR Nat Struct Mol Biol[jour] OR Science[jour] OR Cancer Res[jour] OR FASEB J[jour] OR Cell[jour] OR Nat Methods[jour] OR Mol Cell[jour] OR J Immunol[jour] OR Immunity[jour] OR EMBO J[jour] OR Blood[jour]).
3307 [09:55 23/11/2011 Bioinformatics-btr573.tex] Page: 3308 33063312 A.Nvol et al.Fig.1.
Overview of annotated datasets used in this work.
or ArrayExpress, which are the largest databases for microarray data (Stokes et al., 2008) or a mention of a GEO or ArrayExpress accession number or the pattern [micro]?array data|experiment/analys|analyz; and (iii) sentence contained one deposition action seed from the following: deposit, found, submit, submission, available, access, uploaded, entered, posted, provided, assigned, archived.
After manual review, 133 of the 243 candidate sentences were added to the pool of deposition statements.
The remaining 110 sentences [such as (3) and (4)] were kept as examples of non-deposition statements, and used in our machine learning strategy to retrieve deposition statements for data other than microarray.
In the machine-learning strategy, we aimed at enriching our training corpus, as proposed by Yeganova et al.(2011).
A simple (i.e.only using sentence tokens as features) Nave Bayes (NB) model was built using the 243 microarray data deposition statements as positive examples and 33 000 sentences (the 110 above non-deposition statements, plus sentences from MEDLINE abstracts that contained the word deposit or deposited) used as negative examples.
In spite of our blanket assumption that the sentences extracted from MEDLINE abstracts were non-deposition statements, we did expect a small number of them to be actual deposition statements.
Our reasoning was that the proportion of true non-deposition statements would be high enough to train an efficient model; while applying the model on the set of so-called negatives, it would rank the deposition statements high enough to collect them and adjust our training sets.
By iterating on this method recursively, we finally obtained a training set of 586 positive or deposition statements (including the initial 243 microarray deposition statements) and 578 negative or non-deposition statements that scored high with the model (including the initial 110 non-deposition statements).
This set was used as training data for building NB and SVM data deposition models, and will be referred to as Train-D (Fig.1).
Analysis of deposition elements: to better characterize deposition statements, sentences were tagged for components referring to data, deposition action and deposition location using the following guidelines: Data: a phrase referring to biological data that can be found in public repositories.
Patient data and data relevant to ClinicalTrials.gov were not considered.
However, generic
