            Copyedited by: ES MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: ORIGINAL PAPER [19:02 25/2/2012 Bioinformatics-btr722.tex] Page: 831 831837 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
28 no.
6 2012, pages 831837doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr722 Genetics and population analysis Advance Access publication January 5, 2012 A method to infer positive selection from marker dynamics in an asexual population Christopher J. R. Illingworth and Ville Mustonen Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK Associate Editor: Martin Bishop ABSTRACT Motivation: The observation of positive selection acting on a mutant indicates that the corresponding mutation has some form of functional relevance.
Determining the fitness effects of mutations thus has relevance to many interesting biological questions.
One means of identifying beneficial mutations in an asexual population is to observe changes in the frequency of marked subsets of the population.
We here describe a method to estimate the establishment times and fitnesses of beneficial mutations from neutral marker frequency data.
Results: The method accurately reproduces complex marker frequency trajectories.
In simulations for which positive selection is close to 5% per generation, we obtain correlations upwards of 0.91 between correct and inferred haplotype establishment times.
Where mutation selection coefficients are exponentially distributed, the inferred distribution of haplotype fitnesses is close to being correct.
Applied to data from a bacterial evolution experiment, our method reproduces an observed correlation between evolvability and initial fitness defect.
Availability: A C++ implementation of the inference tool is available under GNU GPL license (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/ software/optimist/).
Contact: vm5@sanger.ac.uk Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on November 9, 2011; revised on December 15, 2011; accepted on December 28, 2011 1 INTRODUCTION The potential of a biological system to adapt to a given environment is a key characteristic, measurements of which shed light on a critical aspect of the process of evolution.
How adaptation takes place depends to a large extent on the distribution of the fitness effects of mutations (Eyre-Walker and Keightley, 2007; Orr, 2005).
Therefore, quantitative measurements of selection are biologically interesting and valuable.
Neutral markers provide one tool for identifying selection in experimental populations.
In an experimental population, markers allow for the easy identification of variants.
Selection pressures acting on marked populations can then be seen by changes in their relative frequencies (Atwood et al., 1951).
In initially isogenic, asexual populations, neutral markers have been used to characterize novel beneficial mutations (Imhof and Schlotterer, 2001; Rozen To whom correspondence should be addressed.
et al., 2002), and to study evolutionary processes such as clonal interference (Kao and Sherlock, 2008; Perfeito et al., 2007) and evolvability (Woods et al., 2011).
Where marked subpopulations have differing initial fitness, their relative fitnesses can be derived by considering the ratio between their Malthusian parameters (Lenski et al., 1991).
Where the initial population is isogenic, these growth rates are theoretically identical, but novel beneficial mutations lead to changes in the marker frequencies.
In a study of beneficial mutations arising in Escherichia coli, Hegreness et al.(2006) examined the log ratio between marker population frequencies.
For each set of observed marker frequencies, a deterministic curve, parameterized by a mutation time and a selection coefficient, was fitted.
Multiple simulations of populations were then generated, giving an estimate of a single beneficial mutation rate and selection coefficient fitting the set of observations as a whole.
While this characterization of multiple populations by single mutation and selection parameters provides a useful approach where clonal interference between mutations is severe, it is not applicable to all evolutionary scenarios (Barrett et al., 2006).
Under a very low beneficial mutation rate, where competition between clones is rare, mutations under a range of strengths of positive selection would be likely to fix.
Furthermore, in the application of this method, where only the first mutational event in an experiment is considered, frequencies at later time-points are discarded (Barrick et al., 2010).
Potentially valuable information on the evolution of the system is lost.
Here, we describe an alternative method that uses a maximum likelihood approach to infer selective effects and establishment times of mutants in an asexual population from individual marker frequency trajectories.
Our method enables the inference of fitness of multiple mutant haplotypes arising in an experiment, with no prior assumption of their distribution of fitness effects, while also allowing for the detection of standing variation in the initial pool.
We test our method against data generated from simulations using a range of evolutionary parameters, and against experimental results from a recent study of marker populations (Barrick et al., 2010).
2 METHODS We describe a marked experimental population in terms of haplotypes.
Mutations result in the emergence of new haplotypes, which we characterize by their marker, haplotype fitness, and time of establishment.
A formal mathematical description of the method is given below; a simpler, more qualitative guide is included in Supplementary Material.
Deterministic model of evolution We consider a deterministic representation of a system of NH haplotypes.
Where qa denotes the frequency of The Author(s) 2012.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
(http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/software/optimist/) vm5@sanger.ac.uk Copyedited by: ES MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: ORIGINAL PAPER [19:02 25/2/2012 Bioinformatics-btr722.tex] Page: 832 831837 C.J.R.Illingworth and V.Mustonen haplotype a, and fa denotes its Malthusian fitness parameter, the evolution of the system can be described via a set of differential equations: dqa/dt =qa ( fa aH fa qa ) (1) where the sum over existing haplotypes H gives the mean population fitness.
Equation (1) is a standard population genetics description of deterministic evolution of haplotypes under selection [see e.g.Hofbauer and Sigmund (1998)].
In order to allow for new mutations, we further define an establishment time ta of haplotype a.
For the set of initial haplotypes H0 ={a|ta =0}, the initial frequencies qa(0) are set in some manner such that aH0 qa(0)=1.
To represent mutations, we start a new haplotype at a population frequency q0 =1103, at the establishment time ta, rescaling the frequencies of other haplotypes accordingly.
This choice of initial frequency reflects the frequency required to escape from genetic drift, i.e.to become established [see e.g.Park et al.(2010) and
