            Copyedited by: ES MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: [10:45 29/5/2012 Bioinformatics-bts233.tex] Page: i90 i90i96 BIOINFORMATICS Vol.
28 ISMB 2012, pages i90i96doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts233 Ranking models of transmembrane-barrel proteins using Z-coordinate predictions Sikander Hayat and Arne Elofsson Center for Biomembrane Research, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm Bioinformatics Center, Science for Life Laboratory, Swedish E-science Research Center, Stockholm University, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden ABSTRACT Motivation: Transmembrane-barrels exist in the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria as well as in chloroplast and mitochondria.
They are often involved in transport processes and are promising antimicrobial drug targets.
Structures of only a few-barrel protein families are known.
Therefore, a method that could automatically generate such models would be valuable.
The symmetrical arrangement of the barrels suggests that an approach based on idealized geometries may be successful.
Results: Here, we present tobmodel; a method for generating 3D models of-barrel transmembrane proteins.
First, alternative topologies are obtained from the BOCTOPUS topology predictor.
Thereafter, several 3D models are constructed by using different angles of the-sheets.
Finally, the best model is selected based on agreement with a novel predictor, ZPRED3, which predicts the distance from the center of the membrane for each residue, i.e.the Z-coordinate.
The Z-coordinate prediction has an average error of 1.61.
Tobmodel predicts the correct topology for 75% of the proteins in the dataset which is a slight improvement over BOCTOPUS alone.
More importantly, however, tobmodel provides a C template with an average RMSD of 7.24 from the native structure.
Availability: Tobmodel is freely available as a web server at: http://tobmodel.cbr.su.se/.
The datasets used for training and evaluations are also available from this site.
Contact: arne@bioinfo.se 1 INTRODUCTION There are two classes of integral transmembrane membrane proteins,-helical proteins and-barrels.-helical transmembrane proteins constitute 2030% of a typical genome.
The transmembrane barrels, which are the focus of this article, are less abundant and only found in the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria, chloroplast and mitochondria.
Although less abundant, transmembrane barrels are known to play a crucial role in the transport over the membrane and, additionally, in pore formation.
They are also candidate targets for the development of antimicrobial drugs (Galdiero et al., 2007; Koebnik et al., 2000; Pajn et al., 2006; Schulz, 2002).
The experimental determination of the structure of transmembrane proteins is fraught with difficulties and, thus, computational methods are essential for identification and structural prediction.
In particular, such predictions can be used for further To whom correspondence should be addressed.
experimental investigations and might aid in elucidating the function of these proteins.
Given the symmetrical structure of-barrels it is possible to generate models directly from a theoretical description of a barrel (Chou et al., 1990; Murzin et al., 1994a,b).
Obviously, these structural models might provide insights into the interactions between residues.
Further, a 3D model can be used to design sitedirected mutagenesis experiments and can be used in the modeling of large membrane protein complexes, such as the TOM-complex of the mitochondrial outer membrane (Becker et al., 2012).
Many methods have been developed for the prediction of-barrel transmembrane protein topology (Bagos et al., 2004, 2005; Bigelow and Rost, 2006; Freeman and Wimley, 2010; Gromiha et al., 2004, 2005; Martelli et al., 2002; Mirus and Schleiff, 2005; Remmert et al., 2009; Singh et al., 2011; Wimley, 2002; Yan et al., 2011).
In addition, methods like partiFold (Waldisphl et al., 2008) and TMBpro (Randall et al., 2008) predict the inter-strand residue contacts.
However, to our knowledge only two methods predict a full 3D model, TMBpro (Randall et al., 2008) and 3D-SPoT (Naveed et al., 2012).
In fact, the latter requires the protein topology as input, so it is only TMBpro that provides the full sequence to structure prediction.
TMBpro is based on secondary structure predictions and prediction of residue contacts in potential transmembrane-barrels.
TMBpro uses templates derived from known transmembrane barrels and aligns the predicted secondary structure to one of the 18 predefined templates based on the number of predicted-strands.
However, as discussed by Naveed et al., template-based methods cannot be applied to novel folds, such as transmembrane-barrels with an odd number of-strands (Naveed et al., 2012).
3D-SPoT is based on optimizing hydrogen bonds and side chain interactions between adjacent-strands.
Three different types of bonds are taken into account; strong hydrogen bonds, weak hydrogen bonds and side chain interactions.
During optimization, adjacent-strands are shifted up and down to obtain the lowest energy arrangement (Naveed et al., 2012).
The final model is then built using an intertwined coil geometric model, where each-strand is represented by a coil wrapped around a hypothetical cylinder, and each coil is separately modeled.
Finally, main chain atoms are added to the C trace using an algorithm developed by Gront et al.(2007).
Here, we present tobmodela computational method for modeling of transmembrane-barrels.
The workflow of tobmodel is outlined in Figure 1.
As shown, first BOCTOPUS is used to generate a set of potential topologies for a given protein sequence (Hayat and Elofsson, 2012).
The second step is to generate a set of alternative 3D models using-barrels with idealized geometries for each topology.
Finally, to rank the models, we developed a novel The Author(s) 2012.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
arne@bioinfo.se Copyedited by: ES MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: [10:45 29/5/2012 Bioinformatics-bts233.tex] Page: i91 i90i96 Z-coordinate prediction Protein Sequence ZPRED3 BOCTOPUS Generate multiple alternate topologies Generate multiple C 3D models Obtain Z-coordiantes for residues in-strands Calculate Z-coordinate errors Top ranking C model Rank models Fig.1.
Tobmodel pipeline.
First, BOCTOPUS (Hayat and Elofsson, 2012) is used to generate topologies.
Thereafter, 3D C models are generated using the predicted topologies and different shear numbers.
Finally, ZPRED3 is used to predict the Z-coordinate of each residue, then the models are ranked based on the lowest Z-coordinate error Z-coordinatepredictor, ZPRED3.
The ranking is determined by the agreement between, on the one hand, the Z-coordinate predictions from ZPRED3 and, on the other, the Z-coordinates from the model.
Further, tobmodel provides better topologies than TMBpro, based on a 10-fold cross-validation test.
The quality of the final model generated by tobmodel is comparable to the final TMBpro model, while 3D-SPoT seems to generate better models.
2 METHODS 2.1 Training dataset The dataset contains 36 transmembrane-barrel proteins obtained from OPM (Lomize et al., 2006) with 30% sequence identity to each other.
All training was based on a strict 10-fold cross-validation.
Furthermore, to avoid homology bias all proteins belonging to the same OPM family were put together in the same cross-validation.
For comparison purposes all proteins in the datasets used in TMBpro and 3D-SPoT were also downloaded from OPM.
All datasets are available on the tobmodel web server.
2.2 Topology prediction using BOCTOPUS BOCTOPUS is a two-stage topology prediction method for transmembrane-barrels recently developed by Hayat et al.(Hayat and Elofsson, 2012).
The predictor consists of two stages that take the local and global p
