            Copyedited by: ES MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: [11:35 29/5/2012 Bioinformatics-bts236.tex] Page: i172 i172i178 BIOINFORMATICS Vol.
28 ISMB 2012, pages i172i178doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts236 Xenomea tool for classifying reads from xenograft samples Thomas Conway1,, Jeremy Wazny,1 Andrew Bromage,1 Martin Tymms,2 Dhanya Sooraj,2 Elizabeth D. Williams2 and Bryan Beresford-Smith1 1NICTA Victoria Research Laboratory, Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Parkville and 2Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash University, Clayton, Australia ABSTRACT Motivation: Shotgun sequence read data derived from xenograft material contains a mixture of reads arising from the host and reads arising from the graft.
Classifying the read mixture to separate the two allows for more precise analysis to be performed.
Results: We present a technique, with an associated tool Xenome, which performs fast, accurate and specific classification of xenograft-derived sequence read data.
We have evaluated it on RNA-Seq data from human, mouse and human-in-mouse xenograft datasets.
Availability: Xenome is available for non-commercial use fromContact: tom.conway@nicta.com.au 1 INTRODUCTION Xenograft models are an important tool for many areas of biomedical research, including oncology, immunology and HIV pathology.
A typical scenario, drawn from oncology research, is that of a human prostate cancer grown in an immunocompromised mouse model.
Doing so allows researchers to investigate aspects of the cancer that are not necessarily preserved in cell lines, and it allows investigations into the interactions between the cancer and the surrounding stromal tissue.
The mouse may be biopsied or harvested and samples of cancer and/or stroma collected at various time points during an experiment.
Difficulties arise, when sequencing the genome or transcriptome of the samples because host (mouse) material (i.e.DNA/RNA) will inevitably comingle with the graft (human) material.
If a sufficiently careful section is taken, it has been generally assumed that the level of host contamination is low enough that it may be ignored.
This may be a dangerous assumption, however, since the level of gene expression is non-uniform.
If the overall level of host contamination in a graft sample is measured to be 10% overall, it may still be the case for a given gene that the host homologue accounts for most or all of the expression.
Contamination may be minimized by physical or biochemical techniques such as conservative sectioning, cell sorting or laser capture micro-dissection, but these techniques can be a significant source of technical bias, or in some cases may require infeasibly large amounts of starting material.
Further, in the case of transcriptomic investigation, classifying host and graft in vitro may fail to adequately capture the interactions between them.
An alternative strategy is to sequence an acknowledged mixture of host and graft, then use in silico methods to classify the individual sequence reads.
This is the approach discussed here.
We demonstrate a simple technique, based on an analysis of sequence To whom correspondence should be addressed.
reads using Tophat, and a more precise technique based on a k-mer decomposition of the host and graft reference sequences, Xenome.
In both cases, the primary goal of the analysis is to classify reads into four classes: reads attributable to the host, reads attributable to the graft, reads which could be attributed to both and reads which are attributable to neither.
To the best of our knowledge, there are no results in the literature examining the classification of high-throughput sequencing short reads from xenograft models.
The studies we know of are concerned with microarray expression profiles or alternative methods for estimating the amount of host material or cell types in the samples.
For example, Lin et al.(2010) investigate the use of species-specific variation in gene length and a multiplex PCR to ascertain the relative amount of mouse and human DNA.
Wang et al.(2010) use microarray gene profiling data and in silico techniques to estimate the quantity of various tissue components.
In Samuels et al.(2010), there is an analysis of a mouse xenograft model using microarray data.
They conclude that if there is more than 90% human DNA then the expression profiles are not unduly skewed.
They also describe an experimental method for removing homologous genes based on cross-hybridization analysis of the probes.
Ding et al.(2010) use short read sequencing to study a cancer genome and identify mutations/deletions.
They estimate tumour cellularity using pathological assessment, and state that their xenograft is 90% tumour cells.
They also map NOD/SCID (mouse) genomic data to human and mouse genomes, reporting 3.17% and 95.85% mapping rates, respectively, and so apply no correction for the murine cells.
We note that in the context of non-uniform RNASeq data ignoring the contribution of the murine expression can lead to biases.
Tools such as Tophat serve a different purpose than that of Xenome.
The former aligns reads to a reference, and we can use those alignments for a variety of purposes, including the classification task we present here.
In contrast, Xenome only performs the classification task itself.
This is an important distinction, since an alignment must assign the read to zero or more positions in the genome; the classification merely has to decide if the read was more likely to arise from the genome than not.
For the remainder of the article, we will assume, unless otherwise stated, that sequence reads arise from RNA-Seq.
However, the techniques we present are applicable to genomic DNA sequences (including ChIP-Seq and MeDIP-Seq) and also to other mixtures of DNA species.
2 METHODS Under the assumption that a graft sample has only a low level of host material contamination, the simplest analysis is to use a regular mappingbased RNA-Seq analysis tool, such as Tophat and assume that either the observed expression is dominated by the graft, which has the greatest number The Author(s) 2012.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Copyedited by: ES MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: [11:35 29/5/2012 Bioinformatics-bts236.tex] Page: i173 i172i178 Xenome Fig.1.
A Venn diagram showing the different classes that a given k-mer may belong to.
The marginal host (and marginal graft) partitions are for those host (and graft) k-mers that are Hamming distance 1 from a k-mer in the graft (and host) reference of input cells, or that the homology between the host species and graft species is such that reads arising from host material will tend to map poorly, and the resultant inferred level of gene expression will be negligible.
In some cases, these assumptions may be true, but in the case of human cancer xenografts in mice, for example, the second assumption is false for many transcripts, and a more precise technique is desirable.
Therefore, we have developed two techniquesone based on the existing RNA-Seq resequencing tool Tophat (Trapnell et al., 2009), and one based on k-mer decompositions of the host and graft
