          OP-CBIO130216 361..370 Vol.
29 ISMB/ECCB 2013, pages i361i370 BIOINFORMATICS doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt215 Short read alignment with populations of genomes Lin Huangy, Victoria Popicy and Serafim Batzoglou* Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA ABSTRACT Summary: The increasing availability of high-throughput sequencing technologies has led to thousands of human genomes having been sequenced in the past years.
Efforts such as the 1000 Genomes Project further add to the availability of human genome variation data.
However, to date, there is no method that can map reads of a newly sequenced human genome to a large collection of genomes.
Instead, methods rely on aligning reads to a single reference genome.
This leads to inherent biases and lower accuracy.
To tackle this problem, a new alignment tool BWBBLE is introduced in this article.
We (i) introduce a new compressed representation of a collection of genomes, which explicitly tackles the genomic variation observed at every position, and (ii) design a new alignment algorithm based on the BurrowsWheeler transform that maps short reads from a newly sequenced genome to an arbitrary collection of two or more (up to millions of) genomes with high accuracy and no inherent bias to one specific genome.
Availability: http://viq854.github.com/bwbble.
Contact: serafim@cs.stanford.edu 1 INTRODUCTION Advancements in next-generation low-cost, high-throughput DNA sequencing technologies have made it possible to sequence a large number of human and other species genomes (Cherf et al., 2012; Stein, 2010).
Several large-scale sequencing efforts are under way, including the 1000 Genomes Project (The 1000 Genomes Project Consortium, 2010) and the International Cancer Genome Project (International Cancer Genome Consortium, 2013).
More than 2000 individuals have already been sequenced by the 1000 Genomes Project.
Although the next-generation sequencing technologies provide a vast amount of data samples for advancing genomic research, the everincreasing volume of genomic data has become a tremendous challenge on multiple fronts (Durbin, 2009; Fritz et al., 2011; Kozanitis et al., 2010).
One challenge is the alignment of the short DNA sequences (short reads) produced by these technologies to reference genomes, to discover the variation of a newly sequenced genome with respect to the previously sequenced human genomes.
Short read alignment is a common first step during genomic data analysis and plays a critical role in medical and population genetics.
Several efficient short-read alignment programs, such as BWA, SOAP2 and Bowtie (Langmead et al., 2009b; Li and Durbin, 2009; Li et al., 2009), have been developed in the past years (Li and Homer, 2010).
These methods use the Burrows Wheeler transform (BWT) (Burrows and Wheeler, 1994), which facilitates linear-time alignment to a large reference string (Ferragina and Manzini, 2000), such as a genome, and requires only a limited amount of memory (Hon et al., 2007; Nong et al., 2011).
These aligners typically precalculate the BWT (and some associated auxiliary structures) of a single reference genome and then map the newly sequenced reads to it using a variant of the BWT backwards search procedure.
Any observed differences from the chosen reference genome are treated as novel genomic variants or sequencing errors (e.g.Li and Durbin, 2009).
In light of the increasing availability of thousands of sequenced human genomes and databases of human genome variation, the requirement of these methods to use a single human reference genome leads to inherent biases towards the arbitrarily chosen reference.
Biased alignment output can be a hindrance to the in-depth and comprehensive understanding of the cancer genome (Lee et al., 2010; Roach et al., 2010), evolutionary history (Kumar et al., 2004), Mendelian diseases (Ng et al., 2010) and numerous other domain applications.
Beyond human, to date, millions of genomic variants have been observed in a wide variety of species and can serve as a valuable resource for alignment.
For example, many inbred mouse strains have been sequenced to characterize their genomic variation (Keane et al., 2011).
Two such mouse strains can have up to 20 million differences between them.
As a result, when they are crossed, their F1 offspring are heterozygous at all loci that differ between the parents.
Aligning reads from the F1 offspring to either parents genome using current alignment techniques will ignore this known heterozygosity and result in alignment bias towards the chosen reference strain.
This can make it difficult to perform an experiment like RNA-seq, which relies on high quality mappings.
The limitations of using conventional
