          OP-CBIO130222 44..52 Vol.
29 ISMB/ECCB 2013, pages i44i52 BIOINFORMATICS doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt227 A method for integrating and ranking the evidence for biochemical pathways by mining reactions from text Makoto Miwa1,*, Tomoko Ohta1, Rafal Rak1, Andrew Rowley1, Douglas B. Kell2, Sampo Pyysalo1 and Sophia Ananiadou1 1The National Centre for Text Mining (NaCTeM) and School of Computer Science and 2School of Chemistry and the Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, The University of Manchester, Manchester, M1 7DN, UK ABSTRACT Motivation: To create, verify and maintain pathway models, curators must discover and assess knowledge distributed over the vast body of biological literature.
Methods supporting these tasks must understand both the pathway model representations and the natural language in the literature.
These methods should identify and order documents by relevance to any given pathway reaction.
No existing system has addressed all aspects of this challenge.
Method: We present novel methods for associating pathway model reactions with relevant publications.
Our approach extracts the reactions directly from the models and then turns them into queries for three text mining-based MEDLINE literature search systems.
These queries are executed, and the resulting documents are combined and ranked according to their relevance to the reactions of interest.
We manually annotate document-reaction pairs with the relevance of the document to the reaction and use this annotation to study several ranking methods, using various heuristic and machine-learning approaches.
Results: Our evaluation shows that the annotated document-reaction pairs can be used to create a rule-based document ranking system, and that machine learning can be used to rank documents by their relevance to pathway reactions.
We find that a Support Vector Machine-based system outperforms several baselines and matches the performance of the rule-based system.
The success of the query extraction and ranking methods are used to update our existing pathway search system, PathText.
Availability: An online demonstration of PathText 2 and the annotated corpus are available for research purposes at http://www.nactem.ac.
uk/pathtext2/.
Contact: makoto.miwa@manchester.ac.uk Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION The scale and speed with which biological literature is published introduces multiple challenges for the creation, verification, maintenance and further development of formal, comprehensive and up-to-date models of the physical entities and reactions involved in biological systems (Ananiadou et al., 2006; Kitano, 2002).
Efforts to understand a complex biological system in detail need to incorporate knowledge that may be distributed over a large number of scientific publications from among the tens of millions available today.
To reduce the demands of discovering and integrating this knowledge, several text mining systems have been proposed (Park et al., 2001; Rajagopalan and Agarwal, 2005; Rzhetsky et al., 2004; Yao et al., 2004; Yuryev et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2009), which address many of the aspects of pathway curation.
However, despite the obvious potential that automatic analysis of the literature holds for assisting large-scale integration of biological knowledge, pathway curation efforts remain largely manual (Herrgard et al., 2008; Swainston et al., 2011; Thiele and Palsson, 2010), carried out with limited or no support from advanced text mining methods.
One way to try to remedy this situation is through the use of semantic search systems that make use of these methods.
However, there are several technical challenges to overcome, such as interfacing with such systems and integrating information from various systems in a coherent way, as well as the fact that few semantic search systems directly involve either the representations or the semantics (physical entity and reaction definitions) used in pathway model curation efforts.
To address these issues and support pathway curation, we have developed PathText 2, an integrated search system designed to link biological pathways with supporting knowledge in the vast body of literature.
Given a pathway model and a reaction, the system is able to find documents that are relevant to the given reaction from MEDLINE.
The literature search in PathText 2 is implemented by translating each reaction into a set of queries that are then executed using several semantic search systems.
The results of the queries are then combined, ranked and presented to the user in a unified user interface.
With these pathway-specific functions, i.e.the reaction-based retrieval of documents and ranking of unified documents by their relevance to pathway reactions, PathText 2 aims to reduce the number of documents curators need to focus on, thus increasing the productivity of pathway curation.
The documents retrieved by PathText 2 can help curators to maintain the textual evidence for reactions and to extend pathways by finding related reactions from the documents.
PathText 2 is designed to read formal pathway models represented in the Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) (Hucka et al., 2003) with CellDesigner (Funahashi et al., 2003) extensions.
SBML is a major standard format for pathway representation and interchange, and its use assures compatibility with a large ecosystem of existing pathway curation tools and resources.
CellDesigner extensions are essential for determining the correct participants in the reaction in our system; SBML itself does not define a fixed set of semantic types for its primitives but instead defines an extensionmechanism (e.g.Courtot et al., 2011), allowing such types to be defined (Le Novre et al., 2005).
PathText 2 is a comprehensive enhancement of a previously released system, PathText (Kemper et al., 2010).
PathText 2*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The Author 2013.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com extends the core functionality of PathText by combining the multiple results received for a single document from the various semantic search systems into a single result, introducing a new document ranking heuristic based on the relevance of the document to the given reaction, offering a new API allowing other systems to easily interface with the system and supporting a novel interface for human users to access the system.
Furthermore, we have updated the individual semantic search systems that are queried by PathText 2 and updated the generation of queries applicable to these systems.
This is done by implementing a query generation and expansion system based on reaction-event mapping (Ohta et al., 2011).
As we are trying to support improved automatic association between pathway models and documents, we have removed previous PathText functionality for the manual annotation and association of documents with pathways.
The improved query generation and ranking of the results should make this functionality obsolete, thus reducing the burden on curators.
We evaluate PathText 2 in detail on two corpora annotated by domain experts, both containing judgments on the relevance of various documents to specific pathway model reactions.
The evaluation shows that use of PathText 2 substantially improves on PubMed search for discovering relevant documents, that the annotations can support the development of heuristics for document ranking and that the task of determining documentreaction relevance is feasible using machine learning methods.
2 PATHTEXT 2 ARCHITECTURE The overall architecture of PathText 2 is illustrated in Figure 1.
PathText 2 currently supports SBML, which is the primary format used for major pathway repositories such as BioModels (Novere et al., 2006) and has been characterized as the most successful standard model exchange format for encoding pathway models (Li et al., 2010).
PathText 2 specifies reaction semantics using the CellDesigner (Funahashi et al., 2003) types in SBML.
CellDesigner is a popular tool for pathway model curation, and the SBML models in major resources such as PANTHER DB (Mi et al., 2007) contain CellDesigner types.
We discuss generalization from SBML/CellDesigner to other representations in Section 5.
PathText 2 interprets the SMBL models and uses the information to interact with various semantic search systems (see Section 2.1).
To interact with these systems, PathText 2 contains query generation modules, which translate a given pathway reaction from the model into a set of queries formatted for use with each of the search systems (Section 2.2).
In response to these queries, each system returns a set of documents; these result sets are merged (so that each document only occurs once), ranked and returned back to the user.
The user interface is covered in Section 2.3.
2.1 Text mining-based semantic search systems PathText 2 integrates three state-of-the-art text mining-based semantic search systems: FACTA (Tsuruoka et al., 2011), KLEIO (Nobata et al., 2008) and MEDIE (Miyao et al., 2006).
Each of these systems is presented briefly later in the text; we refer readers to the publications introducing the systems for detailed descriptions.
FACTA, an extension of the FACTA system, provides realtime search of direct and indirect associations between biological concepts in MEDLINE abstracts as well as abstracts discussing these concepts.
FACTA indexes concepts from the abstracts including genes, proteins, diseases, symptoms, drugs, enzymes and simple chemical compounds, identified using biological databases and thesauri such as UniProt, BioThesaurus, Unified Medical Language System (UMLS), KEGG and DrugBank.
The user interacts with the system by issuing queries in the form of a word, a concept identifier or any Boolean combination of words and/or identifiers.
The web-based user interface shows the results grouped by concepts and ranked according to a choice of co-occurrence statistics (frequency, pointwise mutual information or symmetric conditional probability).
FACTA additionally includes an indirect search function, which can find an association between a query and a target concept via another concept even if the query and target never co-occur in any publication.
KLEIO is a semantic search system for MEDLINE.
It incorporates methods for acronym recognition and disambiguation (Okazaki and Ananiadou, 2006; Okazaki et al., 2010), term normalization (Tsuruoka et al., 2007), gene/protein name recognition (Okanohara et al., 2006) and species recognition and gene/ protein species disambiguation (Wang et al., 2010) to improve and expand standard literature querying with semantic categories and faceted search.
This allows the user to limit the results by specifying semantic categories to which the query words belong (e.g.PROTEIN:hedgehog would find occurrences of the hedgehog protein, as opposed to the animal of the same name).
The retrieved MEDLINE abstracts are annotated with biological concepts including genes, proteins, metabolites, bacteria, organs, symptoms, diseases and species.
The recognized proteins and genes are additionally augmented by automatically disambiguated species information.
MEDIE is a search engine that can be used to query MEDLINE abstracts based on named entity recognition and normalized syntactic structures produced by deep parsing.
The indexing component is supported by the automatic entity taggers NEMine (Sasaki et al., 2008) and NERsuite (http://nersuite.
nlplab.org) and the deep parser Enju (Miyao and Tsujii, 2008), which abstracts over syntactic variability by analysing text in terms of predicate-argument structures.
MEDIE can search for documents on the basis of subject-verb-object (SVO) triplesFig.1.
Illustration of PathText 2 architecture i45 Integrating the evidence for pathways from text expressing associations between entities.
SVO searches are expressed in terms of three fields: the subject, verb and object.
Any of these fields can be left empty, in which case the search engine will ignore that field, thus allowing for queries such as what causes cancer, by leaving the subject blank, setting the verb to cause and the object to cancer.
Analyses from the event extraction system EventMine (Miwa et al., 2012) were also recently incorporated into the MEDIE index.
This system produces events, which are typed n-ary associations that involve an event trigger (usually a verb signifying an action, such as induce) and a set of participants identified as playing specific roles in the event (e.g.Theme, Cause).
Event participants may be either named entities, such as proteins and genes, or other events (Ananiadou et al., 2010).
Figure 2 provides an illustration of an event structure.
To allow for the querying of arbitrary event structures, a new event-based search interface was added to MEDIE, alongside the existing SVO-based interface.
This interface also supports queries in which only a portion of an event structure has been specified.
In addition to a web-based user interface, each of the systems described additionally exposes a web service interface that can be used to access the systems programmatically.
These web services are used by PathText 2 when executing queries.
The use of these web service calls makes it relatively easy to extend the system to use other semantic search systems as they become available.
The only requirement would be to write a module to interface between PathText 2 and the new system.
2.2 Query generation For each semantic search system, PathText 2 provides a query generation module that understands the capabilities of the system and implements a mapping between the semantics of the source pathway model and those applied in the semantic search system.
To realize these modules, a set of query generation rules was constructed based on the reaction-eventmapping identified in our previous study (Ohta et al., 2011).
Table 1 illustrates some of these mappings.
As an example, consider that pathway representations in models typically explicitly identify all reaction participants, such as the gene andmRNA entities inTranscription reactions.
However, not all such elements need to be stated in text, where expressions such as transcription of p53 can (implicitly) identify both DNA and mRNA entities.
The text-oriented event representation thus only requires a single Theme entity for transcription events.
Mapping Transcription reaction reactants to the Theme participants of events permits comparable interpretation.
The queries are generated from a given reaction by applying a series of rules; these use information such as the reaction type, reactants, products, modification type and modifiers, as well as the states of the reactants and products.
The full set of detailed query generation rules and query specifications are provided in the Supplementary Information.
PathText 2 includes the following modules: Query generation for FACTA: Depending on the reaction type, the FACTA query terms are made up of a conjunction of a subset of the reactants, products and modifiers of the reaction.
The query may not contain all of these items, as, depending on the type of reaction being described, the text may not be expected to contain all of the details of the reaction.
For example, CellDesigner degradation reactions have products of the type degraded, which is not expected to appear in text.
When a reaction does not match any of the known types, the FACTA query consists of the conjunction of all of the reactants and products of the reaction.
Query generation for KLEIO: As with FACTA, the KLEIO query terms are made up of a conjunction of a subset of the reactants, products and modifiers for a reaction depending on the reaction type, but with the addition of KLEIOs semantic types (PROTEIN, DISEASE, METABOLITE, etc.)
to identify the correct semantic type for each query term.
A mapping is provided between the species types present in the pathway models and these semantic types; for example, a pathway model species with name p53 and the SBML/CellDesigner type celldesigner:protein is mapped to produce the KLEIO query term PROTEIN:p53.
Types for which no correspondence is defined in the KLEIO type system are mapped to basic keyword queries, similar to those generated for FACTA.
As with FACTA, where the reaction type does not match the known Table 1.
Top-level correspondences for reaction-event mapping Pathway reaction Event representation Type Participant Type Arguments Truncation Reactant, Product Catabolism Theme:Reactant Transcription Reactant, Product Transcription, Gene_expression Theme:Reactant Translation Reactant, Product Translation, Gene_expression Theme:Reactant Heterodimer association Reactant:Biomolecule, Product:Complex Binding Theme:Reactant Dissociation Reactant:Complex, Product:Biomolecule Dissociation Transport Reactant:Biomolecule, from/to:Compartment Localization Theme:Reactant, atLoc/toLoc:from/to Degradation/Truncation Reactant:Biomolecule Catabolism Theme:Reactant Fig.2.
Illustration of event representation i46 M.Miwa et al.type, the query will consist of the conjunction of all of the products and reactants of the reaction.
Query generation for MEDIE: The system generates queries for both SVO and event-structure modules.
SVO queries are generated from the mapping shown in Table 1 as follows: the Cause argument in the event representation, when present, is used as the subject, the most frequent verb for each reaction type as annotated in the GENIA corpus (Kim et al., 2008) is used as the verb and the Theme argument is used as the object.
In addition, specific rules are applied to a few reaction types.
For example, the most frequent verb of the event Localization is localize, which only takes a subject; therefore, the Theme argument is mapped to the subject, and atLoc and toLoc, specific to this reaction type, are added as keywords.
MEDIE event-structure queries are generated directly following the event-reaction mapping provided in Table 1.
Query Expansion for MEDIE Event Query: MEDIE event queries can optionally be expanded using two complementary approaches: entity expansion and event expansion.
Entity expansion performs a rule-based semantic decomposition of the entities participating in the reaction, e.g.Mink1/2 will become Mink1 and Mink2.
Event expansion introduces additional queries that are combinatorial variants of the unexpanded form, e.g.a query for a Binding event with n Theme arguments will be augmented with additional queries for Binding events with 1 to n 1 Theme arguments.
2.3 User interface and programmatic access PathText 2 offers a web-based user interface and a web service API for programmatic access.
Both offer the same functionality for searching the literature for a given reaction in a provided pathway model.
They take as input an SMBL/CellDesigner model in XML format and a reaction ID that identifies the reaction of interest in the model and return a list of ranked
