          OP-CBIO130217 117..125 Vol.
29 ISMB/ECCB 2013, pages i117i125 BIOINFORMATICS doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt221 Stability selection for regression-based models of transcription factorDNA binding specificity Fantine Mordelet1, John Horton1, Alexander J. Hartemink1,2,3, Barbara E. Engelhardt1,3,4 and Raluca Gordan1,2,4,5,* 1Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, 2Department of Computer Science, 3Department of Statistical Science, 4Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics and 5Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA ABSTRACT Motivation: The DNA binding specificity of a transcription factor (TF) is typically represented using a position weight matrix model, which implicitly assumes that individual bases in a TF binding site contribute independently to the binding affinity, an assumption that does not always hold.
For this reason, more complex models of binding specificity have been developed.
However, these models have their own caveats: they typically have a large number of parameters, which makes them hard to learn and interpret.
Results: We propose novel regression-based models of TFDNA binding specificity, trained using high resolution in vitro data from custom protein-binding microarray (PBM) experiments.
Our PBMs are specifically designed to cover a large number of putative DNA binding sites for the TFs of interest (yeast TFs Cbf1 and Tye7, and human TFs c-Myc, Max and Mad2) in their native genomic context.
These high-throughput quantitative data are well suited for training complex models that take into account not only independent contributions from individual bases, but also contributions from di-and trinucleotides at various positions within or near the binding sites.
To ensure that our models remain interpretable, we use feature selection to identify a small number of sequence features that accurately predict TFDNA binding specificity.
To further illustrate the accuracy of our regression models, we show that even in the case of paralogous TF with highly similar position weight matrices, our new models can distinguish the specificities of individual factors.
Thus, our work represents an important step toward better sequence-based models of individual TFDNA binding specificity.
Availability: Our code is available at http://genome.duke.edu/labs/ gordan/ISMB2013.
The PBM data used in this article are available in the Gene Expression Omnibus under accession number GSE47026.
Contact: raluca.gordan@duke.edu 1 INTRODUCTION At the level of transcription, gene expression is regulated mainly via the binding of transcription factors (TFs) to specific short DNA sites in the promoters or enhancers of genes they regulate.
Accurate characterization of the DNA binding specificity of TFs is critical to understand how these proteins achieve their regulatory purpose in the cell.
Currently, the most widely used model for representing the DNA binding specificity of a TF is the position weight matrix (PWM, or DNA motif) (Staden, 1984; Stormo, 2000), a matrix containing scores (or weights) for each nucleotide at every position in the TF binding site.
PWMs can perform well in practice: these models have been combined with chromatin accessibility data to successfully predict where specific TFs bind across the genome in a cell-specific way (Kaplan et al., 2011; Pique-Regi et al., 2011).
However, PWM models make the assumption that individual bases in a TF binding site contribute independently and additively to the affinity of that site, which is not always true in practice.
Dependencies among positions within TF binding sites have been observed in small-scale experimental studies (Bulyk et al., 2002; Jauch et al., 2012; Man and Stormo, 2001), in statistical analyses of known TF binding sites (Tomovic and Oakeley, 2007; Zhou and Liu, 2004), and in computational analyses of high-throughput in vitro and in vivo TF binding data (Badis et al., 2009; Berger et al., 2006; Jolma et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2012).
This suggests that extending the classic definition of a PWMmay lead to specificity models that better fit the TF binding data.
Indeed, several studies have explored more complex models of TFDNA binding specificity and found that they outperform PWMs (Barash et al., 2003; Siddharthan, 2010).
However, complex models are typically characterized by a large number of parameters, which makes them hard to interpret (Agius et al., 2010; Annala et al., 2011) and prone to overfitting (Zhou andLiu, 2004).
Here, we present regression-based models of TFDNA binding specificity, which take into account both the contributions from individual bases in a TF binding site and the contributions from higher-order k-mers.
Our approach differs from previous work in three aspects: (i) our models are trained on high-throughput quantitative data generated specifically for this task; (ii) we use a new feature selection method based on LASSO regression (Bach, 2008; Meinshausen and Buhlmann, 2010; Tibshirani, 1996) to restrict the number of features, which makes our models easier to visualize and interpret; and (iii) we include dependencies by using 2-mers and 3-mers as features and by using a non-linear support vector regression (SVR) method.
The first aspect is important because many previous models were trained either on a small number of high-resolution binding regions (Barash et al., 2003; Zhou and Liu, 2004) or on high-throughput in vivo data (Sharon et al., 2008; Siddharthan, 2010), both of which are noisy, have low resolution and may reflect both direct and indirect DNA binding of the tested TFs (Gordan et al., 2009).
In vitro data from high-throughput assayssuch as protein binding microarrays (PBMs) (Berger et al., 2006), MITOMI (Maerkl and Quake, 2007) or highthroughput SELEX (Jolma et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2009)are more appropriate for learning complex models of TFDNA binding specificity (Agius et al., 2010; Annala et al., 2011;*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The Author 2013.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com Weirauch et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2009).
Here, we use the PBM technology to generate custom data on the binding specificities of the TFs of interest.
Our microarray designs contain hundreds or thousands of genomic DNA regions centered at putative DNA binding sites for the TFs of interest (see Section 2 for details).
The features used in our regression models are based on the occurrences of 1-mers, 2-mers and 3-mers at various positions in the TF binding sites or their flanking regions.
Regression models that take into account all k-mers have hundreds or thousands of parameters, dependingon the value ofk andon the size of the flanking regions.
Such a large number of parameters can lead to overfitting the training data and also make the models hard to visualize and interpret.
To overcome this problem, we use a feature selection approach based on LASSO regression (Bach, 2008; Haury et al., 2012; Meinshausen and Buhlmann, 2010; Tibshirani, 1996).
This allows us to drastically reduce the number of parameters to estimate while maintaining high prediction accuracy.
To illustrate the accuracy of our regressionmodels, we train and test themoncustomPBMdata for fiveTFs fromthebHLHprotein family: yeast TFs Cbf1 and Tye7, and human TFs c-Myc (Myc), Max andMad2 (Mad).
We show that for both yeast and human bHLH TFs, our regression models can distinguish the binding specificities of individual family members, although their PWMs (Fig.1) arehighly similar.This illustrates thatourapproachmaybe used to better understand the importance of intrinsic sequence p
