          OP-CBIO130577 3232..3234 Vol.
29 no.
24 2013, pages 32323234 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt562 Systems biology Advance Access publication September 26, 2013 INVEXa web-based tool for integrative visualization of expression data Jianguo Xia1,2, Ngan H. Lyle1,2, Matthew L. Mayer1,2, Olga M. Pena1,2 and Robert E. W. Hancock1,2,3,* 1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada V6T 1Z3, 2Centre for Microbial Diseases and Immunity Research, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada V6T 1Z4 and 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK Associate Editor: Michael Brudno ABSTRACT Summary: Gene expression or metabolomics data generated from clinical settings are often associated with multiple metadata (i.e.diagnosis, genotype, gender, etc.).
It is of great interest to analyze and to visualize the data in these contexts.
Here, we introduce INVEXa novel web-based tool that integrates the server-side capabilities for data analysis with the browse-based technology for data visualization.
INVEX has two key features: (i) flexible differential expression analysis for a wide variety of experimental designs; and (ii) interactive visualization within the context of metadata and biological annotations.
INVEX has built-in support for gene/metabolite annotation and a fully functional heatmap builder.
Availability and implementation: Freely available at http://www.invex.ca.
Contact: bob@hancocklab.ubc.ca Received on July 22, 2013; revised on September 13, 2013; accepted on September 20, 2013 1 INTRODUCTION Omics technologies such as microarrays, next-generation sequencing and metabolomics are increasingly used in clinical studies.
In many cases, a single dataset will be associated with multiple clinical parameters (metadata) such as diagnosis, genotype, gender and so forth.
It is of great interest to analyze and to visualize the data within these contexts as well as biological annotations to enable one to capture dynamic changes that correlate with clinical factors.
Linear models have proven to be a powerful and flexible approach for analysis of gene expression experiments (Smyth, 2005).
However, users need to have a deep understanding of statistical concepts and R language to use this approach properly.
Heatmaps have proven to be useful in visualizing expression data.
Heatmaps coupled with clustering have become hallmarks for the presentation of gene expression data.
However, most web-based tools provide only static images with limited support for user interactions.
Interactive visualization is mostly limited to stand-alone tools or Java applet plugin (Pavlidis and Noble, 2003; Perez-Llamas and Lopez-Bigas, 2011; Reich et al., 2006; Saeed et al., 2003; Saldanha, 2004).
The rapid development of information technology, especially HTML5 and JavaScript, has presented new opportunities to overcome this limitation (Miller et al., 2013; Tan et al., 2013).
Here, we present INVEX (Integrative Visualization of Expression data)an intuitive web-based tool that seamlessly integrates server-side capabilities for data analysis and annotation with the browse-based technology for data visualization.
INVEX allows researchers to perform flexible data analysis and to visually explore the results as interactive heatmaps within the context of associated metadata and biological annotations.
2 IMPLEMENTATION INVEX is composed of two modules.
The server-side module was implemented using the latest JavaServer Faces 2.0 technology.
The data analysis was based on R and several packages from Bioconductor (Gentleman et al., 2004).
The client-side module was developed based on the HTML5 canvas and JavaScript using the jQuery library (www.jquery.com).
INVEX has been tested using Google Chrome (5.0), Firefox (3.0) and Internet Explorer (9.0) browsers.
The performance of visualization depends on the users computer.
We recommend accessing INVEX from a computer with at least a 15-inch screen and 2 GB memory.
3 APPLICATION EXAMPLE INVEX provides four example datasets each associated with multiple metadatathree gene expression datasets (Estrogen, Sepsis and TimeSeries) and one metabolomics data (Cachexia).
Here, we illustrate the main features of INVEX using the Sepsis dataset.
3.1 Data upload, annotation and analysis INVEX accepts an expression data table annotated with various metadata.
The data can be uploaded as a tab-delimited text (.txt) or in its compressed format (.zip) (see INVEX Help page for detailed instructions).
Click the Start menu on the home page to enter the analysis page.
To access our test datasets, click the Try Examples button on the bottom left.
The four datasets are listed with detailed descriptions.
The Sepsis data were generated from a study comparing gene expression changes from Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation to endotoxin tolerance in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The Author 2013.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com as well as very )-www.jquery.com ,-s as (PBMC) from four donors (Pena et al., 2011).
There are three experimental conditions: control, LPS (pro-inflammatory) and LPS_LPS indicating two doses of LPS treatments within a day (leading to endotoxin tolerance).
Thus, there are two types of metadata: Treatment and Donor.
Select the Sepsis data and click Yes to upload the file.
For the convenience of testing, INVEX sets the default parameters for the remaining stepsannotation, normalization, differential expression and enrichment analysis.
Click Submit to proceed in the first two steps.
For differential analysis, INVEX can deal with two-or multiple-group, paired or block design, time-series, common-control and nested-comparisons.
Here, it is particularly interesting to compare genes that respond differently between the two treatments.
To perform such analyses, we choose nested comparisons between control vs. LPS and control vs. LPS_LPS, and select Interactions only.
The analysis returns 1791 significant genes, which is reduced to 251 after setting log2 fold change cutoff to 1.0 (2-fold change in expression).
Use Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) for enrichment analysis.
Finally, click Proceed to visualization to enter the visualization page.
3.2 Visual data exploration A screenshot of the visualization page is shown in Figure 1.
There are four viewsOverview, Focus view, Annotation view and Heatmap builder, with a top toolbar containing menus for adjusting resolution, colors, clustering and so forth.
The Overview on the left provides a birds-eye view of the expression profile of all significant genes (Fig.1A).
By default, genes are ordered by their adjusted P-values.
Select Euclidean distance to cluster genes for pattern discovery.
Users can drag to select any region of interest for detailed inspection in the Focus view.
The Focus view in the center shows the gene expression profiles of current interest with three adjustable resolutions (Fig.1B).
The metadata, sample IDs and color keys are displayed on the top and bottom panels, respectively.
Double click the Treatment metadata row to sort all samples accordingly.
On the right side, the Overall Enriched Themes pane shows enriched pathways, P-values and matched gene numbers (Fig.1C).
Double click the name of the top hit cytokinecytokine receptor interaction to visualize the expression profiles of its 22 genes.
The Enriched Themes in Current Focus bar allows users to identify enriched functional modules for genes in Focus view.
3.3 Building custom heatmaps Click the Heatmap builder from the top toolbar to activate the Heatmap builder (Fig.1D).
This pane is a playground that allows users to easily create custom heatmaps to reveal specific features.
Users can now double click to select a single gene or drag to select multiple genes from Focus view toHeatmap builder.
Within the builder, users can double click to delete or drag to reorganize a row.
Separators (blank rows) can be added and then dragged to specific positions to create visual cluster boundaries.
When all genes of interest are included and organized, users can edit samples using the Edit samples option.
Finally, all heatmaps can be exported as portable network graphics (PNG) images labeled with metadata, sample IDs and color keys by using the Download function from the top toolbar.
4 CONCLUSIONS In the context of integrative analysis of expression data from clinical studies, there are two general scenarios: multiple expression datasets collected for the same disease or multiple metadata collected for a single dataset.
We have recently developed INMEX, a tool to support data analysis in the former scenario (Xia et al., 2013).
In this article, we introduce INVEX that has been designed for the latter scenario.
By coupling the conventional server-side functions for data analysis and annotation with the client-side visualization technologies, INVEX provides a promising approach for developing efficient bioinformatics tool in the omics era.
Funding: Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR).
J. Xia was supported by a CIHR Postdoctoral Fellowship and Killam Postdoctoral Research Fellowship.
R.E.W.H.
holds a Canada Research Chair.
The charge for open access fee was covered by UBC Killam Advanced Studies Fund.
Conflict of Interest: none declared.
Fig.1.
Visual data exploration using INVEX.
(A) Overview, (B) Focus view, (C) Annotation view and (D) Heatmap builder 3233 INVEX Integrative data visualization ,-, , two-, etc p p ; paper
