ABSTRACT Summary: The Type II clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/Cas system is an adaptive immune response in prokaryotes, protecting host cells against invading phages or plasmids by cleaving these foreign DNA species in a targeted manner.
CRISPR/Cas-derived RNA-guided engineered nucleases (RGENs) enable genome editing in cultured cells, animals and plants, but are limited by off-target mutations.
Here, we present a novel algorithm termed Cas-OFFinder that searches for potential offtarget sites in a given genome or user-defined sequences.
Unlike other algorithms currently available for identification of RGEN off-target sites, Cas-OFFinder is not limited by the number of mismatches and allows variations in protospacer-adjacent motif sequences recognized by Cas9, the essential protein component in RGENs.
Cas-OFFinder is available as a command-line program or accessible via our website.
Availability and implementation: Cas-OFFinder free access at Contact: baesau@snu.ac.kr or jskim01@snu.ac.kr Received on November 13, 2013; revised on December 27, 2013; accepted on January 21, 2014 1 INTRODUCTION Genome editing with engineered nucleases is broadly useful for biomedical research, biotechnology and medicine.
Engineered nucleases cleave chromosomal DNA in a targeted manner, and the repair of the resulting double-strand breaks by endogenous systems gives rise to targeted genome modifications in cultured cells, animals and plants.
We and others have developed three different types of engineered nucleases: zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) (Bibikova et al., 2003; Kim et al., 2009), transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) (Kim et al., 2013; Miller et al., 2011) and RNA-guided engineered nucleases (RGENs) (Cho et al., 2013; Cong et al., 2013; Jinek et al., 2013; Mali et al., 2013) derived from the Type II clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)/CRISPRassociated (Cas) system, an adaptive immune response in bacteria and archaea.
Unlike ZFNs and TALENs whose DNA specificities are determined by DNA-binding proteins, RGENs use complementary base pairing to recognize target sites.
RGENs consist of (i) dual RNA components comprising sequence-invariant tracrRNA and sequence-variable guide RNA termed crRNA [or single-chain guide RNA (sgRNA) constructed by linking essential portions of tracrRNA and crRNA (Jinek et al., 2012)] and (ii) a fixed protein component, Cas9, that recognizes the protospacer-adjacent motif (PAM) downstream of target DNA sequences corresponding to guide RNA.
Custom-designed RGENs are produced simply by replacing guide RNAs, making this system easy to access.
Unfortunately, RGENs cleave not only on-target sites but also off-target sites that differ by up to several nucleotides from the on-target sites (Cho et al., 2014; Fu et al., 2013; Hsu et al., 2013), causing unwanted off-target mutations and chromosomal rearrangements.
These undesired off-target effects raise significant concerns for using RGENs as genome editing tools in diverse applications.
To address this issue, researchers must be able to search for potential off-target sites in the genome.
Sequence alignment tools such as TagScan (Cradick et al., 2011; Iseli et al., 2007), Bowtie (Langmead et al., 2009) or GPGPU-enabled CUSHAW (Liu et al., 2012) can be used to find potential offtarget sites, but are limited by the number of mismatched bases allowed and a requirement for a fixed PAM sequence.
Here we introduce a fast and highly versatile off-target searching tool, Cas-OFFinder.
Importantly, Cas-OFFinder is written in OpenCL, an open standard language for parallel programming in heterogeneous environments, enabling operation in diverse platforms such as central processing units (CPUs), graphics processing units (GPUs) and digital signal processors (DSPs).
2 METHODS 2.1 Concept of Cas-OFFinder Versions of Cas9 derived from three different species have been exploited to edit genes in human cells.
These Cas9 proteins recognize different PAM sequences.
Cas9 originated from Streptococcus pyogenes (SpCas9) recognizes 50-NGG-30 PAM sequences and, to a lesser extent, 50-NAG-30.
Cas9 from Streptococcus thermophilus (StCas9) (Cong et al., 2013) and that from Neisseria meningitidis (NmCas9) (Hou et al., 2013) recognizes 50-NNAGAAW-30 (WA or T) and 50-NNNNGMTT-30 (MA or C), respectively.
The degeneracy in PAM recognition by Cas9 must be accounted for when searching for potential off-target sites.
In the case of SpCas9, Cas-OFFinder first compiles all the 23-bp DNA sequences composed of 20-bp sequences corresponding to the sgRNA sequence of interest and the 50-NRG-30 PAM sequences (Fig.1A).
Cas-OFFinder then compares all the compiled sequences with the query sequence and counts the number of mismatched bases in the 20-bp sgRNA sequence.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors.
The Author 2014.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com 2.2 Workflow of Cas-OFFinder Cas-OFFinder is composed of two different OpenCL kernels (a searching kernel and a comparing kernel) and C (wrapper) parts (Fig.1B).
First, Cas-OFFinder reads genome sequence data files in single or multi-sequence FASTA formats.
To read and parse FASTA files, an open-source FASTA/FASTQ parser library is used.
Although OpenCL supports various processors, the memory of the devices is not always large enough for big data analysis.
To overcome the memory limitation of OpenCL devices, wrapper1 divides the genome data into units of the largest possible size allowed by the device memory.
These divided chunks are then loaded into the searching kernel that compiles all sites that include a PAM sequence in the entire genome.
To search for and select these specific sites rapidly and effectively, the searching kernel runs independently on every calculation unit of a processor, i.e.all searching processes on the calculation units are accomplished simultaneously.
After this step, wrapper2 collects the information about the specific sites containing PAM sequences and delivers these sequences to the comparing kernel, which counts the number of mismatched bases.
Similar to the searching kernel, all comparing processes on the calculation units are accomplished simultaneously.
Finally, wrapper3 selects potential offtarget sites that have fewer mismatched bases than a given threshold, and writes the results into an output file with the following information: chromosome number, position, direction, number of mismatched bases and potential off-target DNA sequences with mismatched bases noted in lowercase letters.
These processes are repeated until all the divided chunks are loaded.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION To evaluate the performance of Cas-OFFinder, we first chose arbitrary SpCas9 target sites in the human genome and ran CasOFFinder with query sequences via CPU (Intel i7 3770K) or GPU (AMD Radeon HD 7870).
Notably, running time per target site was decreased as the number of target sites was increased (Fig.1C).
This result is expected because the searching kernel works only once for many input targets.
The speed of CasOFFinder based on GPU (3.0 s) was 20 faster than that of CPU (60.0 s) when 1000 target sites were analyzed.
We also used Cas-OFFinder to search for potential off-target sites of NmCas9, which recognizes 50-NNNNGMTT-30 (where M is A or C) PAM sequences in addition to a 24-bp target DNA sequence specific to guide RNA in human and other genomes (Table 1).
Note that Cas-OFFinder allows mixed bases to account for the degeneracy in PAM sequences.
In conclusion, Cas-OFFinder enables searching for potential off-target sites in any sequenced genome rapidly without limiting the PAM sequence or the number of mismatched bases.
These features make Cas-OFFinder applicable to ZFNs, TALENs and transcription factors that are prone to off-target DNA recognition.
Funding: National Research Foundation of Korea (2013000718 to J.-S.K.)
and the Plant Molecular Breeding Center of NextGeneration BioGreen 21 Program (PJ009081), the National Research Foundation of Korea (2013065262), TJ Park Science Fellowship (to S.B.).
Conflict of Interest: none declared.
