          OP-CBIO140269 9..18 Vol.
30 ISMB 2014, pages i9i18 BIOINFORMATICS doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu259 Evaluating synteny for improved comparative studies Cristina G. Ghiurcuta* and Bernard M. E. Moret Laboratory for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, EPFL-IC-LCBB INJ 230, Station 14, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland ABSTRACT Motivation: Comparative genomics aims to understand the structure and function of genomes by translating knowledge gained about some genomes to the object of study.
Early approaches used pairwise comparisons, but today researchers are attempting to leverage the larger potential of multi-way comparisons.
Comparative genomics relies on the structuring of genomes into syntenic blocks: blocks of sequence that exhibit conserved features across the genomes.
Syntenic blocs are required for complex computations to scale to the billions of nucleotides present in many genomes; they enable comparisons across broad ranges of genomes because they filter out much of the individual variability; they highlight candidate regions for in-depth studies; and they facilitate whole-genome comparisons through visualization tools.
However, the concept of syntenic block remains loosely defined.
Tools for the identification of syntenic blocks yield quite different results, thereby preventing a systematic assessment of the next steps in an analysis.
Current tools do not include measurable quality objectives and thus cannot be benchmarked against themselves.
Comparisons among tools have also been neglectedwhat few results are given use superficial measures unrelated to quality or consistency.
Results: We present a theoretical model as well as an experimental basis for comparing syntenic blocks and thus also for improving or designing tools for the identification of syntenic blocks.
We illustrate the application of the model and the measures by applying them to syntenic blocks produced by three different contemporary tools (DRIMM-Synteny, i-ADHoRe and Cyntenator) on a dataset of eight yeast genomes.
Our findings highlight the need for a well founded, systematic approach to the decomposition of genomes into syntenic blocks.
Our experiments demonstrate widely divergent results among these tools, throwing into question the robustness of the basic approach in comparative genomics.
We have taken the first step towards a formal approach to the construction of syntenic blocks by developing a simple quality criterion based on sound evolutionary principles.
Contact: cristinagabriela.ghiurcuta@epfl.ch 1 BACKGROUND Comparative studies have long been the mainstay of knowledge discovery in biology.
With the advent of inexpensive sequencing tools, pairwise sequence comparison became a major research tool; programs such as BLAST (Altschul et al., 1990) are used to identify regions with similar sequences in order to study problems in genetics and genomics by using knowledge from better characterized organisms.
Such comparisons have been carried out on relatively short sequence fragmentsusually up to the length of a protein transcript, i.e.a few thousand nucleotides.
Such work continues at a great pace today, but the rapidly increasing availability of complete genome sequences has led to the desire to compare entire genomes at once, the better to understand the large-scale architectural features of genomes and the evolutionary events that have shaped these features, such as segmental and whole-genome duplication, horizontal transfer, recombinations of various types and rearrangements.
Comparing entire genomes is not new: almost a century ago, Thomas Morgan and his students used chromosomal banding to build genetic maps of various strains of Drosophila melanogaster.
What is new today is the possibility of comparing complete genome sequences to each other.
Comparing even just two genomes is a major computational challenge when the two genomes have several billion nucleotides and when most of the sequence (490% in humans) is poorly understood and so lacks a suitable evolutionary model.
Consequently, researchers have approached the problem by defining (or searching for) conserved sequence markers (mostly belonging to the better understood coding regions of the genome).
These markers are then used to form largescale patterns that can be evaluated for similarity and conservation.
Such large-scale patterns, when used systematically, can be viewed as alternative representations of the genomes.
The simplest such representation uses the concept of syntenic blocks (SBs), large blocks of sequence that are well conserved (as testified by commonality of markers and similarity of high-level patterns) across the species (or within a genome).
Working with such blocks facilitates comparative studies: (i) it confers robustness against variability across individuals and against various sources of error; (ii) it reduces the dependence on an accepted model of sequence evolution for each region and is less likely to suffer from homoplasy; (iii) it reduces the complexity of the analysis of the genomic structures; (iv) it provides high-level features for further evolutionary studies; and (v) it identifies specific regions of interest for detailed studies and possible bench experiments.
In this article, we provide a concise overview of the existing notions of synteny in the literature and propose a formal, principled definition of SBs based on homologies.
We discuss how the quality of SBs can be measured against this definition and illustrate our approach with a comparison of three current tools for the construction of SBsCyntenator (Roedelsperger and Dieterich, 2010), DRIMM-Synteny (Pham and Pevzner, 2010) (DRIMM) and i-ADHoRE 3.0 (Proost et al., 2012) (i-ADHoRe).
We investigate the underlying heuristics and evaluate the results on a dataset of eight full genomes of various species of yeasts from the Yeast Gene Order Browser (YGOB) (Byrne and Wolfe, 2005), pointing out the issues that arise when working with SBs.
1.1 Early notions of synteny Little has been done so far towards a formal definition of SBs and/or SB families, nor have developers of algorithms and*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The Author 2014.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com [1] , ,.
over paper syntenic block syntenic block 3 syntenic block [23] [20] , [21] 8 [5] syntenic block syntenic block XPath error Undefined namespace prefix software for producing SBs given any quantifiable goals.
Instead, identifying SBs has been a matter of application-dependent heuristics, lacking any serious attempt at evaluating the quality of the approachessomething that in any case would have proved difficult in absence of quality criteria.
The first mention of synteny as it is understood today was in an article of Renwick (1971) on human chromosome mapping, where the term is introduced to denote collocation of markers on the same chromosome.
Nadeau and Taylor (1984) gave an informal definition of syntenic segments, in a paper that has since been cited by most researchers concerned with synteny.
Nadeau and Taylor gave a list of features viewed as supporting inclusion of markers in an SB, a list that includes conserved orientation, conserved adjacency and conserved position of homologous markers associated with the corresponding mapped chromosomes, a collection of features that loosely defines what is more commonly called today collinearity.
The study of rearrangements led to the definition of common intervals (Bergeron et al., 2002; Jahn, 2011), conserved regions of a chromosome within which the same set of genes can be observed, albeit not necessarily in the same order.
The concept is formally and precisely defined and captures many of the properties informally associated in the literature with SBs.
The definition is given in terms of families of non-duplicated genes (or other families of unique sequences) and their ordering.
It does not take into account precise locations on the genome, nor the actual nucleotide sequences of these genes.
Around the same time, the need to compare entire genomes of the newly sequenced model species led The Mouse Genome Sequencing Consortium (2002) to propose SBs as sets of adjacent syntenic fragments (possibly shuffled in order and orientation) belonging to the same chromosome, where a syntenic fragment consisted of markers arranged in a conserved order.
In this view, syntenic fragments obey collinearity, whereas SBs need not do so.
Calabrese et al.(2003), authors of the FISH synteny tool, defined their model based on segmental homology, in which the ordering of features belonging to two homologous segments is roughly conserved, some variation being allowed.
Pevzner and Tesler (2003) and later Bourque et al.(2004), both working on the GRIMM-Synteny tool, removed constraints on conserved segments, thereby implicitly defining an SB in terms of conserved segments that can be disrupted by internal rearrangementsrearrangements that the authors found to be far more common than expected and that therefore had to be largely ignored in constructing SBs.
In contrast, Van de Peer and his group, authors of the ADHoRe tool (Vandepoele et al., 2002), chose to emphasize collinearity and to break larger blocks into smaller ones as necessary to maintain this property.
These and other early tools are briefly reviewed in (Deonier et al., 2005).
1.2 Markers, syntenic blocks and genomic alignment Identifying SBs and aligning whole genomes both rely on identifying markers, i.e.short sequences that are highly conserved across the genomes and long enough to make their conservation statistically significant.
SB construction uses subsets from the set of markers: if a sufficiently dense region is identified in most of the genomes, those regions can be viewed as SBs.
Genomic alignment uses the markers as anchors, i.e.fixed
