          OP-CBIO140277 60..68 Vol.
30 ISMB 2014, pages i60i68 BIOINFORMATICS doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu269 Inductive matrix completion for predicting genedisease associations Nagarajan Natarajan* and Inderjit S. Dhillon Department of Computer Science, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA ABSTRACT Motivation: Most existing methods for predicting causal disease genes rely on specific type of evidence, and are therefore limited in terms of applicability.
More often than not, the type of evidence available for diseases variesfor example, we may know linked genes, keywords associated with the disease obtained by mining text, or co-occurrence of disease symptoms in patients.
Similarly, the type of evidence available for genes variesfor example, specific microarray probes convey information only for certain sets of genes.
In this article, we apply a novel matrix-completion method called Inductive Matrix Completion to the problem of predicting gene-disease associations; it combines multiple types of evidence (features) for diseases and genes to learn latent factors that explain the observed genedisease associations.
We construct features from different biological sources such as microarray expression data and disease-related textual data.
A crucial advantage of the method is that it is inductive; it can be applied to diseases not seen at training time, unlike traditional matrix-completion approaches and network-based inference methods that are transductive.
Results: Comparison with state-of-the-art methods on diseases from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database shows that the proposed approach is substantially betterit has close to onein-four chance of recovering a true association in the top 100 predictions, compared to the recently proposed CATAPULT method (second best) that has 515% chance.
We demonstrate that the inductive method is particularly effective for a query disease with no previously known gene associations, and for predicting novel genes, i.e.genes that are previously not linked to diseases.
Thus the method is capable of predicting novel genes even for well-characterized diseases.
We also validate the novelty of predictions by evaluating the method on recently reported OMIM associations and on associations recently reported in the literature.
Availability: Source code and datasets can be downloaded from Contact: naga86@cs.utexas.edu 1 INTRODUCTION In silico prioritization of disease genes is an important step towards discovering causal genes and understanding genetic disorders.
Many diseasegene prioritization tools have been developed in the last decade, some generic and some disease-class specific.
Due to the inherent difficulty and latency in human genedisease studies, very few reliable associations are reported to public databases such as the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) and the Genetic Association Database (Becker et al., 2004).
Therefore, exploiting multiple auxiliary sources of data is essential for predicting genes related to polygenic traits, and many existing methods have been developed for this purpose.
For example, a popular family of network-based methods include CIPHER (Wu et al., 2008), GeneWalker (K ohler et al., 2008), Prince (Vanunu et al., 2010), RWRH (Li and Patra, 2010) and CATAPULT (Singh-Blom et al., 2013).
These methods exploit biological networks such as the functional gene interactions network and disease similarity network; they infer genedisease connections by using random walk procedures on different biological networks or computing a similarity measure between nodes.
The problem of predicting genedisease associations can be thought of as analogous to designing a recommender system where the goal is to predict the preference that a user (gene) would give to an item (disease).
An important formulation used in recommender systems such as the Netflix movie recommendations (Bennett and Lanning, 2007) is matrix completion, where the problem is to complete the user-item preference matrix given a sample of observed p
