          OP-CBIO140275 149..156 Vol.
30 ISMB 2014, pages i149i156 BIOINFORMATICS doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu267 Pipasic: similarity and expression correction for strain-level identification and quantification in metaproteomics Anke Penzlin1,y, Martin S. Lindner1,y, Joerg Doellinger2,3, Piotr Wojtek Dabrowski2,4, Andreas Nitsche2 and Bernhard Y. Renard1,* 1Research Group Bioinformatics (NG4), 2Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens 1 (ZBS 1), 3Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens 6 (ZBS 6) and 4Central Administration 4 (IT), Robert Koch Institute, 13353 Berlin, Germany ABSTRACT Motivation: Metaproteomic analysis allows studying the interplay of organisms or functional groups and has become increasingly popular also for diagnostic purposes.
However, difficulties arise owing to the high sequence similarity between related organisms.
Further, the state of conservation of proteins between species can be correlated with their expression level, which can lead to significant bias in results and interpretation.
These challenges are similar but not identical to the challenges arising in the analysis of metagenomic samples and require specific solutions.
Results: We introduce Pipasic (peptide intensity-weighted proteome abundance similarity correction) as a tool that corrects identification and spectral counting-based quantification results using peptide similarity estimation and expression level weighting within a non-negative lasso framework.
Pipasic has distinct advantages over approaches only regarding unique peptides or aggregating results to the lowest common ancestor, as demonstrated on examples of viral diagnostics and an acid mine drainage dataset.
Availability and implementation: Pipasic source code is freely available from https://sourceforge.net/projects/pipasic/.
Contact: RenardB@rki.de Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online 1 INTRODUCTION In contrast to classical proteomic approaches, metaproteomics and environmental proteomics studies aim at deciphering the interplay of different organisms contained within an environmental sample (Muth et al., 2013).
Throughout the past years, this idea has seen increasing application primarily in three fields: aqueous ecosystems, terrestrial systems and eukaryotic host microbiomes (Hettich et al., 2013).
In addition, metaproteomic approaches have become of interest also for clinical diagnostics, e.g.for characterizing the state of an infection (Fouts et al., 2012) or for identifying and strain-level typing of bacteria (Karlsson et al., 2012).
Similar to metagenomic approaches (Wooley et al., 2010), the analysis of environmental samples and the interplay of organisms offer an enormous potential to further the characterization and understanding of these systems.
At the same time, challenges in metaproteomics are manifold and relate to all steps of the analysis.
Particularly, this includes the handling of the resulting large and complex datasets of spectra derived from mass spectrometry (MS) experiments and their meaningful comparison with reference proteomes of organisms.
It can by no means be generally assumed that this set of
