          OP-CBIO140449 453..461 Vol.
31 no.
4 2015, pages 453461 BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu407 Systems biology Advance Access publication July 3, 2014 Inter-species prediction of protein phosphorylation in the sbv IMPROVER species translation challenge Michael Biehl1,*,y, Peter Sadowski2,y, Gyan Bhanot3, Erhan Bilal4, Adel Dayarian5, Pablo Meyer4, Raquel Norel4, Kahn Rhrissorrakrai4, Michael D. Zeller2 and Sahand Hormoz5 1Johann Bernoulli Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science, University of Groningen, 9700 AK Groningen, The Netherlands, 2University of California, Irvine, CA 92617, 3Department of Physics and Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Busch Campus, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, 4IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Computational Biology, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, 5Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA Associate Editor: Igor Jurisica ABSTRACT Motivation: Animal models are widely used in biomedical research for reasons ranging from practical to ethical.
An important issue is whether rodent models are predictive of human biology.
This has been addressed recently in the framework of a series of challenges designed by the systems biology verification for Industrial Methodology for Process Verification in Research (sbv IMPROVER) initiative.
In particular, one of the sub-challenges was devoted to the prediction of protein phosphorylation responses in human bronchial epithelial cells, exposed to a number of different chemical stimuli, given the responses in rat bronchial epithelial cells.
Participating teams were asked to make inter-species predictions on the basis of available training examples, comprising transcriptomics and phosphoproteomics data.
Results: Here, the two best performing teams present their datadriven approaches and computational methods.
In addition, post hoc analyses of the datasets and challenge results were performed by the participants and challenge organizers.
The challenge outcome indicates that successful prediction of protein phosphorylation status in human based on rat phosphorylation levels is feasible.
However, within the limitations of the computational tools used, the inclusion of gene expression data does not improve the prediction quality.
The post hoc analysis of time-specific measurements sheds light on the signaling pathways in both species.
Availability and implementation: A detailed description of the dataset, challenge design and outcome is available at www.sbvimprover.
com.
The code used by team IGB is provided under http://github.com/ uci-igb/improver2013.
Implementations of the algorithms applied by team AMG are available at http://bhanot.biomaps.rutgers.edu/wiki/ AMG-sc2-code.zip.
Contact: meikelbiehl@gmail.com Received on April 3, 2014; revised on June 1, 2014; accepted on June 20, 2014 1 INTRODUCTION Despite their limitations, animal models play an essential role in biomedical research, ranging from basic science to translational medicine, as human testing is severely limited by practical and ethical constraints.
In the context of drug development, the usefulness of animal models obviously hinges on the extent to which results can be translated to human biology.
As an example, we consider here the response of bronchial epithelial cells to external chemical stimuli in rat and human.
On one hand, organisms of common origin should arguably share many of the basic physiological mechanisms.
On the other hand, different species may exhibit significant differences in the details of their cellular mechanisms such as signaling pathways.
It is, therefore, essential to study this relationship systematically with the aim to develop reliable tools for the translation of results from animal models to human biology.
Recently, the systems biology verification Industrial Methodology for Process Verification in Research (sbvIMPROVER) initiative designed and organized the second sbv IMPROVER challenge, which was devoted to the question of species translation.
In particular, sub-challenge 2 discussed in the following, concerned the protein phosphorylation status of normal human bronchial epithelial cells (NHBE) and normal rat bronchial epithelial cells (NRBE) exposed to the same set of chemical stimuli.
Herein, we present and discuss our studies of computational approaches for the prediction of stimulus-specific human protein phosphorylation levels based on gene expression and phosphorylation observed in the rat model.
In section 2, we first give a brief description of the data and challenge design.
Next, the computational approaches to the prediction task are described.
After specifying the evaluation criteria applied by the challenge organizers, we describe methods used for the post hoc analysis of datasets and challenge results.
Section 3 presents the results in terms of the predictions and their evaluation.
In addition, results of the post hoc analysis concerning modifications of the prediction models and findings related to the phosphorylation kinetics are presented.
We conclude with a discussion of the main results and an outlook on potential extensions and future studies.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.
The Author 2014.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com www.sbvimprover.com www.sbvimprover.com-, XPath error Undefined namespace prefix XPath error Undefined namespace prefix 2 METHODS Where applicable, the following is structured according to contributions from the challenge organizers and the two best performing teams: team AMG (Adel, Michael, Gyan) with members Bhanot, Biehl, Dayarian and Hormoz and team IGB (Institute for Genomics and Bioinformatics) with members Sadowski and Zeller.
2.1 Data acquisition and challenge design The acquisition and preparation of the datasets are presented in greater detail in Rhrissorrakrai et al.(2015), which also provides further
