          OP-CBIO140524 527..533 Vol.
30 ECCB 2014, pages i527i533 BIOINFORMATICS doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu477 RidgeRace: ridge regression for continuous ancestral character estimation on phylogenetic trees Christina Kratsch and Alice C. McHardy* Department for Algorithmic Bioinformatics, Heinrich Heine University, Universitatsstr.
1, 40225 D usseldorf, Germany ABSTRACT Motivation: Ancestral character state reconstruction describes a set of techniques for estimating phenotypic or genetic features of species or related individuals that are the predecessors of those present today.
Such reconstructions can reach into the distant past and can provide insights into the history of a population or a set of species when fossil data are not available, or they can be used to test evolutionary hypotheses, e.g.on the co-evolution of traits.
Typical methods for ancestral character state reconstruction of continuous characters consider the phylogeny of the underlying data and estimate the ancestral process along the branches of the tree.
They usually assume a Brownian motion model of character evolution or extensions thereof, requiring specific assumptions on the rate of phenotypic evolution.
Results: We suggest using ridge regression to infer rates for each branch of the tree and the ancestral values at each inner node.
We performed extensive simulations to evaluate the performance of this method and have shown that the accuracy of its reconstructed ancestral values is competitive to reconstructions using other stateof-the-art software.
Using a hierarchical clustering of gene mutation profiles from an ovarian cancer dataset, we demonstrate the use of the method as a feature selection tool.
Availability and implementation: The algorithm described here is implemented in C++ as a stand-alone program, and the source code is freely available at http://algbio.cs.uni-duesseldorf.de/soft ware/RidgeRace.tar.gz.
Contact: mchardy@hhu.de Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION Many biological studies investigate the ancestral states of one or several discrete and continuous characters on a phylogenetic tree (Felsenstein, 2004).
Comparative methods correlate the evolution of alleles at different loci with each other or with a trait and thus often require the reconstruction of ancestral values.
Typical examples for discrete characters are the reconstruction of the absence, presence or state of genes or traits for the internal nodes of the tree (i.e.for the ancestral organisms), while typical examples for continuous characters are environmental p
