          OP-CBIO140558 3287..3288 Vol.
30 no.
22 2014, pages 32873288 BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu509 Genetics and population analysis Advance Access publication July 29, 2014 Metabomxtr: an R package for mixture-model analysis of non-targeted metabolomics data Michael Nodzenski1, Michael J. Muehlbauer2, James R. Bain2,3, Anna C. Reisetter1, William L. Lowe, Jr4 and Denise M. Scholtens1,* 1Department of Preventive Medicine, Division of Biostatistics, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, 2Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and Metabolism Center, Duke Molecular Physiology Institute and 3Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27704 and 4Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611 Associate Editor: Jeffrey Barrett ABSTRACT Summary: Non-targeted metabolomics technologies often yield data in which abundance for any given metabolite is observed and quantified for some samples and reported as missing for other samples.
Apparent missingness can be due to true absence of the metabolite in the sample or presence at a level below detectability.
Mixture-model analysis can formally account for metabolite missingness due to absence or undetectability, but software for this type of analysis in the high-throughput setting is limited.
The R package metabomxtr has been developed to facilitate mixture-model analysis of non-targeted metabolomics data in which only a portion of samples have quantifiable abundance for certain metabolites.
Availability and implementation: metabomxtr is available through Bioconductor.
It is released under the GPL-2 license.
Contact: dscholtens@northwestern.edu Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on April 21, 2014; revised on July 3, 2014; accepted on July 18, 2014 1 INTRODUCTION High-throughput metabolomics profiling has surged in popularity with non-targeted technologies in particular offering opportunity for discovery of new metabolite associations with phenotypes or outcomes.
A challenge to analyzing non-targeted output is the frequent occurrence of missing data (Hrydziuszko and Viant, 2012).
These data are not missing in the sense that they were not collected; rather, metabolites may be detected and their abundance quantified in some samples and not others.
Typically conducted using nuclear magnetic resonance, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry or gas chromatographymass spectrometry (Issaq et al., 2009; Moco and Vervoort, 2007), non-targeted assays typically have unknown lower detection thresholds.
Thus, when a given metabolite is not detected, it is unknown whether that metabolite was indeed absent or merely undetectable.
Several approaches for handling missingness have been described inmetabolomics literature, including complete case analysis, imputation and adaptations of classic dimension reduction tools to allow formissing data.
Formetabolite-by-metabolite analyses, imputation is common, with methods including minimum, median andnearest neighbor imputation (Hrydziuszko andViant, 2012).
Partial least squares discriminant analysis and principal components analysis with missing data adaptations have been used, although these methods identify regression-based linear combinations of multiple correlated metabolites associated with a phenotype or outcome, and, in general, results are less translatable for understanding individual metabolite contributions (Andersson and Bro, 1998; Walczak and Massart, 2001).
An underused approach for metabolite-by-metabolite analysis is the Bernoulli/lognormal mixture model proposed by Moulton and Halsey (1995).
This method simultaneously estimates parameters modeling the probability of non-missing response and the mean of observed values.
Imputation is not required, and instead missingness is explicitly modeled as either true absence or presence below detectability, consistent with non-targeted metabolomics technology.
We used mixture models to analyze GC-MS metabolomics data (Scholtens et al., 2014), but, to our knowledge, there is no available software to easily perform these analyses that folds into existing high-throughput data analysis pipelines.
Noting the elegance of the mixture-model approach and the continued issue of missing data in metabolomics research, we present metabomxtr, an R package that automates mixturemodel analysis.
The core functions accept R objects typically handled in Bioconductor-type analyses or basic data frames, thus providing a flexible tool to complement existing user pipelines and p
