                Computational Identification of Active Enhancers in Model Organisms Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 142150 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb www.sciencedirect.com REVIEW Computational Identification of Active Enhancers in Model Organisms Chengqi Wang 1, Michael Q. Zhang 2,3, Zhihua Zhang 1,* 1 CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China 2 Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Center for Systems Biology, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080, USA 3 Bioinformatics Division, Center for Synthetic and Systems Biology, TNLIST, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China Received 28 December 2012; revised 1 April 2013; accepted 20 April 2013 Available online 17 May 2013 * Pe C 16 by ht KEYWORDS Enhancer identification; Active enhancer recognition; Histone modification mark; Transcription factor Corresponding author.
E-mail: zhangzhihua@big.a er review under responsibil hinese Academy of Sciences a Production an 72-0229/$-see front matter Elsevier B.V. All rights reserv tp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.20 c.cn (Zh ity of B nd Gene d hostin 2013 Bei ed.
13.04.002 Abstract As a class of cis-regulatory elements, enhancers were first identified as the genomic regions that are able to markedly increase the transcription of genes nearly 30 years ago.
Enhancers can regulate gene expression in a cell-type specific and developmental stage specific manner.
Although experimental technologies have been developed to identify enhancers genome-wide, the design principle of the regulatory elements and the way they rewire the transcriptional regulatory network tempo-spatially are far from clear.
At present, developing predictive methods for enhancers, particularly for the cell-type specific activity of enhancers, is central to computational biology.
In this review, we survey the current computational approaches for active enhancer prediction and discuss future directions.
Introduction Gene transcription is regulated by a series of accurately orchestrated interactions between transcription factors (TFs) and cisregulatory DNA elements, e.g., promoters and enhancers [1].
Enhancers are often found in non-coding regions of a genome and generally distal to their target promoters.
The first characterized enhancer was a DNA segment that markedly increased the transcription of the b-globin gene in a transgenic assay in ang Z).
eijing Institute of Genomics, tics Society of China.
g by Elsevier jing Institute of Genomics, Chinese A the SV40 tumor virus genome about 30 years ago [2].
Nonetheless, global identification of enhancers and their activities remains challenging, since enhancers can activate transcription regardless of their location or orientation [3].
The development of computational enhancer recognition approaches has been greatly facilitated by the massive amount of genomic data available owing to the rapid advances in sequencing technologies in recent years.
Early algorithms were developed largely based on evolutionary constraints with the assumption that highly conserved non-coding regions should have functional potential [4].
However, conservation by itself is not sufficient to confer cell-type specific enhancer activities, suggesting that additional (e.g., epigenetic) information is required for accurate prediction.
Genome-wide maps of chromatin marks have been used to show that active enhancers are likely to be associated with certain characteristic chromatin signatures, e.g., monomethylation of histone H3 at lysine residue 4 (H3K4me1) [5].
But, Bonn et al.reported that H3K4me1 is cademy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting mailto:zhangzhihua@big.ac.cnWang C et al/ Computational Methods for Enhancer Prediction 143 distributed similarly between mesodermally active and inactive enhancers, indicating that the placement of H3K4me1 is not cell type specific during embryonic development [6].
Hitherto, to the best of our knowledge, there is no evidence that active enhancers should necessarily exhibit the same single or a combination of epigenetic marks across all the cell types [7].
Therefore, it is necessary to select optimal combinations of epigenetic marks to predict when and where an enhancer is active [811].
In this review, we first survey the most commonly adopted strategies in enhancer recognition and then discuss potential future directions.
The principle of enhancer recognition Enhancers may be characterized by quantitative measures, termed features, associated with the underlying DNA sequences.
In principle, an enhancer recognition algorithm utilizes informative and discriminative features as input to discriminate enhancers from non-enhancers, ideally from other non-enhancer cis-regulatory elements.
Algorithms and features are both important.
We therefore will discuss them separately.
Features can be briefly classified into three categories, namely comparative genomic features, TF binding related genetic features and epigenetic features (Figure 1).
Comparative genomic features mainly refer to the conservation scores calculated by comparing the genome sequences of different species.
The predictive power of comparative genomic features stems from the fact that functional genome regions (e.g., enhancers) are subjected to negative selection [12,13].
TF binding related genetic features use quantitative scores presumably representing the TF binding affinity at the DNA sequence of interest.
Figure 1 Features used in enhancer prediction algorithms The comparative genomic features are usually generated from compari features result from two sources, one from known TF binding motifs measured by various technologies.
See the main text for more details.
The DNA binding sites of a given TF are usually determined by the DNA nucleotide sequence and the binding affinity between the TF and the DNA sequence [1416].
It is believed that TFs are the actual operators for enhancer regulatory activities [17], which may explain why TF binding related genetic features are predictive.
Direct measurement of the binding affinity between a TF and DNA sequence is not easy.
However, the binding affinity can be inferred indirectly, either by experimentally measuring frequency of TF binding events, such as chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) [18], or by calculating the similarity of the DNA sequences with a known TF binding motif [19,20].
The epigenetic feature mainly includes the level of histone modifications and of DNA methylation.
Recent experimental evidence supports the association of several histone modifications with enhancer activity.
The histone modification levels thus have served as features to predict active enhancers in humans [21,22].
Researchers also attempt to seek optimum combinations of these features for whole-genome prediction of active enhancers [5,911] (Table 1).
Obviously, not all the aforementioned features are equally important for active enhancer prediction.
The level of some dominant features showed strong correlation with enhancer activity [5,23], although the nature of the relationship between the features and enhancer states is poorly understood.
Further development of superior predictive methods can not only help us to reveal such structure, but also help to improve sensitivity and specificity of the predictions.
Algorithms for enhancer recognition can be roughly divided into two groups.
One group comprises probabilistic graphical models which describe the generative process of specific signals, such as Bayesian networks (BNs) [24] and hidden Markov models (HMMs) [25].
The other group employs son between DNA sequences in closely-related species.
TF binding and the other from ChIP experiments.
Epigenetic features can be Table 1 Features of computational methods for enhancer prediction Feature Method Ref Comparative genomic features Aparicios method [4] Visels method (2008) [30] Chens method [8] Yips method [50] Sequence-based TF binding related features Narlikars method [65] Chens method [8] Lees method [44] Yips method [50] Experiment-based TF binding related features Visels method (2009) [46] Zinzens method [67] Mays method [48] Chens method [8] Epigenetic features Heintzmans method [5] Wons method [11] Firpis method [10] SEGWAY [69] Kharchenkos method [60] Hes method [23] Ernsts method [61] ChromaGenSVM [9] Yips method [50] Chens method [8] Bonns method [6] Note:More than one type of features were employed to build enhancer recognition model in some studies.
For example, Chen et al.used all four types of features to develop active enhancer recognition model [8].
144 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 142150 discriminative filters and includes thresholds or classification boundaries in the features.
This group mainly includes support vector machines (SVMs) [26] and artificial neutral networks (ANNs) [27].
The features used in enhancer recognition Comparative genomic features Comparative genomic features comprise conservation scores calculated from multi-species genome sequence alignment.
With the completion of more vertebrate genome sequencing projects, many methods have been developed to discern slowly evolving genome regions.
For example, by comparing point substitutions, insertions and deletions between humans, mice and rats, Cooper et al.comprehensively annotated slowly evolving regions in the human genome [28].
Phastcon score, another example representing the evolutionary conservation of genomic regions [29], has been employed to predict putative enhancer location [8].
In early systematic recognition of potential enhancers in fugu [4], a pair-wise identity score of Hoxb-4 between mouse and fugu was used to detect conserved sequence blocks, followed by transgenic mouse assays to measure their enhancer activities.
Likewise, ultraconserved non-coding elements between humans, mice and rats were also found to be highly enriched in enhancer regions [30].
However, conservation per se is not sufficient to deduce enhancer activity in any given cell type.
Moreover, several enhancers with little conservation were found carrying identical regulatory patterns in different species [3133].
Therefore, additional information is required to predict enhancer activity in a given cell type.
Transcriptional factor binding related genetic features Transcriptional factor binding related genetic features can be roughly classified into two groups.
One group includes quantitative scores of similarity to a known TF binding motif, representing the TF binding affinity to the DNA segments (sequence-based TF binding related genetic features).
The other group includes experimental measurements of TF binding frequency, which also presumably represents TF binding affinity (experiment-based TF binding related genetic features).
The sequence-based TF binding related genetic features comprise individual TF binding and the enrichment of modular combinations of TF binding.
Measuring TF binding affinities is not an easy task experimentally; however, it can be approached from the nucleotide p
