                Does the Genetic Code Have A Eukaryotic Origin?
Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 4155 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb www.sciencedirect.com ORIGINAL RESEARCH Does the Genetic Code Have A Eukaryotic Origin?
Zhang Zhang, Jun Yu * CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China Received 15 November 2012; revised 9 January 2013; accepted 11 January 2013 Available online 20 January 2013 * Pe C 16 an ht KEYWORDS Genetic code; Purine content; Sensitivity; Codon; Amino acid Corresponding author.
E-mail: junyu@big.ac.cn (Y er review under responsibil hinese Academy of Sciences a Production an 72-0229/$-see front matter d Science Press.
All rights rese tp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.20 u J).
ity of B nd Gene d hostin 2013 Beiji rved.
13.01.001 Abstract In the RNA world, RNA is assumed to be the dominant macromolecule performing most, if not all, core house-keeping functions.
The ribo-cell hypothesis suggests that the genetic code and the translation machinery may both be born of the RNA world, and the introduction of DNA to ribo-cells may take over the informational role of RNA gradually, such as a mature set of genetic code and mechanism enabling stable inheritance of sequence and its variation.
In this context, we modeled the genetic code in two content variablesGC and purine contentsof protein-coding sequences and measured the purine content sensitivities for each codon when the sensitivity (% usage) is plotted as a function of GC content variation.
The analysis leads to a new patternthe symmetric patternwhere the sensitivity ofpurine content variation showsdiagonally symmetry in the codon tablemore significantly in the twoGC content invariable quarters in addition to the two existing patterns where the table is divided into either four GC content sensitivity quarters or two amino acid diversity halves.
The most insensitive codon sets areGUN (valine) andCAN (CAR for asparagine andCAY for aspartic acid) and themost biased amino acid is valine (always over-estimated) followed by alanine (always under-estimated).
The unique position of valine and its codons suggests its key roles in the final recruitment of the complete codon set of the canonical table.Thedistinct choicemayonlybe attributable to sequence signaturesor signals of splice sites for spliceosomal introns shared by all extant eukaryotes.
Introduction The genetic code and its codon organization are yet to be fully understood [16] albeit plenteous displays, inspiring interpretations and thoughtful hypotheses in the vast literature [713].
There are at least two basic facets for the code to be engaged together with evolving cellular machineries with eijing Institute of Genomics, tics Society of China.
g by Elsevier ng Institute of Genomics, Chinese Ac increasing complexity and efficiency [14,15].
One is informational, where the code is inscribed into mRNAs through transcription and decoded by tRNAs and aminoacyl tRNA synthetases (AARS) through translation into amino acids; the other is operational, where anticodons of tRNAs interacts directly with codons of a mRNA to make sure that the code is translated accurately.
There are many other basic elements of the genetic code, which follow the two-track scheme.
For instance, the two types of nucleotidespurines and pyrimidinesare different in shape (two-ringed vs. one-ringed) and molecular weight, but they are equivalent informationally.
Another example concerns AARS that adding amino acids to the correct tRNAs for protein synthesis [16].
Since AARS do not directly recognize anticodons borne by tRNAs and thus the code, they evolve to dictate the relationship between codons ademy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Published by Elsevier Ltd mailto:junyu@big.ac.cn42 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 4155 and their corresponding anticodons in rather complex and dynamic ways [17].
Most strikingly, the tRNA pool and the AARS set are rather dynamic and have gone through membership change and recruiting process across taxa [1825].
We have recently showed [36] that the algebraic representation of the code is structurally equivalent to a content-centric organization and that codon and amino acid usage under different classification schemes are correlated closely with GC content, implying a set of rules governing compositional dynamics across a wide variety of prokaryotic genome sequences and perhaps even eukaryotic ones.
Our results also indicate that codons and amino acids are not randomly partitioned in the table [1,2,4,6], where the 6-fold degenerate codons and their amino acids play important roles not only to balance the compositional dynamics of protein-coding DNA sequences, but also the physiochemical dynamics of proteins.
Therefore, the content-centric organization of the code is of great usefulness in deciphering its hitherto defined organizations and regularities as well as the dynamics of nucleotide, codon and amino acid compositions.
In this report, we describe the dynamics of codons and their encoded amino acids in relation to purine content changes by displaying their purine sensitivity in a context of GC change as a follow-up for our previous publications [3,5].
Not only is there purine sensitivity among the seemingly content-insensitive codons, but also the sensitivity has exhaustive patterns that are unique to different grouping schemes of the codon triplets.
These patterns are uniformity, symmetry and ending of codon triplets (i.e., the third codon position or cp3).
Surprisingly, the most insensitive 4-fold degenerate amino acid is valine (V), which is encoded by GUN (N stands for one of the four nucleotides).
Based on the step-wise evolution scenario of the genetic code [1,2], the impermanent and impermissible usage of GUN suggests that in the proto-cell of the RNA world, the splicing machinery was already invented since GU serves as an irreducible dinucleotide sequence for the splice site and the genetic code might not evolve to the canonical form universal to the present-day life.
Results and discussion Symmetric and asymmetric natures of the genetic code The genetic code (in this context it is the codon tablea 64 codon full-display) is organized primarily as symmetric or pairing units (Figure 1) because base pairing, albeit imperfect at times, is the primary operational force to embrace codons and their corresponding anti-codons together.
These basic units should be independent from each other unless connected in the informational track, i.e., encoding the same amino acids as in the case of the three 6-fold degenerate codons for leucine (L), arginine (R) and serine (S).
The table is simply divided into four quarters (Figure 1A) and each has 16 sequence-complimentary codons (Figure 1B and C).
The pairing is between the heavy codons consisting of 2 purines and 1 pyrimidine (2R + 1Y) and the light codons (2Y + 1R) within the four basic units according to the operational rules (thus the operational track) other than sequence complementation that is indeed merely an informational concern (Figure 1D).
In addition to this heavy-light codon pairing, the odd-numbered triplet itself always has two flanking nucleotides that are also considered as symmetry: when the two nucleotides are identical, both purines, both pyrimidines and both AU or GC.
The third scheme is uniformity where all three nucleotides are considered: all identical, all purines or pyrimidines.
Aside from its basic organization, there are several features where the genetic code and its codons are organized in a nonperfect symmetry, largely due to historic reasons in terms of its step-wise evolution or selection [1,2].
Although the pyrimidineending codons are perfectly organized in the table, i.e., all Uending and C-ending codons are interchangeable vertically without altering their encoded amino acids, the purine-ending codons have a couple of exceptions (Figure 1A).
One example is in the AU-rich box (Figure 2): there are two codon duplexesAU (G/A) for M/I and UG (A/G) for Stop/Wencoding different amino acids or stop signals.
Another is the 6-fold degenerate codon sets: L, R and S, which are proposed to provide balance between the pro-diversity and pro-robustness halves for the dominant physiochemical properties: hydrophobicity, polarity, charge, shape and size [36].
The symmetry of codon organization is also multifold beyond the basic units organized in the four quarters (Figure 2A).
The characteristics of the four-quarter organization are built on the sensitivity of GC-content [13].
The AU-rich and GCrich quarters are both sensitive to GC variation but the other two are seemingly not.
The second way to divide the codons is one-to-two: the pro-diversity half and the pro-robustness half (Figure 2B).
The pro-robustness half is so organized that it almost suggests that it is evolved to be filled not only fast but in a perfect order.
There must be a third feature or even more features in the table organization, concerning the two GC content insensitive boxes or quarters.
What is it?
How does purine content change manifest them in the codon organization?
Is purine sensitivity ancient since the code might have started from purine-pyrimidine pairing to discrete AU and GC pairing (Figure 3A)?
Most importantly, how did the code actually expand into the next and even the current form?
We show one of the possible next steps in Figure 3B.
Predictable trends and categorizations of purine variation sensitivity of the codon triplets Understanding the compositional dynamics of protein-coding sequences is of great significance in deciphering underlying mechanisms of sequence evolution.
Towards this end, we have previously made several attempts to model sequence dynamics quantitatively.
Based on an assumption thatmutation and selection act at the level of nucleotide, our model takes account of diverse forces from both mutation and selection at three codon positions and factors bothGC and purine contents as two essential parameters.
As testified on a large collection of species across three domains of life, our model is capable of quantitatively recapturing the compositional dynamics of nucleotides, codons and amino acids with changing GC and purine contents [36].
Both GC and purine contents are important background parameters for composition related analyses as we have been working with a focus on prokaryotes for over a decade [2633].
GC content is known to vary in a more dramatic way ranging from 20% to 80%, whereas purine content fluctuates narrowly around 50% with a deviation of 10% up and down [3].
Extensive studies have documented the primary Figure 1 A display of 64-slot codon table A.
The codons are organized in four different quarters based on GC content variation.
Pyrimidine-ending codons are shaded.
B. Sequence complimentary codons in the four quarters are shaded.
C. The complementary codons are rearranged to show their mirror images (the top and the bottom panels).
D. Codons are partitioned into high molecular weight and low molecular weight groups (low molecular weight codons are shaded), based on NMP molecular weight (AMP, 347.2; CMP, 323.2; GMP, 363.2; and UMP, 324.2).
Zhang Z and Yu J/ Purine Variation Sensitivity of the Genetic Code 43 Figure 2 The organization of the genetic code A.
The genetic code is organized in half and half, where the purine-sensitive half encodes more amino acids than the other half, whose cp3 (the third codon position) nucleotides possess diverse physiochemical properties and thus named as the pro-diversity half.
The other half, however, encodes fewer amino acids than the pro-diversity half, whose cp3 nucleotides are not sensitive to compositional changes.
B.
The genetic code is partitioned into four quarters: AU-rich, GC-rich, GCp1 and GCp2.
The GC content sensitive quarters are shaded in different colors.
Sr (start) and St (stop) represent the start and stop signals, respectively.
Figure 3 The evolutionary scenarios of the genetic code A.
The assumed early code that encodes 7 amino acids with triple duplexes, one stop codon, and one start codon.
Individual nucleotide may be not necessary to be distinguished other than purines (R) and pyrimidines (Y).
B.
As the emergence of protein synthesis machinery, the translational machinery may become more precise so that individual nucleotides are recognized.
The first-phase code (shaded in green) may have expanded into the second phase where G is involved in protein-coding.
Since GU and AG are involved in splice sites, AGN and GUN (shaded in pink) may not be part of the second-phase genetic code.
44 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 4155 contribution of GC content in codon/amino acid composition variations [3436].
However, there is little attention paid to uncovering the contribution of purine content to composition variation as it is less impressive than GC content.
Of course, purine content must have its own characteristics and indispensable influences on compositional dynamics of codons and amino acids.
Most importantly, since purine content at the second codon position often controls physiochemical properties of amino acids, amino acid usage (as well as the related codon usage) may display unique codon or amino acid dynamic patterns in terms of the relationship between mutation and selection, which can be estimated based on a variety of methods [3740].
For instance, amino acids with similar physiochemical properties may exchange at certain positions through codon-specific relationship to achieve size variations, such as among hydroxyl group-containing amino acidsY, T and S, in addition to the largest group of hydrophobic amino acids that include P, G, A, I, V, L, F and M. Therefore, it is hypothesized that together with the changing purine content, some amino acids may be used at a constant frequency as purine variation-insensitive and others may vary accordingly as purine variationsensitive.
To test this hypothesis, let us begin with how codons react to purine content variations when purine variation sensitivity is plotted as a function of GC variation (Figure 4).
The plots are more complex than what we anticipated but very characteristic.
From this large collection, we observe several obvious variables.
First, the predicted trend, assuming five fixed purine contents (0.40, 0.45, 0.50, 0.55 and 0.60), provides possible sensitivity and some of the real data are deviated significantly from the predictions but limited in number.
Second, the trend, where both increase and decrease are obvious as GC content varies, is mostly definable based on the GC content of the Figure 4 Codon usage plots based on fixed background GC and purine contents Purine contents (R) are set from 0.4 to 0.6 (color-coded; red for R = 0.4, green for R = 0.45, yellow for R = 0.5, cyan for R = 0.55, purple for R = 0.6).
The genetic code is grouped into four quarters with each having 16 codons including AT-rich quarter (A), GCp1 quarter (B), GCp2 quarter (C), and GC-rich quarter (D).
The scattering of the curves indicates sensitivity to purine variation in a context of GC content increase.
Data from each bacterial genome is represented as a single solid circle.
Zhang Z and Yu J/ Purine Variation Sensitivity of the Genetic Code 45 Figure 4 (continued) 46 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 4155 Figure 5 Purine sensitivity of amino acids in a context of GC content variation A. Nucleotide triplets that are not sensitive to GC content variation (shaded) due to lack of uniformity (all purines and all pyrimidines) and symmetry (RNR and YNY).
B. Nucleotide triplets that have G-or CNG or C and A-or UNA or U (shaded) are assumed purine variation-insensitive when GC content varies.
C. Only uniformity and true symmetric nucleotide triplets (not shaded) are considered purine variation-sensitive in a context of GC variation.
D. The codon table after consolidating the third codon positions into purine and pyrimidines.
The less purine variation-sensitive codons in the AU-rich and GC-rich quarters are shaded in pink.
E. A schematic representation of the codon table after marking the purine variation sensitive-codons (S).
Note that the insensitive codons are all in the diagonal (shaded in grey).
Zhang Z and Yu J/ Purine Variation Sensitivity of the Genetic Code 47 codon endings, e.g., G-ending and C-ending codons increase as genomic GC content goes up and the opposite trend belongs to A-ending or U-ending codons.
Third, the trends have three categories: going with the model calculation, over-estimation and under-estimation within the purine variability boundaries.
Fourth, the scattering of the data points, which may reflect the interplay of selective constraints and mutation pressures, is rather impressive as some of the codons are almost invariable but others tend to go wild.
We categorize the codons, codon sets (within a slot of four) Figure 6 Amino acid usage plots based on fixed background GC and purine contents Purine (R) contents are set from 0.4 to 0.6 (color-coded; red for R = 0.4, green for R= 0.45, yellow for R = 0.5, cyan for R = 0.55, purple for R = 0.6).
Amino acid frequencies are plotted against GC content.
Data from each bacterial genome is represented as a single solid dot.
48 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 4155 and amino acids according to predictions and their fit to the real data in two ways.
The first way is to examine all plots for manual classification, and the second is to use statistics to set cut-off values for validating the primary observation.
We first would like to examine the predicted trends of codons and codon sets rather than amino acids that are subjected for major consideration of selection as one of the key variables.
Zhang Z and Yu J/ Purine Variation Sensitivity of the Genetic Code 49 Purine sensitivities of the 64 codons are essentially partitioned into four purine sensitivity categories including one purine-insensitive group and three purine-sensitive groups when uniformity is a sole concern.
The purine-sensitive codons essentially fall into three obvious patterns (Figure 4).
The first or pattern-I, also the most sensitive group of codons, is composed of four and the only four identical triplets (IT): AAA (K), UUU (F), GGG (G) and CCC (P).
The second or the pattern-II is composed of all-purine (RT) and all-pyrimidine (YT) triplets except the four codons of pattern-I.
The third or pattern-III is the all-AU (AT) and all-GC (GT) triplets except the four identical triplets of pattern-I.
When the observation goes further into the codon slot or set and within the triplet, we found other relevant patterns when within-codon symmetry is also concerned.
Other than those overlapping with uniformity, including the RT, YT, AT and GT groups, we have many codons falling into symmetry groups, even within codons that are deemed insensitive as we categorized in this analysis.
These symmetric codons are exceptional, i.e., they behave like the sensitive codons.
For instance, within GAR and AGR, the symmetric codons GAG and AGA definitely have a stronger bias than the asymmetric codons GAA and AGG, which are perfect for uniformity.
Similarly, in the YT groups, CUC and UCU are biased more than CUU and UCC due to the two perfect symmetries.
Among the codons in different patterns, the sensitivities are also not uniform.
We can also examine the details within the 2, 3-and 4-fold degenerate codons for each amino acid, where we categorize the paired purine-ending or pyrimidine-ending codons within an amino acid-to-codon slot as either R-duplexes or Y-duplexes, which are the components of the RT or YT groups.
First, let us look at the trends of codon biases in the AAN box.
There are three distinct patterns.
One is AAA, belonging to pattern-I, also among the stronger; another is AAG, an RT group codon, whose bias is weaker than that of AAA but stronger than that of AAU that is an AT group codon.
The AAC codon, which does not belong to any of the sensitivity groups, is a member of the insensitive group.
In addition, since the codon biases are plotted as a function of GC content change, both the G-and C-ending codons have an up-going trajectory, whereas the AU-ending codons are either flat, near plateau-reaching, or even downward.
Another observation is that the RT codons tend to have a more scattered biases overall.
Similarly, everything in the UUN, CCN and GGN slots resembles what are in the AAN slot.
Second, let us look at the RT or YT groups.
There are only two RT-groups, AGR and GAR, both of which are expected to be weaker in the bias as compared to the four IT codons.
Third, we have 12 codons in the AT and GT groups with 6 in each.
The symmetric rule in the RT and YT groups is also true in the AT and GT groups, i.e., AUA, UAU, GCG and CGC are more sensitive than the asymmetric codons.
Fourth, as we expected, if nucleotide symmetry is the essential element of the compositional dynamics, we can also see purine sensitivities among the insensitive codon groups within each slot that are overall insensitive.
For instance, in the CAN slot, CAC is expected to be sensitive and it is true.
Furthermore, we can also expect that CAU is also sensitive since C and U are both pyrimidines so that the pyrimidine symmetry in the two positions is also significant albeit the symmetry of the identical nucleotide is stronger than CAU, where the symmetry is YAY.
Similarly, in the GUN slot, we can expect that GUG is more sensitive than GUA, where G and A satisfy purine symmetry.
There are essentially three parameters we have observed so far: triplet ending that involves only the cp3 nucleotide, triplet symmetry that concerns the two flanking nucleotides of the codon triplet, and triplet uniformity that reflects the collective effect covering the entire triplet (Figure 2).
Codon ending is rather straightforward, relevant to either GC or AU contents.
The ultimate uniformity is what of the IT group, followed by RT and YT groups and ended at AT and GT groups.
A similar packing order is predictable under the symmetry framework: from identical and purine/pyrimidine to AU or GC at the two codon positions.
Under the three frameworkscodon-ending, uniformity and symmetrythe defined effects are by and large additive, i.e., the effects under three frameworks as well as any of the groupings are all relevant.
For instance, the effect of AGA comes from the RT group under the uniformity framework and ANA under the symmetry framework.
We now examine the rank of nucleotides in manifesting purine sensitivity.
First, it appears that purines have stronger influence (of course) than pyrimidines, and this rule is true for all patterns.
However, G and A behave differentially under the two-parameter frameworks: for the IT group, A has stronger effect than G under the uniformity framework, and the opposite is seen in the symmetry framework (such as ANA vs GNG).
Second, the trends for U and C are similar to the case of A and G under both frameworks.
It is rather clear that the two frameworks have different underlying mechanisms.
Purine variation sensitivity of codon sets and amino acids Based on the purine and pyrimidine pairing scheme among codons, we can now look into the organization of purine variation-sensitive and-insensitive codons (Figure 5).
We have 16 insensitive codons that do not possess any of the purine sensitive elements (Figure 5A), and if we further ignore GC content uniformity (i.e., the two flanking nucleotides both are either AU or GC), exactly half of the codons are either sensitive or insensitive (Figure 5B).
Moreover, if we eliminate purine or pyrimidine uniformities, only 24 codons are left sensitive to purine content change (Figure 5C).
Once the table is simplified to show only 36 codon sets, we see a clear pattern now in the GC content variation-insensitive quarters, GCp1 and GCp2 (Figure 5D and E).
This pattern fits our expectation that codons in the GCp1 and GCp2 boxes are not sensitive to GC content variation but the AU-rich and GC-rich boxes are in general.
Of course, other factors may rise to become dominant.
The amino acids involved in this scheme are: S, T, W, V, D, L and Q (Figure 6).
Significantly, 4 of the 6 serine codons are all in this category but only 2 of the 6 leucine, one half of the valine, and one half of the threonine codons are.
Surprisingly, if sensitivity is dominant, there are only three insensitive amino acids in the entire codon set: W, D and Q.
Importantly, none of them are irreducible since there are functionally and structurally equivalent amino acids in the table if size is not set to be very stringent.
If we go further, ignoring W, a single-codon-encoded amino acid, it is very suggestive as why D and Q are recruited to their current positions in the table.
Figure 7 Physiochemical properties of valine The parameters of alanine (red) and leucine are specifically listed for comparative purposes and other amino acids are not indicated for simplification.
All parameters are ranked in a shared order among the parameters, either from small to large or from weak to strong in the common sense for convenience; some may not be ordered in a correct way and truly shared by all but the results are not sensitive to it.
All parameters are referenced with keys (abbreviations, last name initials, and last names when single authored papers are quoted) and to their corresponding literature.
A.
Some selected physiochemical properties of valine among all amino acids.
The property measures and related
