                   Endogenous Small RNA Clusters in Plants Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 6471 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb www.sciencedirect.com REVIEW Endogenous Small RNA Clusters in Plants * Corresponding author.
E-mail: xjwang@genetics.ac.cn (Wang XJ).
Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier 1672-0229/$-see front matter 2014 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Yong-Xin Liu 1,2, Meng Wang 1, Xiu-Jie Wang 1,* 1 State Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China Received 19 February 2014; revised 9 April 2014; accepted 15 April 2014 Available online 24 April 2014 Handled by Jun Yu KEYWORDS Small RNA cluster; MicroRNA; siRNA; Expression pattern Abstract In plants, small RNAs (sRNAs) usually refer to non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) with lengths of 2024 nucleotides.
sRNAs are involved in the regulation of many essential processes related to plant development and environmental responses.
sRNAs in plants are mainly grouped into microRNAs (miRNAs) and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), and the latter can be further classified into trans-acting siRNAs (ta-siRNAs), repeat-associated siRNAs (ra-siRNAs), natural anti-sense siRNAs (nat-siRNAs), etc.
Many sRNAs exhibit a clustered distribution pattern in the genome.
Here, we summarize the features and functions of cluster-distributed sRNAs, aimed to not only provide a thorough picture of sRNA clusters (SRCs) in plants, but also shed light on the identification of new classes of functional sRNAs.
Introduction Small RNAs (sRNAs) have been identified as pivotal regulators in plants, participating in the regulation of plant growth and development, adaptation to abiotic stresses and responses to biotic pathogens [1,2].
sRNAs in plants can be mainly classified into microRNAs (miRNAs) and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) [3].
They are processed from the double-stranded region of single RNA molecules with hairpin-shaped secondary structures or double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) molecules, respectively, by one of the dicer-like family enzymes (DCL) encoded by the plant genome [4].
miRNAs are the class of most extensively studied sRNAs so far, and have been implicated to play essential roles in many aspects of plant development, such as meristem division, organ specification, leaf shape formation, secondary root elongation, flowering and fertility [5].
The population of endogenous siRNAs in plants largely exceeds that of miRNAs.
Increasing lines of evidence have shown that siRNAs are also important regulators in plants.
The RNA silencing phenomenon was first discovered in plants as a mechanism to silence invading nucleic acids such as transgenes and viruses through the action of siRNAs [6].
It was later recognized that RNA silencing also plays important roles in the regulation of gene expression in a wide range of biological processes [7].
In recent years, extensive studies focusing on plant sRNAs have been carried out, especially in the model plant hosting Liu YX et al/ Endogenous Small RNA Clusters in Plants 65 Arabidopsis thaliana.
These studies led to the identification of a few genes related to sRNA biogenesis and functions [5,8,9], and also new groups of functional sRNAs [1017].
For miRNAs, besides the traditionally-recognized mature miRNAs, high expression and target-cleavage function were also found for the isomiRNAs, which are sRNAs produced from the same genomic loci as miRNAs but with variable lengths, and miRNA*s, which are pairing sequences of mature miRNAs within the same hairpin-shaped precursor [1821].
On the other hand, the known functional siRNA classes include (1) trans-acting siRNAs (ta-siRNAs), which are phased sRNAs produced from the TAS genes with the involvement of miRNAs and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase 6 (RDR6) [22], (2) repeatassociated siRNAs (ra-siRNAs), which are generated from transposons, heterochromatic and repetitive genomic regions [23], (3) natural antisense siRNAs (nat-siRNAs), which are derived from the overlapping regions of natural antisense transcript pairs [24,25], (4) cis-acting siRNAs (ca-siRNAs) produced by the cis-cleavage of TAS3 transcript [14] and (5) DNA double-strand break induced small RNAs (diRNAs) in response to DNA damage [16].
Besides the above mentioned groups, there are also a large number of unclassified sRNAs with unknown functions.
With the application of high-throughput sequencing technology, the population and expression of sRNAs have been extensively explored in many plant species, revealing some genomic regions enriched in sRNAs [23].
These genomic regions tend to produce multiple, sometimes hundreds or thousands of, sRNAs with variable lengths.
The cluster-distributed sRNAs can be grouped into small RNA clusters (SRCs), which have caught some attention in recent years [2628].
Studies have shown that 24-nucleotide (nt) SRCs may contribute to hybrid vigor in Arabidopsis and maize [29,30].
Moreover, bioinformatics tools identifying SRCs have also been developed [18,31].
Here, we summarize the current knowledge and features of plant SRCs, as well as the facing challenges, with the hope to facilitate functional studies of SRCs in plants.
Biogenesis of plant miRNAs and siRNAs Both miRNAs and siRNAs are derived from the doublestranded regions of RNA molecules.
The difference is that miRNAs are produced from the double-stranded stem region of a single RNA molecule with hairpin-shaped precursors, whereas siRNAs are generated from double-stranded duplexes formed by two RNA molecules [5].
There are several steps involved in miRNA biogenesis.
Firstly, primary miRNAs (pri-miRNAs), which are the original transcripts for miRNA processing, are transcribed in most cases by RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) [32,33].
In plants, pri-miRNAs are primarily produced from intergenic regions, whereas a considerable number of animal miRNAs are encoded by introns of protein-coding genes [34].
Secondly, pri-miRNAs are processed into precursor miRNAs (pre-miRNAs) with stem-loop shaped secondary structures by the endonuclease Dicer-like 1 protein (DCL1) [35].
This process also requires the participation of many other proteins, such as the RNA-binding protein DAWDLE (DDL) [36], the C2H2-zinc finger protein SERRATE (SE) [37] and the dsRNA binding protein HYPONASTIC LEAVES1 (HYL1) [38].
Thirdly, pre-miRNAs are processed by DCL1 into 21-nt double-stranded miRNA duplex in nucleus [39].
The double-stranded duplex of mature miRNA and its pairing sequence, used to be named miRNA*, are then exported to the cytoplasm through the action of the HASTY protein, which is the plant ortholog of exportin 5, and other unknown factors [40].
Increasing lines of evidence have shown that the miRNA* sequences of some miRNAs are also functional under certain circumstances.
The miRNA and miRNA* are now more commonly named as miRNA-5p and miRNA-3p, respectively, according to their positions on the hairpin-shaped precursor [4143].
The produced miRNA-5p or miRNA-3p will then be methylated by HEN1 [44], a reaction that protects them from being degraded by the small RNA degrading nuclease (SDN) class of exonucleases [45].
Finally, the functional miRNA (either miRNA-5p, miRNA-3p or both) will be incorporated into Argonature (AGO) protein-centered RNA induced silencing complex (RISC) to execute their functions [46].
Classically, plant miRNAs usually associate with AGO1 to induce post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) of RNA by pairing to target sequences and resulting in RNA slicing and/or translation inhibition [47,48].
On the other hand, siRNAs are generated from dsRNA duplexes and processed by one of the DCL family member proteins (Table 1).
siRNA precursors include single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) molecules with near-perfect double-stranded regions formed by the fold-back of an inverted-repeat (IR) sequence [49], dsRNA duplexes formed by two RNA molecules with sequence complementarity [24] or dsRNAs converted from ssRNAs by RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RdRPs) [50].
The resulting dsRNA molecules will be cleaved sequentially into siRNAs, and loaded to AGO proteins of the RISC complex to execute transcriptional or post-transcriptional gene silencing functions via sequencing pairing [10].
In plants, siRNAs of different lengths are produced by different DCL family proteins and exhibit different AGO protein association p
