                Promote Connections of Young Computational Biologists in China Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 253256 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb www.sciencedirect.com MEETING REPORT Promote Connections of Young Computational Biologists in China Shihua Zhang 1,*, Xiu-Jie Wang 2,* 1 National Center for Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences, Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 2 Center for Molecular Systems Biology, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China Received 21 June 2013; revised 23 June 2013; accepted 1 July 2013 Available online 5 July 2013 Background The first Youth Investigator Forum on Interdisciplinary Research of Mathematics, Computer Science and Biological Science (YMCB) took place on May 1819, 2013 in Beijing, China.
The conference was hosted by the National Center for Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences (NCMIS), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), and was initiated by Dr. Xiu-Jie Wang (Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, CAS) and Dr. Shihua Zhang (Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, CAS).
This conference was launched to nurture the next generation of computational biologists in China.
More than 300 people from all over the country attended this conference and 21 talks and 40 posters were presented at this meeting.
The topics covered next-generation sequencing data analysis, transcription and mRNA regulation, microRNA and lncRNA regulation, network biology, cancer genomics, epigenetics and personalized medicine.
The conference was opened by Prof. Shihua Zhang with a warm welcome to the participants and an introduction to the goal of the conference.
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail: zsh@amss.ac.cn (Zhang S), xjwang@genetics.ac.cn (Wang XJ).
Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier 1672-0229/$-see front matter 2013 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese A by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Then Prof. Lei Guo, Zhirong Sun and Xiu-Jie Wang gave brief remarks respectively to wish a successful conference.
In this report we give a short introduction about the talks and briefly recapitulate each one of them, providing
