BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.25 no.8 2009, pages 1091 1093 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp101 Systems biology ClueGO: a Cytoscape plug-in to decipher functionally grouped gene ontology and pathway annotation networks Gabriela Bindea1 4, , Bernhard Mlecnik1 3, , Hubert Hackl4, Pornpimol Charoentong4, Marie Tosolini1 3, Amos Kirilovsky1 3, Wolf-Herman Fridman1 3,5, Franck Pagès1 3,5, Zlatko Trajanoski4 and Jérôme Galon1 3,5, 1INSERM, AVENIR Team, Integrative Cancer Immunology, U872, 75006 Paris, 2Université Paris Descartes, 3Université Pierre et Marie Curie Paris 6, Cordeliers Research Center, Paris, France, 4Institute for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria and 5Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, HEGP, Paris, France Received on November 13, 2008 revised on February 8, 2009 accepted on February 16, 2009 Advance Access publication February 23, 2009 Associate Editor: Trey Ideker ABSTRACT Summary: We have developed ClueGO, an easy to use Cytoscape plug-in that strongly improves biological interpretation of large lists of genes.
ClueGO integrates Gene Ontology (GO) terms as well as KEGG/BioCarta pathways and creates a functionally organized GO/pathway term network.
It can analyze one or compare two lists of genes and comprehensively visualizes functionally grouped terms.
A one-click update option allows ClueGO to automatically download the most recent GO/KEGG release at any time.
ClueGO provides an intuitive representation of the analysis results and can be optionally used in conjunction with the GOlorize plug-in.
Availability: http://www.ici.upmc.fr/cluego/cluegoDownload.shtml Contact: jerome.galon@crc.jussieu.fr Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION Since the number of genes that can be analyzed by high-throughput experiments by far exceeded what can be interpreted by a single person, different attempts have been initiated in order to capture biological information and systematically organize the wealth of data.
For example Gene Ontology (GO) (Ashburner et al., 2000) annotates genes to biological/cellular/molecular terms in a hierarchically structured way, whereas Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) (Kanehisa et al., 2002) and BioCarta assigns genes to functional pathways.
Several functional enrichment analysis tools (e.g. Boyle et al., 2004 Huang et al., 2007 Maere et al., 2005 Ramos et al., 2008 Zeeberg et al., 2003) and algorithms (e.g. Li et al., 2008) were developed to enhance data interpretation.
As most of these tools mainly present their results as long lists or complex hierarchical trees, we aimed to develop ClueGO a Cytoscape (Shannon et al., 2003) plug-in to facilitate the biological interpretation and to visualize functionally grouped terms in the form of networks and charts.
Other tools like BiNGO (Maere et al., 2005) or PIPE (Ramos et al., 2008) assess overrepresented GO terms  To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the ﬁrst two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors.
and reconstruct the hierarchical ontology tree, whereas ClueGO uses kappa statistics to link the terms in the network.
Compared with the approach of Ramos et al. (2008) which creates an in silico annotation network based on pathways and protein interaction data and maps the gene list of interest afterwards, ClueGO generates a dynamical network structure by already initially considering the gene lists of interest.
ClueGO integrates GO terms as well as KEGG/BioCarta pathways and creates a functionally organized GO/pathway term network.Avariety of ﬂexible restriction criteria allow for visualizations in different levels of speciﬁcity. In addition, ClueGO can compare clusters of genes and visualizes their functional differences.
ClueGO takes advantage of Cytoscape s versatile visualization framework and can be used in conjunction with the GOlorize plug-in (Garcia et al., 2007). 2 METHODS AND IMPLEMENTATION ClueGO has two major features: it can be either used for the visualization of terms corresponding to a list of genes, or the comparison of functional annotations of two clusters.
2.1 Data import Gene identiﬁer sets can be directly uploaded in simple text format or interactively derived from gene network graphs visualized in Cytoscape. ClueGO supports several gene identiﬁers and organisms by default and is easy extendable for additional ones in a plug-in like manner (Supplementary Material). 2.2 Annotation sources To allow a fast analysis, ClueGO uses precompiled annotation ﬁles including GO, KEGG and BioCarta for a wide range of organisms.
A one-click update feature automatically downloads the latest ontology and annotation sources and creates new precompiled ﬁles that are added to the existing ones.
This ensures an up-to-date functional analysis.
Additionally ClueGO can easily integrate new annotation sources in a plug-in like way (Supplementary Material). 2.3 Enrichment tests ClueGO offers the possibility to calculate enrichment/depletion tests for terms and groups as left-sided (Enrichment), right-sided (Depletion) or two-sided (Enrichment/Depletion) tests based on the hypergeometric distribution.
2009 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[18:02 30/3/2009 Bioinformatics-btp101.tex] Page: 1091 1091 1093  G.Bindea et al. Furthermore it provides options to calculate mid-P-values and doubling for two-sided tests to deal with discreetness and conservatism effects as suggested by (Rivals et al., 2007). To correct the P-values for multiple testing several standard correction methods are proposed (Bonferroni, Bonferroni step-down and Benjamini-Hochberg). 2.4 Network generation and visualization To create the annotations network ClueGO provides predeﬁned functional analysis settings ranging from general to very speciﬁc ones.
Furthermore, the user can adjust the analysis parameters to focus on terms, e.g. in certain GO level intervals, with particular evidence codes or with a certain number and percentage of associated genes.
An optional redundancy reduction feature (Fusion) assesses GO terms in a parent child relation sharing similar associated genes and preserves the more representative parent or child term.
The relationship between the selected terms is deﬁned based on their shared genes in a similar way as described by Huang et al. (2007). ClueGO creates ﬁrst a binary gene-term matrix with the selected terms and their associated genes.
Based on this matrix, a term term similarity matrix is calculated using chance corrected kappa statistics to determine the association strength between the terms.
Since the term term matrix is of categorical origin, kappa statistic was found to be the most suitable method.
Finally, the created network represents the terms as nodes which are linked based on a predeﬁned kappa score level.
The kappa score level threshold can initially be adjusted on a positive scale from 0 to 1 to restrict the network connectivity in a customized way.
The size of the nodes reﬂects the enrichment signiﬁcance of the terms.
The network is automatically laid out using the Organic layout algorithm supported by Cytoscape. The functional groups are created by iterative merging of initially deﬁned groups based on the predeﬁned kappa score threshold.
The ﬁnal groups are ﬁxed or randomly colored and overlaid with the network.
Functional groups represented by their most signiﬁcant (leading) term are visualized in the network providing an insightful view of their interrelations.
Also other ways of selecting the group leading term, e.g. based on the number or percentage of genes per term are provided.
As an alternative to the kappa score grouping the GO hierarchy using parent child relationships can be used to create functional groups.
When comparing two gene clusters, another original feature of ClueGO allows to switch the visualization of the groups on the network to the cluster distribution over the terms.
Besides the network, ClueGO provides overview charts showing the groups and their leading term as well as detailed term histograms for both, cluster speciﬁc and common terms.
Like BiNGO, ClueGO can be used in conjuntion with GOlorize for functional analysis of a Cytoscape gene network.
The created networks, charts and analysis results can be saved as project in a speciﬁed folder and used for further analysis.
3 CASE STUDY To demonstrate how ClueGO assesses and compares biological functions for clusters of genes we selected up-and down-regulated natural killer (NK) cell genes in healthy donors from an expression proﬁle of human peripheral blood lymphocytes (GSE6887, Gene Expression Omnibus). For upregulated NK genes ClueGO revealed speciﬁc terms like Natural killer cell mediated cytotoxicity in the group Cellular defense response.
Downregulated in NK cells compared with the reference (a pool of all immune cell types) were genes involved in the innate immune response (Macrophages), but also in the adaptive immune response (T and B cell). The common functionality refers to characteristics of leukocytes (chemotaxis), besides other terms involved in cell division and metabolism (Fig. 1). 1092 Fig.1.
ClueGO example analysis of up-and down-regulated NK cell genes in peripheral blood from healthy human donors.
(a) GO/pathway terms speciﬁc for upregulated genes.
The bars represent the number of genes associated with the terms.
The percentage of genes per term is shown as bar label.
(b) Overview chart with functional groups including speciﬁc terms for upregulated genes.
(c) Functionally grouped network with terms as nodes linked based on their kappa score level ( 0.3), where only the label of the most signiﬁcant term per group is shown.
The node size represents the term enrichment signiﬁcance. Functionally related groups partially overlap.
Not grouped terms are shown in white.
(d) The distribution of two clusters visualized on network (c). Terms with up/downregulated genes are shown in red/green, respectively.
The color gradient shows the gene proportion of each cluster associated with the term.
Equal proportions of the two clusters are represented in white.
[18:02 30/3/2009 Bioinformatics-btp101.tex] Page: 1092 1091 1093  4 SUMMARY ClueGO is a user friendly Cytoscape plug-in to analyze interrelations of terms and functional groups in biological networks.
A variety of ﬂexible adjustments allow for a profound exploration of gene clusters in annotation networks.
Our tool is easily extendable to new organisms and identiﬁer types as well as new annotation sources which can be included in a transparent, plug-in like manner.
Furthermore, the one-click update feature of ClueGO ensures an up-to-date analysis at any time.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank A Van Cortenbosch for the name of the tool.
Funding: INSERM Ville de Paris INCa the Austrian Ministry for Science and Research, Project GEN-AU BINII the European 7FP Grant Agreement 202230 (GENINCA). Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES Ashburner,M. et al. (2000) Gene ontology: tool for the uniﬁcation of biology.
The Gene Ontology Consortium.
Nat. Genet., 25, 25 29.
ClueGO Boyle,E.I. et al. (2004) GO::TermFinder open source software for accessing Gene Ontology information and ﬁnding signiﬁcantly enriched gene ontology terms associated with a list of genes.
Bioinformatics, 20, 3710 3715.
Garcia,O. et al. (2007) GOlorize: a cytoscape plug-in for network visualization 23, coloring.
Bioinformatics, layout and with Gene Ontology-based 394 396.
Huang,D.W. et al. (2007) The DAVID Gene Functional Classiﬁcation Tool: a novel biological module-centric algorithm to functionally analyze large gene lists.
Genome Biol., 8, R183 R183. Kanehisa,M. et al. (2002) The KEGG databases at GenomeNet. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 42 46.
Li,Y. et al. (2008) A global pathway crosstalk network.
Bioinformatics, 24, 1442 1447.
Maere,S. et al. (2005) BiNGO: a Cytoscape plugin to assess overrepresentation of Gene Ontology categories in biological networks.
Bioinformatics, 21, 3448 3449.
Ramos,H. et al. (2008) The protein information and property explorer: an easy-to-use, rich-client web application for the management and functional analysis of proteomic data.
Bioinformatics, 24, 2110 2111.
Rivals,I. et al. (2007) Enrichment or depletion of a GO category within a class of genes: which test Bioinformatics, 23, 401 407.
Shannon,P. et al. (2003) Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks.
Genome Res., 13, 2498 2504.
Zeeberg,B.R. et al. (2003) GoMiner: a resource for biological interpretation of genomic and proteomic data.
Genome Biol., 4, R28 R28. [18:02 30/3/2009 Bioinformatics-btp101.tex] Page: 1093 1091 1093 1093
