BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.25 no.19 2009, pages 2615 2616 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp459 Gene expression RNA-MATE: a recursive mapping strategy for high-throughput RNA-sequencing data Nicole Cloonan , , Qinying Xu , Geoffrey J. Faulkner, Darrin F. Taylor, Dave T. P. Tang, Gabriel Kolle and Sean M. Grimmond Queensland Centre for Medical Genomics, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia 4072, Australia Received on February 4, 2009 revised on July 21, 2009 accepted on July 22, 2009 Advance Access publication July 30, 2009 Associate Editor: Joaquin Dopazo ABSTRACT Summary: Mapping of next-generation sequencing data derived from RNA samples (RNAseq) presents different genome mapping challenges than data derived from DNA. For example, tags that cross exon-junction boundaries will often not map to a reference genome, and the strand speciﬁcity of the data needs to be retained.
Here we present RNA-MATE, a computational pipeline based on a recursive mapping strategy for placing strand speciﬁc RNAseq data onto a reference genome.
Maximizing the mappable tags can provide signiﬁcant savings in the cost of sequencing experiments.
This pipeline provides an automatic and integrated way to align color- space sequencing data, collate this information and generate ﬁles for examining gene-expression data in a genomic context.
Availability: Executables, source code, and exon-junction libraries are available from http://grimmond.imb.uq.edu.au/RNA-MATE Contact: n.cloonan@imb.uq.edu.au Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics Online.
High-throughput sequencing technologies can generate hundreds of millions of short tags (typically only 25 50 nt) from a single experiment, and this capacity is enabling a new wave of genomic research.
Not only is this technology being used for genomic sequencing, re-sequencing and epigenomic applications, but several groups have recently applied this technology to sequence RNA for gene-expression studies (RNAseq). Conceptually, RNAseq protocols are simple.
Single-stranded RNA molecules are captured between two sequencing adaptors, either through serial ligation (Lister et al., 2008) or through random-primed PCR (Cloonan et al., 2008), yielding strand speciﬁc information.
More commonly, RNAseq data is generated from sheared, double-stranded cDNA libraries (Mortazavi et al., 2008 Nagalakshmi et al., 2008 Sultan et al., 2008 Wilhelm et al., 2008), however this approach loses strand information, which can not always be assumed from annotations (since loci can produce antisense transcripts, and loci on different strands can overlap). To whom correspondence should be addressed.
The authors wish it be known that, in their opinion, the ﬁrst two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.
Some of the beneﬁts of using RNAseq over microarrays to study gene-expression data include: (i) the potentially unlimited dynamic range of expression (ii) the greater sensitivity of the sequencing data (iii) the improved ability to discriminate regions of high sequence identity and (iv) the ability to proﬁle transcription without prior assumptions of which genomic regions are expressed.
However, for mammalian genomes, there are technical challenges associated with mapping and counting short-tag sequences.
Firstly, mammalian transcripts are non-contiguous due to the splicing of introns from the pre-mRNA, therefore a proportion of tags (those that cross exon-exon boundaries) will not map directly to the genome.
The presence of genome wide repeats and other repetitive sequence in the mouse and human genomes means that a sizeable proportion of short tags can not be placed uniquely (Faulkner et al., 2008). Finally, depending on the speciﬁc library preparation protocol, a proportion of fragments may be shorter than the full length of the tag sequenced.
Such tags will contain adaptor sequence that prevents mapping to the genome.
Here we present a computational pipeline to map RNAseq data.
RNA-Mapping and Alignment Tools for Expression (RNA-MATE) generates both tag counting and genome-browser visualization of genomic and exon-junction mapping results, addressing the issues above (Fig. 1). Depending on the downstream applications of the mapped data, the quality of individual tags may need to be assessed before inclusion in the mapping dataset. To accommodate this, there is an optional tag quality module, which assesses the tags by the number of basecalls with PHRED scores of 10.
If this option is disabled, all tags are passed to the alignment module.
Alignment of the short tags to a reference is done using mapreads (http://solidsoftwaretools.com/gf/project/mapreads/), an algorithm that maps color-space data.
Tags are mapped to the reference genome, and then against a library of known exon-junctions (although this default behavior can be modiﬁed). Tags that fail to map are chopped to user-deﬁned lengths, and the genomic mapping is restarted.
In this way, tags that have adaptor sequence, or poor quality ends are recovered at their longest length.
Although this strategy uses more CPU time, it will typically yield between 1.6 and 3 times the mappable tags, providing signiﬁcant cost savings.
The number of mismatches between the reference and tag is user deﬁned, and when unique genomic mappings are selected, only the  The Author(s) 2009.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses by-nc/2.5/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[15:19 31/8/2009 Bioinformatics-btp459.tex] Page: 2615 2615 2616  N.Cloonan et al. Start Read Configuration File 1 2 3 4 check quality  Yes Quality Check No Genome/Junction Alignment tag aligned  No Trim Tag Yes rescue multimappers  Yes No Select Single Mapping Tags Multimapping Tag Rescue Create Wiggle Plot Files Create Junction BED files End Fig.1.
The RNA-MATE recursive mapping pipeline.
The pipeline consists of four major components.
(1) Tags are (optionally) ﬁltered based on the quality values for each basecall. (2) The alignment module attempts to align tags ﬁrst to the genome, and then to a library of known exon-junction sequences.
If a tag fails to align, then the tag is truncated, and the process is repeated.
(3) The optional tag rescue module uses information derived from both single- and multi-mapping tags to uniquely place multi-mapping tags.
(4) Finally, UCSC genome browser compatible wiggle plots and BED ﬁles are generated.
mappings at the highest level of stringency are retained.
Advice on mapping parameters is included in the documentation.
For most downstream applications, tags are only informative if they can be placed uniquely within a genome.
The proportion of transcriptome tags that align to multiple places within a genome will vary depending on the length of the tags, the genome, and the expression in the individual sample, however this is typically between 13 38% for mammalian libraries (Cloonan et al., 2008 Mortazavi et al., 2008). Strategies to rescue ambiguous sequences have recently been applied to high-throughput sequencing data, and we have reﬁned our previously described algorithm (Faulkner et al., 2008) to work efﬁciently with large data sets.
For every multi- mapping tag, the algorithm considers all tags that map near to each of the possible locations of the tag (within a user-speciﬁed window) to determine the most likely mapping position of the tag.
Where a tag can not be unambiguously assigned, a fractional weighting to the relevant positions is assigned.
Between 40 and 60% of multi-mapping tags can be assigned a single position with 60% likelihood, depending on the relative sequence coverage (Supplementary Table 1). The recommended window size for shotgun sequencing is 10 nt (Cloonan et al., 2008), though for disparate data types currently available this can vary.
For instance, Cap Analysis of Gene Expression (CAGE) tags are rescued using a window of 100 nt, a size previously shown to optimize mammalian promoter detection (Carninci et al., 2006). Finally, UCSC genome browser compatible wiggle plots for genome mapped data, and BED ﬁles for exon-junction mapped data 2616 are generated automatically from the collated results.
The wiggle plots are strand-speciﬁc, single-nucleotide resolution coverage plots, and directly represent the number of times an individual nucleotide has been seen in the sequencing data.
BED ﬁles depict hits to junction sequences, and graphically display exon combinatorics. In addition, plots containing only start sites of tags are included to facilitate tag-counting applications.
Plots generated from particularly deep sequencing may be difﬁcult to upload directly to the UCSC genome browser, and a post-processing script to ﬁlter wiggle plots to aid visualization in this way is provided.
The assignment of tags to genes is facilitated Galaxy (Giardine et al., 2005), and a tutorial is provided in the user manual.
This allows the comparison of RNAseq data to microarray data, or the visualization and analysis using tools developed for microarrays. In this step, particular care needs to be taken to ensure that different RNAseq protocols are processed with the strand of capture in mind.
For example, serial-ligation approaches will generate sequences from the sense strand, relative to the annotated gene, whereas the random-primed strand-speciﬁc protocols will generate tags mapping to the anti-sense strand.
This pipeline described here is written in Perl, and makes use of a PBS queue manager, however it can be conﬁgured to use LSF or SGE (detailed in the documentation). Due to the long computational times required for recursive-mapping, implementation on machines without access to a cluster is not recommended, but possible.
Future releases will support alternative alignment algorithms, SNP calling, and an easy to use web based GUI. All source code, instructions, testing data, and additional scripts are available from http://grimmond.imb.uq.edu.au/RNA-MATE/. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors greatly appreciate the advice and sequencing data given to us by Ehsan Nourbakhsh and Brooke Gardiner, and the help with LSF and SGE queues given to us by Xuanzhong Li and Till Bayer. Funding: National Health and Medical Research Council [455857 to S.M.G. 456140, 631701] the Australian Research Council [DP0988754] the Australian Stem Cell Centre [to G.J.F, G.K. and D.F.T.] and the University of Queensland [to N.C. and Q.X.]. Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES Carninci,P. et al. (2006) Genome-wide analysis of mammalian promoter architecture and evolution.
Nat. Genet., 38, 626 635.
Cloonan,N. et al. (2008) Stem cell transcriptome proﬁling via massive-scale mRNA sequencing.
Nat. Meth., 5, 613 619.
Faulkner,G.J. et al. (2008) A rescue strategy for multimapping short sequence tags reﬁnes surveys of transcriptional activity by CAGE.
Genomics, 91, 281 288.
Giardine,B. et al. (2005) Galaxy: a platform for interactive large-scale genome analysis.
Genome Res., 15, 1451 1455.
Lister,R. et al. (2008) Highly integrated single-base resolution maps of the epigenome in Arabidopsis. Cell, 133, 523 536.
Mortazavi,A. et al. (2008) Mapping and quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by RNA-Seq. Nat. Meth., 5, 621 628.
Nagalakshmi,U. et al. (2008) The transcriptional landscape of the yeast genome deﬁned by RNA sequencing.
Science, 320, 1344 1349.
Sultan,M. et al. (2008) A global view of gene activity and alternative splicing by deep sequencing of the human transcriptome. Science, 1160342.
Wilhelm,B.T. et al. (2008) Dynamic repertoire of a eukaryotic transcriptome surveyed at single-nucleotide resolution.
Nature, 453, 1239 1243.
[15:19 31/8/2009 Bioinformatics-btp459.tex] Page: 2616 2615 2616
