BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.30 no.20 2014, pages 2959 2961 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu406 Genome analysis Advance Access publication July 1, 2014 GATB: Genome Assembly & Analysis Tool Box Erwan Drezen1, Guillaume Rizk1, Rayan Chikhi2, Charles Deltel1, Claire Lemaitre1, Pierre Peterlongo1 and Dominique Lavenier1,* 1INRIA/IRISA/GenScale, Campus de Beaulieu, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France and 2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, PA 16802, USA Associate Editor: John Hancock ABSTRACT Motivation: Efficient and fast next-generation sequencing (NGS) algo-rithms are essential to analyze the terabytes of data generated by the NGS machines.
A serious bottleneck can be the design of such algo-rithms, as they require sophisticated data structures and advanced hardware implementation.
Results: We propose an open-source library dedicated to genome assembly and analysis to fasten the process of developing efficient software.
The library is based on a recent optimized de-Bruijn graph implementation allowing complex genomes to be processed on desk-top computers using fast algorithms with low memory footprints.
Availability and implementation: The GATB library is written in C++ and is available at the following Web site http://gatb.inria.fr under the A-GPL license.
Contact: lavenier@irisa.fr Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on March 25, 2014 revised and accepted on June 20, 2014 1 INTRODUCTION The analysis of next-generation sequencing (NGS) data remains a time-and space-consuming task.
Many efforts have been made to provide efficient data structures for indexing the terabytes of data generated by the fast sequencing machines (Suffix Array, Burrows Wheeler transform, Bloom filter, etc.). Genome assem-blers such as Velvet (Zerbino and Birney, 2008), ABySS (Simpson et al., 2009), SOAPdenovo2 (Luo et al., 2012), SPAdes (Bankevich et al., 2012) or mappers such as BWA (Li and Durbin, 2009) or variant detection such as CRAC (Philippe et al., 2013) for instance make an intensive use of these data structures to keep their memory footprint as low as possible.
At the same time, parallelism has been largely investigated to reduce execution time.
Many strategies such as GPU implemen-tation (Liu et al., 2012), cloud deployment (Zhao et al., 2013), algorithm vectorization (Rizk and Lavenier, 2010), multithread-ing, etc., have demonstrated high potentiality on NGS processing.
The overall efficiency of NGS software depends on a smart combination of data representation and use of the available pro-cessing units.
Developing such software is thus a real challenge, as it requires a large spectrum of competence from high-level *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
data structure and algorithm concepts to tiny details of implementation.
The GATB library aims to ease the design of NGS algorithms.
It offers a panel of high-level optimized building blocks to speedup the development of NGS tools related to genome as-sembly and/or genome analysis.
The underlying data structure is a memory efficient de-Bruijn graph (Compeau et al., 2011), and the general parallelism model is multithreading. The GATB library targets standard computing resources such as current multicore processor (laptop computer, small server) with a few gigabytes of memory.
Hence, from the high-level C++ functions available in the GATB library, NGS programing designers can rapidly elaborate their own software based on state-of-the-art algorithms and data structures of the domain.
Based on the same idea, other bioinformatics libraries exist, from which domain-specific tools can be elaborated.
The NGS++ library (Markovits et al., 2013) is specifically tailored for developing applications that work with genomic regions and features, such as epigenomics marks, gene features and data that are associated with BED type files.
The SeqAn library (Doring et al., 2008) is a general-purpose library targeting standard se-quence processing.
Advanced data structures such as de-Bruijn graphs are not included in SeqAn. Khmer (Crusoe et al., 2014) is a library and toolkit for doing k-mer-based NGS dataset ana-lysis. As with GATB, most of khmer relies on an underlying probabilistic data structure (Bloom filter). The khmer library can be used in various k-mer processing such as abundance filtering, error trimming, graph size filtering or partitioning.
2 METHODS One of the main concerns of the GATB-core library is to provide com-puting modules able to run on standard machines, i.e. computers not requiring large amount of main memory.
The central data structure is a de-Bruijn graph from which numerous actions can be performed as shown Figure 1: data error correction, as-sembly, biological motif detection [e.g. single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)], etc.
The graph is constructed by extracting and by counting all the different k-mers from one or several sequencing datasets. This time-and space-consuming task is conducted by a disk streaming algorithm, DSK (Rizk et al., 2013), which adapts its memory requirement according to the available computer memory.
Trade-off between execution time and memory occupancy can be set up: the larger the computer memory, shorter the computation time (reduced disk access). The de-Bruijn graph memory footprint is kept low thanks to an opti-mized Bloom filter representation (Chikhi and Rish, 2012 Salikhov et al., 2014). Only vertices of the de-Bruijn graph are memorized.
Edges are ß The Author 2014.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com  E.Drezen et al. this abstraction level, developing new tools based on de-Buijn graphs is fast, and does not require programmers to delve into low-level details.
The GATB library takes benefit of the parallel nature of today s multicore architecture of microprocessors.
When pos-sible, time-consuming parts of the code are multithreaded to provide fast runtime execution.
The GATB library is developed in C++ under the A-GPL license and is available from the following Web site: http://gatb. inria.fr. An extensive documentation with tutorials is available to guide designers in the process of developing new NGS tools from the GATB building blocks: http://gatb-core.gforge.inria.fr (see also Supplementary File 2 for technical implementation details). Fig.1.
Schematic view of the GATB organization 4 RESULTS deduced by querying the Bloom filter.
False positives (owing to the prob-abilistic behavior of the Bloom filter) are suppressed by adding an extra data structure enumerating critical vertices.
This efficient de-Bruijn graph representation fits, for example, a complete mammal genome in 4 GB. 3 IMPLEMENTATION The GATB library is composed of five main packages: system, tools, bank, kmer and de-Bruijn packages.
The system package holds all the operations related to the operating system (OS): file management, memory management and thread management.
Using such an abstraction allows client code to be independent from the OS, thus suppressing compil-ation directive inside the code or improving some OS accesses by hiding specific OS optimization.
The supported operating systems are Linux, Mac and Windows.
The tools package offers generic operations used throughout the user application but not specific to genomics area.
For ex-ample, this package includes design pattern tools (such as itera-tors, observers, smart pointers, etc.) and object collections (such as containers, bags, iterables, etc.). It also optimizes the way GATB data structures are saved.
The HDF5 file format is cur-rently used (HDF5, 2012). This powerful technology is extremely well suited for large and complex data collection such as those handled in the GATB library.
The bank package provides operations related to standard genomic sequence dataset management.
All the main sequence file formats are supported, and high-level interfaces allow sequences to be easily iterated regardless of the input format.
In other words, algorithms are written independently of the input formats.
The kmer package is dedicated to fine-grained manipulation of k-mers. Optimized routines are provided to perform k-mer counting from large sequence datasets, to find k-mer neighbor-hood or to select k-mers based on different criteria.
Finally, the de-Bruijn package provides high-level functions to manipulate a static de-Bruijn graph data structure: creation from a set of k-mers, iteration through different nature of nodes (simple k-mers, branching k-mers, etc.
), extraction of neighbor nodes, etc.
Additional information (e.g. k-mer coverage, markers of visited nodes) is stored in the graph branching nodes.
From 2960 To demonstrate the efficiency of the GATB library, a few soft-ware implemented from GATB are briefly presented.
The idea is to give a quick overview of the application spectrum of the GATB library and some performance numbers.
Minia (Chikhi and Rish, 2012) is a short-read de-Bruijn as-sembler capable of assembling large and complex genomes into contigs on a desktop computer.
The assembler produces contigs of similar length and accuracy to other de-Bruijn assemblers  e.g. Velvet (Zerbino and Birney, 2008). As an example, a Boa (Illumina 2 120 bp constrictor constrictor (1.6 Gb) dataset reads, 125 coverage) from Assemblathon 2 (Bradnam et al., 2013) can be processed in 45 h and 3 GB of memory on a standard computer (3.4 GHz 8-core processor) using a single core, yielding a contig N50 of 3.6 kb (prior to scaffolding and gap-filling). Bloocoo is a k-mer spectrum-based read error corrector, de-signed to correct large datasets with low memory footprints.
It uses the disk streaming k-mer counting algorithm contained in the GATB library and inserts solid k-mers in a Bloom filter.
The correction procedure is similar to the Musket multistage approach (Liu et al., 2013). Bloocoo yields similar results while requiring far less memory: for example, it can correct whole human genome re-sequencing reads at 70 coverage with 54 GB of memory (see Supplementary file 1 for extra informa-tion on Bloocoo). DiscoSNP aims to discover Single Nucleotide Polymorphism from non-assembled reads and without a reference genome.
From one or several datasets a global de-Bruijn graph is con-structed, then scanned to locate specific SNP graph patterns (Uricaru et al., 2014). A coverage analysis on these particular locations can finally be performed to validate and assign scores to detected biological elements.
Applied on a mouse dataset (2.88 Gb, 100 bp Illumina reads), DiscoSnp takes 34 h and re-quires 4.5 GB RAM.
In the same spirit, the TakeABreak soft-ware discovers inversion variants from non-assembled reads.
It directly finds particular patterns in the de-Bruijn graph and pro-vides execution performances similar to DiscoSNP (Lemaitre et al., 2014). Funding: ANR (French National Research Agency) (ANR-12-EMMA-0019-01). Conflict of interest: none declared.
GATB: Genome Assembly & Analysis Tool Box REFERENCES Bankevich,A. et al. (2012) SPAdes: a new genome assembly algorithm and its applications to single-cell sequencing.
J. Comput. Biol., 19, 455 477.
Bradnam,K.R. et al. (2013) Assemblathon 2: evaluating de novo methods of genome assembly in three vertebrate species.
Gigascience, 2, 10.
Liu,Y. et al. (2012) CUSHAW: a CUDA compatible short read aligner to large transform.
Bioinformatics, 28, genomes based on the Burrows Wheeler 1830 1837.
Luo,R. et al. (2012) SOAPdenovo2: an empirically improved memory-efficient short-read de novo assembler.
Gigascience, 1, 18.
Markovits,A. et al. (2013) NGS++: a library for rapid prototyping of epigenomics Chikhi,R. and Risk,G. (2012) Space-efficient and exact de-Bruijn graph represen-software tools.
Bioinformatics, 29, 1893 1894. tation based on a Bloom filter.
Algorithms Bioinform., 8, 236 248.
Philippe,N. et al. (2013) CRAC: an integrated approach to the analysis of RNA-seq Compeau,P. et al. (2011) How to apply de Bruijn graphs to genome assembly.
Nat. reads.
Genome Biol., 14, R30. Biotechnol., 29, 987 991.
Rizk,G. and Lavenier,D. (2010) GASSST: global alignment short sequence search Doring,A. et al. (2008) SeqAn:an efficient generic C++ loibrary for sequence ana-tool.
Bioinformatics, 26, 2534 2540. lysis. BMC Bioinformatics, 9, 11.
Rizk,G. et al. (2013) DSK: k-mer counting with very low memory usage.
HDF5 group help desk.
(2012) File format specification v2.0. http://www.hdfgroup. Bioinformatics, 29, 652 653. org/HDF5/doc/H5.format.html. Crusoe,M.R. et al. (2014) The khmer software package: enabling efficient sequence analysis.
[Epub ahead of print, doi: 10.6084/m9.figshare.979190]. Lemaitre,C. et al. (2014) Mapping-free and assembly-free discovery of inversion breakpoints from raw NGS reads.
In: First International Conference on Algorithms for Computational Biology (AlCoB 2014). Tarragona, Spain. Li,H. and Durbin,R. (2009) Fast and accurate short read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler Transform.
Bioinformatics, 25, 1754 1760.
Salikhov,K. et al. (2014) Using cascading bloom filters to improve the memory usage for de-Bruijn graph.
Algorithms Mol Biol, 9, 2.
Simpson,J.T. et al. (2009) ABySS: a parallel assembler for short read sequence data.
Genome Res., 19, 1117 1123.
Uricaru,R. et al. (2014) Reference-ree detection of genotypable SNPs, in revision to NAR[Epub ahead of print]. Zhao,S. et al. (2013) Rainbow: a tool for large-scale whole-genome sequencing data analysis using cloud computing.
BMC Genomics, 14, 425.
Liu,Y. et al. (2013) Musket: a multistage k-mer spectrum-based error corrector for Zerbino,D.R. and Birney,E. (2008) Velvet: algorithms for de novo short read as-Illumina sequence data.
Bioinformatics, 29, 308 315. sembly using de-Bruijn graphs.
Genome Res., 18, 821 829.
2961
