Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 144 150 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb www.sciencedirect.com PERSPECTIVE Human Pharyngeal Microbiome May Play A Protective Role in Respiratory Tract Infections Zhancheng Gao 1,*, Yu Kang 2, Jun Yu 2, Lufeng Ren 2 1 Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Peking University People s Hospital, Beijing 100044, China 2 CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China Received 30 April 2014 revised 28 May 2014 accepted 9 June 2014 Available online 18 June 2014 Handled by Fangqing Zhao KEYWORDS Respiratory tract infections Pharyngeal microbiome Homeostasis Probiotics Restoration balance of microbiome Abstract The human pharyngeal microbiome, which resides at the juncture of digestive and respi-ratory tracts, may have an active role in the prevention of respiratory tract infections, similar to the actions of the intestinal microbiome against enteric infections.
Recent studies have demonstrated that the pharyngeal microbiome comprises an abundance of bacterial species that interacts with the local epithelial and immune cells, and together, they form a unique micro-ecological system.
Most of the microbial species in microbiomes are obligate symbionts constantly adapting to their unique surroundings.
Indigenous commensal species are capable of both maintaining dominance and evoking host immune responses to eliminate invading species.
Temporary damage to the pha-ryngeal microbiome due to the impaired local epithelia is also considered an important predisposing risk factor for infections.
Therefore, reinforcement of microbiome homeostasis to prevent invasion of infection-prone species would provide a novel treatment strategy in addition to antibiotic treat-ment and vaccination.
Hence continued research efforts on evaluating probiotic treatment and developing appropriate procedures are necessary to both prevent and treat respiratory infections.
Introduction * Corresponding author.
E-mail: zcgao@bjmu.edu.cn (Gao Z). Respiratory tract infections (RTIs) continue to be a leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, despite the emergence of antibiotics.
According to a recent report by the World Health Organization (WHO), RTI-related mortality remains high, second only to that of cancers and cardio-cerebrovascular diseases (World Health Statistics 2013, www.who.int). RTIs often result from new invasion and abnormal propagation of speciﬁc pathogens into airways.
Apart from the number and virulence of such invasive patho-gens, host defenses also govern the occurrence and severity of infection.
Over the past several decades, advancements in the understanding of adaptive immunity  a major protective mechanism against pathogenic infection  have greatly inﬂuenced medical practice and are invaluable to the develop-ment of effective vaccines against infections by many lethal 1672-0229/$-see front matter ª 2014 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2014.06.001 Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier  Gao Z et al  Pharyngeal Microbiome May Prevent Respiratory Infections 145 pathogens.
In accordance, further elucidation of local mucosal and non-speciﬁc immunity is also important for the develop-ment of therapies to prevent pathogenic invasion [1]. Recently, increasing lines of evidence have indicated that the human microbiome (complicated bacterial communities residing in speciﬁc anatomic sites of the human body, see Box 1) is exten-sively involved in infections and other pathogen-related dis-eases, and has an important role in the maintenance of overall health [2]. Additionally, probiotic supplementation to restore microbiome balance may be useful as an adjuvant treatment against infections and has therefore gained much attention in current clinical research and practice especially in intestinal infections, because the overall effectiveness of antibiotics continues to decrease due to the emergence of drug-resistant pathogens [3]. We hypothesize that the pharyn-geal microbiome, which resides at the juncture of the digestive and respiratory tracts, may share common features with intes-tinal microbiomes and could serve as a key player in the devel-opment of respiratory diseases.
Here, we provide our perspective on potentially similar protective roles of the pha-ryngeal microbiome and discuss the strategy of using probio-tics as an adjuvant therapy for treatment of RTIs based on an in-depth review of the current literature.
The pharyngeal microbiome and microecosystem Complexity of the human pharyngeal microbiome Hundreds of microbial species inhabit the human nasal, oral and pharyngeal cavities, including 25 40 families of bacteria, Box 1 Glossary Metagenome: A composite of genomes or genes of heteroge-neous taxa from a deﬁned environment.
Metagenomic analysis is directly performed on samples based on high-throughput sequencing which makes it possible to charac-terize all microbial compositions, including uncultivable organisms, and to analyze the collective properties of the community as a whole and its microbial interactions in situ. Pangenome: A superset of genes or genomic information of all strains of a species (mainly applicable to bacteria or archaea, which have signiﬁcantly variable gene contents among strains). Pangenomic analysis delivers a whole pic-ture of species genomic properties in the context of global distribution or evolution.
Microbiome: Species surveyed at different coverages for a microbial community in a deﬁned environment.
In recent years, microbial communities within human body have been studied by using metagenomic tools and methodology.
Microecosystem: A system includes the microbial commu-nity and its deﬁned environmental components within lim-ited spacing and is organized in general through a network of nutrient exchanges and energy ﬂows. In the human body, the microecosystem includes microbiome, immunity, epithelial lining and other local physiochemical factors (such as pH, temperature and nutrients). archaea, ameba and fungi, according to ample evidence from laboratory cultures [4]. The number of newly discovered species has considerably increased owing to the recent advances in metagenomic (Box 1) research techniques, especially high-throughput sequencing technology, that enable the discovery of non-culturable species [5 7]. In the pharynx, ﬁve major bacterial phyla have been identiﬁed thus far according to data released by the Human Microbiome Project (HMP): Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria and Fusobacteria (Figure 1A). Figure 1 Relative abundance of major phyla in the microbiomes of different sites or conditions in the human body A. Microbiomes in stool, skin, vagina and pharynx.
B. Microbiomes in nares, saliva, buccal mucosa and pharynx.
C. Microbiomes in the lung of healthy individuals and patients with asthma, COPD and CF.
Microbial abundances (%) in panels A and B are calculated based on raw data from the Human Microbiome Project (http:/ hmpdacc.org/HMBSA), whereas microbial abundances (%) in panel C are calculated based on data described previously [8,9]. COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease CF, cystic ﬁbrosis. 146 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 144 150 The pharyngeal microbiome (referred as throat in HMP) is dis-tinguished by having more Bacteroidetes than those found in other body sites, including the skin, intestines and vaginal cav-ity. Meanwhile, the pharyngeal microbiome comprises 27% Bacteroidetes and 10% Proteobacteria, whereas the nearby sal-iva microbiome contains 9% Bacteroidetes and 51% Proteo-bacteria (Figure 1B). These two phyla are important to human infections because the major causative pathogens of periodontitis are Bacteroidetes and the most common Gram-negative pathogens (e.g., Acinetobacter, Moraxella, Pseudomo-nas, Haemophilus, Klebsiella and Legionella spp.) in chronic respiratory diseases, such as cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), are Proteobacteria (Figure 1C). Located at the lowest part of the respiratory track, the lung microbiome does not contain any particular set of species distinguishable from that of the pharynx, although there are variations in the proportions of the known species [10]. However, a healthy lung microbiome is characterized by a relatively reduced biomass, which is often 2 4 fold less than that of the pharynx [11]. The pharyngeal microecosystem together with local In the human body, a microecosystem includes an anatom-ically deﬁned microbiome immune system and the epithelial lining of the host (Box 1). Studies of the intestinal and other microbiomes have shown that co-habitating microbes within a microbiome are not random assortments, but rather often exhibit various interactions, such as competing for or mutually utilizing metabolic resources in coordinated ways [12]. As such, microbiomes are always organized to maintain a homeostatic status, thereby greater metabolic efﬁciency [12]. Consequently, all components of the microbiome are constrained in optimized proportions [12]. Meanwhile, the microbiome provides critical signals to promote matura-tion of immune cells and differentiation of the tissue lining to promote a protective entity to prevent dominance of aggressive members and infections from non-residential pathogens [13]. the demand for increasing In the human pharynx, the most common genera in descending order are Prevotella, Capnocytophaga, Campylo-bacter, Veillonella, Streptococcus, Neisseria and Haemophilus, which account for 9.72% 1.26% of the members of the indigenous microbiome, according to the HMP data.
Each of these genera includes species that are well-known fastidi-ous bacteria hosted by the human body.
Although it may not be easy to demonstrate a subset of bacterial species unique to the pharyngeal microbiome, is possible to differentiate it from the corresponding gut microbiomes in terms of the proportions of constituents.
Because of the limited number of studies on the pharyngeal microbiome, many interactions among microecosystem components remain unclear.
However, homeostasis and interactions of microbes with local environmental factors are universal features of microbiome. Therefore, it is rather reasonable to infer that the pharyngeal microbiome also share such common features of all human microbiomes, although the understanding of which mainly comes from studies on intestinal microbiome. it Habitat-speciﬁc variability It is necessary to clearly differentiate the inner and outer microbiomes of the human body, i.e., the human-associated microbiomes and the habitat-speciﬁc microbiomes of the host (Figure 2). Habitat-speciﬁc microbiomes can be characterized as either restricted or open.
As an example of a restricted microbiome, consider the hospital environment where contin-uous antibiotic stress drives both species variability and con-tent limitation.
Moreover, species in hospital environments are often multi-drug resistant and may be opportunistic patho-gens that cause severe infections especially in patients with chronic illness, often leading to hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP). On the contrary, microbiomes within an ordinary human habitat are perceived as relatively open, where it is assumed not to be directed by any one speciﬁc stressor other than seasonal, geographic and biological variables [14]. Patho-gens from such a microbiome may lead to infection even in healthy persons when there is sufﬁcient competitiveness among species and toxicity to host, rendering a condition widely termed as community-acquired pneumonia (CAP). Potential roles of the pharyngeal microbiome in preventing RTIs Living in a microbe-dominant world, all animals, including humans, must develop strategies to avoid unpredictable inva-sion of microbial pathogens.
Hence, introduction of a handful of harmless microbes, as co-habitant defenders, presents an effective means to accomplish this requirement.
Through the development of an efﬁcient metabolic network, symbiotic com-mensal bacteria become established internally and externally and cooperate with the immune response of their hosts, thus excluding other foreign microbes ( strangers ) from establish-ing habitats.
In the meantime, they release toxins or boost host immunity to kill other invasive species ( aggressors ) [15]. It has been well demonstrated that the intestinal microbiome plays an active role in the prevention of local infections [16]. Whether or not a pathogen can cause an infection depends on the balance between pathogenic expansion and microbiome homeostasis, which has been extensively studied in murine models [17]. Although the role of the pharyngeal microbiome in RTIs has not been thoroughly elucidated, there is some evi-dence suggesting similar protective effects to those of the gut microbiome as discussed below.
The pharyngeal microbiome has an essential role in the air-way linings to protect against infection of air-transmitted pathogens, in addition to the host immunity, especially against the newly emerging infectious agents.
The importance of the microbiome integrity is supported by the so-called herd effect in vaccination.
That is, vaccination to a limited number of people offers protection from infection to others without vaccination.
One well-known example is the epidemic of Haemophilus inﬂuenza type b in Finland, where a low vaccina-tion rate of 50% resulted in a 95% reduction in the number of the invasive infections [18]. To prevent infection by indigenous species, it is necessary to maintain the microbiome homeostasis with beneﬁcial abun-dance of each species.
In the pharynx, many pathogenic including Streptococcus pneumonia, Staphylococcus species,  Gao Z et al  Pharyngeal Microbiome May Prevent Respiratory Infections 147 Figure 2 Open or restrained habitat-speciﬁc microbiomes and RTI The human pharyngeal microbiome is unavoidably inﬂuenced by environmental microbiomes in the habitat where the host lives.
Some of the habitat-speciﬁc microbiomes are open and stable, such as those of residential communities, and others are restrained, such as those in hospitals or even ICU rooms.
Examples of infections related to such microbiomes are CAP and HAP.
ICU, intensive care unit CAP, community-acquired pneumonia HAP, hospital-acquired pneumonia RT, respiratory tract.
inﬂuenza and Mycoplasma pneumonia, are aureus, H. well-adapted to the pharyngeal environment and become established in the resident microbiome, rendering the host asymptomatic [19 21]. Epidemiological studies suggested that the proportion of aforementioned resident pathogens in human hosts varies by season, as does the incidence of RTIs attributed to them [22]. Our recent study revealed that for each species in a set of common bacterial respiratory pathogens, there exists an abundance threshold, above which the risk of infection increases.
Therefore, this threshold indicates the stringently-regulated homeostasis of a microbiome [23]. Damages of the pharyngeal microbiome prior to RTIs Although the microbiome often acts as a line of defense against infection, the strength of such defense is largely depen-dent on the state of the host, especially that of the local epithe-lia [24]. To maintain a highly efﬁcient and mutual metabolic support network, a spectrum of microbial species in appropri-ate proportions becomes prerequisite.
However, the epithelia of the respiratory tract, including the pharynx, can become damaged by many factors, such as air pollutants, smoking, immune injury and infection.
In hosts with genetic defects or epithelial dysfunction, such as in CF or COPD, the defensive abilities of the microbiome may decrease and render the host susceptible to pathogenic invasion.
Such conditions often lead to repeated and chronic infection, which, in turn, further dam-ages the epithelia and deteriorates the protective characteristics of the microbiome over time, similar to what occurs in dental and intestinal infections [25,26]. Recent studies have shown that an unhealthy status of the respiratory microbiome persists in high-risk populations, such as infants, the elderly and patients with COPD, CF or bronchi-ectasis, in whom the microbial communities are much less diversiﬁed than those found in healthy individuals [27 32]. Diversity is a major factor that promotes system stability [33], loss of diversity thus lessens the protective effects of the microbiome and renders patients vulnerable to infection.
In patients with chronic RTIs, the defending frontier retreats from the throat to the trachea or bronchia as indicated by increased number of microbial sequences found in bronchoal-veolar lavage ﬂuid (BALF) and sputum samples [27,29]. These ectopic microbiomes are abnormal and usually fragile, result-ing in repeated infections.
In addition, susceptible populations  148 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 144 150 may share a reduced abundance threshold, thereby allowing speciﬁc pathogens to easily establish infection [23]. In addition to the loss of diversity, the loss of protective species is also detrimental to homeostasis.
Generally, among patients with chronic RTIs, those with CF are most vulnerable to infection, followed by those with COPD and then asthma.
Metagenomic studies indicate that the proportion of Bacteroidetes spp. in sputa gradually decreases in the sequence of asthma, COPD and CF, whereas Proteobacteria, which include most of the common respiratory pathogens and are abundant in saliva, gain their proportions (Figure 1C) [8,9]. Therefore, it seems that Proteobacteria gradually expand when Bacteroidetes retreat.
Although the protective effect of Bacter-oidetes spp. remains to be validated, it is still reasonable to believe that not all species bear equal weight in maintaining pharyngeal microbiome homeostasis.
Impaired pharyngeal microbiome homeostasis may also be involved in the onset of acute infection.
Predisposed infection with inﬂuenza or other viruses is commonly observed in patients with bacterial pneumonia, often leading to intensive aggravation of disease [34]. The predisposed viral infection is reported to be able to alter the local microbial ecology, epithe-lial function and immunity [35]. In such cases, some dormant pathogens may disengage from homeostatic control, propagate abnormally, and invade downward into the lung, eventually causing secondary bacterial infections [36 39]. Restoration of the pharyngeal microbiome In addition to antibiotics and vaccines, restoration of a stable and healthy microbiome is another strategy that should be considered in infection control and anti-infective therapy, since the microbiome plays a direct role in ﬁghting pathogenic infec-tion. This strategy capitalizes on the protective roles of intact microbiomes, as described in both large-scale pangenomic [40] and metagenomic [41] studies.
To reinforce host defense during infection, methods for evaluating the stability and imbalances of the microbiomes are needed to identify the infec-tion-prone status and the species that should be replenished as recently reported [42]. Currently, the stability of microbiomes can only be evalu-ated based on resident biodiversity.
Although many diversity indices have been developed [43 45], most consider only species richness and equilibrium in a given community, but disregard different beneﬁcial effects speciﬁc to each species.
Therefore, next-generation evaluation methods are in demand to specify appropriate proportions of each species in speciﬁc microbiomes, especially those with protective roles, in order to deﬁne deﬁciency and to further develop appropriate treat-ment regimens.
Large-scale clinical trials have already demonstrated several protective effects of probiotics or microbiome transplantation in combating intestinal infections, especially in managing sec-ondary pathogens, such as Clostridium difﬁcile [46 50]. These treatments have been shown to modulate host immune status and improve host resistance to pathogens [51,52], and have also been applied to the treatment of tooth [53], urinary tract [54] and vaginal infections [55]. Regarding the respiratory tract, studies have suggested of probiotic supplementation against infections with inﬂuenza virus and protective potential effects recent as well Corynebacterium tuberculostearicum [56,57], as pneumococcal [58] and ventilator-associated pneumonia [59], although other studies disputed the efﬁcacy of probiotics for treatment of RTIs [60]. It is of note that main management in all these studies was orally-administrated Lactobacillus which may not be a good choice because of the low proportion of Lactobacillus in pharyngeal or respiratory tract microbiomes effective administration methods that can detain probiotics in the pharynx and multi-ple probiotic regimes may further improve the overall treat-ment outcome [62]. Therefore, there are no straightforward conclusions regarding the efﬁcacy of probiotics for treatment of RTIs, based on the ﬁndings of current reports.
In addition, [61]. Conclusions The constituents of human microbiome, which form an impres-sive biomass, are regarded as  permanent guests  of the body [63]. Increasing evidence suggests that resident microbiomes act more as guards than guests, in consideration of the beneﬁts to the host.
In the scope of the respiratory tract, there have been clues to suggest a potential protective role of the pharyngeal microbiome against pathogens invading the lungs.
However, our current knowledge on this friendly microbiome is rather limited.
Metagenomic and pangenomic studies based on high-throughput sequencing technologies are thus warranted to obtain additional molecular details of the airway infections.
We therefore are able to ultimately develop new treatments based on the possibility of restoring the pharyngeal microbiome. Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program, Grant No.2006AA02Z4A9) and the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, Grant No.2011CB944100). References [1] Sato S, Kiyono H. The mucosal immune system of the respiratory tract.
Curr Opin Virol 2012 2:225 32.
[2] Cenit MC, Matzaraki V, Tigchelaar EF, Zhernakova A.
Rapidly expanding knowledge on the role of the gut microbiome in health and disease.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2014. http://dx.doi.org 10.1016/j.bbadis.2014.05.023. [3] Morrissey I, Hackel M, Badal R, Bouchillon S, Hawser S, Biedenbach D. A review of ten years of the Study for Monitoring Antimicrobial Resistance Trends (SMART) from 2002 to 2011.
Pharmaceuticals (Basel, Switzerland) 2013 6:1335 1346.
[4] Pennisi E. A mouthful of microbes.
Science 2005 307:1899 901.
[5] Ahn J, Yang L, Paster BJ, Ganly I, Morris L, Pei Z, et al. Oral microbiome proﬁles: 16S rRNA pyrosequencing and microarray assay comparison.
PLoS One 2011 6:e22788. [6] Belda-Ferre P, Alcaraz LD, Cabrera-Rubio R, Romero H, Simon-Soro A, Pignatelli M, et al. The oral metagenome in health and disease.
ISME J 2012 6:46 56.
[7] Griffen AL, Beall CJ, Firestone ND, Gross EL, Difranco JM, Hardman JH, et al. CORE: a phylogenetically-curated 16S rDNA database of the core oral microbiome. PLoS One 2011 6:e19051. [8] Guss AM, Roeselers G, Newton IL, Young CR, Klepac-Ceraj V, Lory S, et al. Phylogenetic and metabolic diversity of bacteria associated with cystic ﬁbrosis. ISME J 2011 5:20 9.
Gao Z et al  Pharyngeal Microbiome May Prevent Respiratory Infections 149 [9] Hilty M, Burke C, Pedro H, Cardenas P, Bush A, Bossley C, et al. Disordered microbial communities in asthmatic airways.
PLoS One 2010 5:e8578. [29] Blainey PC, Milla CE, Cornﬁeld DN, Quake SR. Quantitative analysis of the human airway microbial ecology reveals a pervasive signature for cystic ﬁbrosis. Sci Transl Med 2012 4:153ra30. [10] Morris A, Beck JM, Schloss PD, Campbell TB, Crothers K, Curtis JL, et al. Comparison of the respiratory microbiome in healthy nonsmokers and smokers.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2013 187:1067 75.
[11] Charlson ES, Bittinger K, Haas AR, Fitzgerald AS, Frank I, Yadav A, et al. Topographical continuity of bacterial populations in the healthy human respiratory tract.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2011 184:957 63.
[12] Wintermute EH, Silver PA. Dynamics in the mixed microbial concourse.
Genes Dev 2010 24:2603 14.
[13] Chow J, Lee SM, Shen Y, Khosravi A, Mazmanian SK. Host-in health and disease.
Adv Immunol symbiosis bacterial 2010 107:243 74.
[14] Song SJ, Lauber C, Costello EK, Lozupone CA, Humphrey G, Berg-Lyons D, et al. Cohabiting family members share microbiota with one another and with their dogs.
eLife 2013 2:e00458. [15] Schmitz JM, Durham CG, Schoeb TR, Soltau TD, Wolf KJ, Tanner SM, et al. Helicobacter felis-associated gastric disease in microbiota-restricted mice.
J Histochem Cytochem 2011 59: 826 41.
[16] Britton RA, Young VB.
Role of the intestinal microbiota in resistance to colonization by Clostridium difﬁcile. Gastroenterol-ogy 2014 146:1547 53.
[17] Reeves AE, Theriot CM, Bergin IL, Huffnagle GB, Schloss PD, Young VB.
The interplay between microbiome dynamics and pathogen dynamics in a murine model of Clostridium difﬁcile infection.
Gut Microbes 2011 2:145 58.
[18] Kim TH, Johnstone J, Loeb M. Vaccine herd effect.
Scand J Infect Dis 2011 43:683 9.
[19] Watson K, Carville K, Bowman J, Jacoby P, Riley TV, Leach AJ, et al. Upper respiratory tract bacterial carriage in aboriginal and non-aboriginal children in a semi-arid area of Western Australia. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2006 25:782 90.
[20] Quintero B, Araque M, van der Gaast-de Jongh C, Escalona F, Correa M, Morillo-Puente S, et al. Epidemiology of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Staphylococcus aureus colonization in healthy Venezuelan children.
Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2011 30:7 19.
[21] Gnarpe J, Lundback A, Sundelof B, Gnarpe H. Prevalence of Mycoplasma pneumoniae in subjectively healthy individuals.
Scand J Infect Dis 1992 24:161 4.
[22] Bogaert D, Keijser B, Huse S, Rossen J, Veenhoven R, van Gils E, et al. Variability and diversity of nasopharyngeal microbiota in children: a metagenomic analysis.
PLoS One 2011 6:e17035. [23] Kang Y, Deng R, Wang C, Deng T, Peng P, Cheng X, et al. Etiologic diagnosis of lower respiratory tract bacterial infections using sputum samples and quantitative loop-mediated isothermal ampliﬁcation. PLoS One 2012 7:e38743. [24] Larsson E, Tremaroli V, Lee YS, Koren O, Nookaew I, Fricker A, et al. Analysis of gut microbial regulation of host gene expression along the length of the gut and regulation of gut microbial ecology through MyD88. Gut 2012 61:1124 31.
[25] Santos AL, Siqueira Jr JF, Rocas IN, Jesus EC, Rosado AS, Tiedje JM. Comparing the bacterial diversity of acute and chronic dental root canal infections.
PLoS One 2011 6:e28088. [26] DuPont AW, DuPont HL. The intestinal microbiota and chronic disorders of the gut.
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2011 8: 523 31.
[27] Erb-Downward JR, Thompson DL, Han MK, Freeman CM, McCloskey L, Schmidt LA, et al. Analysis of the lung microb-iome in the  healthy  smoker and in COPD. PLoS One 2011 6:e16384. [28] Sibley CD, Grinwis ME, Field TR, Eshaghurshan CS, Faria MM, Dowd SE, et al. Culture enriched molecular proﬁling of the cystic ﬁbrosis airway microbiome. PLoS One 2011 6:e22702. [30] Zemanick ET, Sagel SD, Harris JK. The airway microbiome in cystic ﬁbrosis and implications for treatment.
Curr Opin Pediatr 2011 23:319 24.
[31] Huang YJ, Lynch SV. The emerging relationship between the airway microbiota and chronic respiratory disease: clinical impli-cations.
Expert Rev Respir Med 2011 5:809 21.
[32] Whelan FJ, Verschoor CP, Stearns JC, Rossi L, Luinstra K, Loeb M, et al. The loss of topography in the microbial communities of the upper respiratory tract in the elderly.
Ann Am Thorac Soc 2014 11:513 21.
[33] Chang JY, Antonopoulos DA, Kalra A, Tonelli A, Khalife WT, Schmidt TM, et al. Decreased diversity of the fecal microbiome in recurrent Clostridium difﬁcile-associated diarrhea.
J Infect Dis 2008 197:435 8.
[34] Goffard A, Lambert V, Salleron J, Herwegh S, Engelmann I, Pinel C, et al. Virus and cystic ﬁbrosis: rhinoviruses are associated with exacerbations in adult patients.
J Clin Virol 2014 60:147 53.
[35] Oshansky CM, Gartland AJ, Wong SS, Jeevan T, Wang D, Roddam PL, et al. Mucosal immune responses predict clinical outcomes during inﬂuenza infection independently of age and viral load.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2014 189:449 62.
[36] Jacoby P, Watson K, Bowman J, Taylor A, Riley TV, Smith DW, et al. Modelling the co-occurrence of Streptococcus pneumoniae with other bacterial and viral pathogens in the upper respiratory tract.
Vaccine 2007 25:2458 64.
[37] DeLeo FR, Musser JM. Axis of coinfection evil.
J Infect Dis 2010 201:488 90.
[38] Rizzo C, Caporali MG, Rota MC. Pandemic inﬂuenza and pneumonia due to Legionella pneumophila: a frequently underes-timated coinfection. Clin Infect Dis 2010 51:115. [39] Moore HC, Jacoby P, Taylor A, Harnett G, Bowman J, Riley TV, et al. The interaction between respiratory viruses and patho-genic bacteria in the upper respiratory tract of asymptomatic aboriginal and non-aboriginal children.
Pediatr Infect Dis J 2010 29:540 5.
[40] Markowitz VM, Chen IM, Chu K, Szeto E, Palaniappan K, Grechkin Y, et al. IMG/M: the integrated metagenome data management and comparative analysis system.
Nucleic Acids Res 2012 40:D123 9.
[41] Tosh PK, McDonald LC. Infection control in the multidrug-resistant era: tending the human microbiome. Clin Infect Dis 2012 54:707 13.
[42] Rogers GB, Zain NM, Bruce KD, Burr LD, Chen AC, Rivett DW, et al. A novel microbiota stratiﬁcation system predicts future exacerbations in bronchiectasis. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2014 11:496 503.
[43] Shannon CE. The mathematical theory of communication.
1963.
MD Comput 1997 14:306 17.
[44] Tuomisto H. A consistent terminology for quantifying species diversity Yes, it does exist.
Oecologia 2010 164:853 60.
[45] Tuomisto H, Ruokolainen K. Analyzing or explaining beta diversity Understanding the targets of different methods of analysis.
Ecology 2006 87:2697 708.
[46] Cimperman L, Bayless G, Best K, Diligente A, Mordarski B, Oster M, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study of Lactobacillus reuteri ATCC 55730 for the preven-tion of antibiotic-associated diarrhea in hospitalized adults.
J Clin Gastroenterol 2011 45:785 9.
[47] Borody TJ, Khoruts A. Fecal microbiota transplantation and applications.
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol emerging 2012 9:88 96.
[48] Zihler A, Gagnon M, Chassard C, Lacroix C. Protective effect of probiotics on Salmonella infectivity assessed with combined in vitro gut fermentation-cellular models.
BMC Microbiol 2011 11:264. 150 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 144 150 [49] Lundell L. Use of probiotics in abdominal surgery.
Dig Dis 2011 29:570 3.
[50] Gough E, Shaikh H, Manges AR. Systematic review of intestinal microbiota transplantation (fecal bacteriotherapy) for recurrent Clostridium difﬁcile infection.
Clin Infect Dis 2011 53:994 1002.
[51] Willing BP, Vacharaksa A, Croxen M, Thanachayanont T, Finlay BB. Altering host resistance to infections through microbial transplantation.
PLoS One 2011 6:e26988. [52] Wells JM. Immunomodulatory mechanisms of lactobacilli. Mic-rob Cell Fact 2011 10(Suppl 1):S17. [53] Culp DJ, Robinson B, Parkkila S, Pan PW, Cash MN, Truong HN, et al. Oral colonization by Streptococcus mutans and caries development is reduced upon deletion of carbonic anhydrase VI expression in saliva.
Biochim Biophys Acta 2011 1812:1567 76.
[54] Amdekar S, Singh V, Singh DD.
Probiotic therapy: immuno-modulating approach toward urinary tract infection.
Curr Micro-biol 2011 63:484 90.
[55] Martin DH. The microbiota of the vagina and its inﬂuence on women s health and disease.
Am J Med Sci 2012 343:2 9.
[56] Youn HN, Lee DH, Lee YN, Park JK, Yuk SS, Yang SY, et al. Intranasal administration of live Lactobacillus species facilitates protection against inﬂuenza virus infection in mice.
Antiviral Res 2012 93:138 43.
[57] Abreu NA, Nagalingam NA, Song Y, Roediger FC, Pletcher SD, Goldberg AN, et al. Sinus microbiome diversity depletion and Corynebacterium tuberculostearicum enrichment mediates rhinos-inusitis. Sci Transl Med 2012 4:151ra24. [58] Tanaka A, Seki M, Yamahira S, Noguchi H, Kosai K, Toba M, et al. Lactobacillus pentosus strain b240 suppresses pneumonia induced by Streptococcus pneumoniae in mice.
Lett Appl Micro-biol 2011 53:35 43.
[59] Bailey JL, Yeung SY. Probiotics for disease prevention: a focus on ventilator-associated pneumonia.
Ann Pharmacother 2011 45: 1425 32.
[60] Barraud D, Bollaert PE, Gibot S. Impact of the administration of probiotics on mortality in critically ill adult patients: a meta-anal-ysis of randomized controlled trials.
Chest 2013 143:646 55.
[61] Forsythe P. Probiotics and lung diseases.
Chest 2011 139:901 8.
[62] Osipov GA, Verkhovtseva NV. Study of human microecology by spectrometry of microbial markers.
Benef Microbes mass 2011 2:63 78.
[63] Avila M, Ojcius DM, Yilmaz O.
The oral microbiota: living with a permanent guest.
DNA Cell Biol 2009 28:405 11.
