Available online at www.sciencedirect.com Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 10 (2012) 181 185 Review GENOMICS PROTEOMICS & BIOINFORMATICS www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb Systems Approaches to Biology and Disease Enable Translational Systems Medicine Leroy Hood   , Qiang Tian   Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109-5234, USA Received 31 July 2012 revised 9 August 2012 accepted 14 August 2012 Available online 23 August 2012 Abstract The development and application of systems strategies to biology and disease are transforming medical research and clinical practice in an unprecedented rate.
In the foreseeable future, clinicians, medical researchers, and ultimately the consumers and patients will be increasingly equipped with a deluge of personal health information, e.g., whole genome sequences, molecular proﬁling of diseased tissues, and periodic multi-analyte blood testing of biomarker panels for disease and wellness.
The convergence of these practices will enable accurate prediction of disease susceptibility and early diagnosis for actionable preventive schema and personalized treatment regimes tailored to each individual.
It will also entail proactive participation from all major stakeholders in the health care system.
We are at the dawn of predictive, preventive, personalized, and participatory (P4) medicine, the fully implementation of which requires marrying basic and clinical researches through advanced systems thinking and the employment of high-throughput technologies in genomics, pro-teomics, nanoﬂuidics, single-cell analysis, and computation strategies in a highly-orchestrated discipline we termed translational systems medicine.
Keywords: Systems biology P4 medicine Family genome sequencing Targeted proteomics Single-cell analysis Introduction Systems biology strives to unravel the enormous complex-ity of biological systems through a holistic approach in the context of a cross-disciplinary environment.
Since its founding in early 2000, the Institute for Systems Biology (ISB) has been pioneering systems strategies to biology and disease through the development of systems strategies and the application and/or development of cutting-edge high-throughput technologies to the investigation of model organisms and humans with varying degrees of complexity: from single-cell organisms (bacteria and yeast) [1 3] to experimental animal models (mouse) [4 7] and to human disorders [8 10]. Over the last decade, rapid advancements in genomic and proteomic technologies, computational  Corresponding authors.
E-mail: Leroy.Hood@systemsbiology.org (Hood L), Qiang.Tian@sys-temsbiology.org (Tian Q). strategies and their applications in human diseases have demonstrated promising early success in genomic medicine.
We discuss here our view of how systems approaches to biology and disease and emerging technologies are going to transform the medical practices by shaping up transla-tional systems medicine for early diagnosis, disease pro-gression, patient stratiﬁcation, predicting recurrence, and therapeutic guidance.
Dealing with disease complexity systems medicine and its 5 pillars Human phenotypes are speciﬁed by two types of biological information: the digital information of the genome, and the environmental information that impinges upon and modiﬁes the digital information.
Two general biological structures connect the genotype and environment to phe-notype: (1) biological networks capture, transmit, process and pass on information these networks organize, 1672-0229/$-see front matter Ó 2012 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Published by Elsevier Ltd and Science Press.
All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2012.08.004  182 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 10 (2012) 181 185 integrate and model data to enormously increase the signal to noise (2) simple and complex molecular machines execute biological functions.
A systems view of disease pos-tulates that disease arises from disease-perturbed networks.
A ramiﬁcation of this premise entails studies of disease pathogenesis at through a systems approach so that better strategies for early diagnosis and therapeutics targeting these perturbed networks can be devised.
We stipulate ﬁve pillars to address disease complexity upholding systems approach as follows.
the network level (1) Viewing biology and consequentially medicine as an informational science is one key to deciphering complexity.
(2) Systems biology infrastructure and strategy holy trinity of biology (i.e., use biology to drive technology and computation development) endorse cross-disciplinary culture and democratization of data-generation and data-analysis tools.
(3) Holistic, systems experimental approaches enable deep insights into disease mechanisms and new approaches to diagnosis and therapy through analyz-ing the dynamics of disease processes.
(4) Emerging technologies provide large-scale data acquisition and permit exploration of new dimen-sions of patient data space.
(5) Transforming analytic tools will allow deciphering the billions of data points for each individual sculpting in exquisite detail the wellness and disease landscapes.
These ﬁve fundamental principles will allow in-depth interrogation of diseased networks at unprecedented molecular resolution.
Some disease events will occur well before the disease manifestation for early detection, whereas key nodal points amongst perturbed networks can be identiﬁed for diagnostic detection or therapeutic interventions.
Both diseased organs/tissues and patient blood constitute excellent specimen reservoirs for systemic assessment of diseased conditions in multiple spatial and temporal measurements.
Whole genome and whole tran-scriptome sequencing, targeted proteomics via mass spec-trometry and protein chips, single-cell analysis and a variety of targeted nucleic acid detection systems (e.g., next-generation sequencing (NGS), DNA arrays, Nano-String n-Counter [11], Fluidigm BioMark, etc.) will be the workhorse churning out enormous amount of data.
We anticipate that in 10 years each individual will be sur-rounded by a virtual cloud of billions of data points.
A key challenge is to fully integrate these diverse data type, correlate with distinct clinical phenotypes, extract mean-ingful biomarker panels for guiding clinical practice.
We enumerate here some of the individual patient informa-tion-based assays of the present and future (Table 1). Family genome sequencing: integrating genetic and genomics Complete human genome sequence is becoming increas-ingly aﬀordable and will be a fundamental part of one s medical record in 10 years.
While a great deal can be learned regarding one s predisposition to certain diseases from individual genome, sequencing of a family permit one to use the principles of Mendelian genetics to elimi-nate 70% sequencing error.
This will greatly facilitate better identiﬁcation of rare variants, determining chromo-somal haplotypes and intergenerational mutation rate, and identiﬁcation of candidate genes for simple Mendelian diseases.
Moreover, knowledge of cis and trans linkage relationships of genes and control elements will be key for understanding biology and disease, and reducing the chromosomal search space for disease genes [9,12]. Recent developments by Complete Genomics Inc (CGI) employ-ing long fragment (LFR) have demonstrated whole-genome sequencing from as few as 10 20 cells with three striking advances over typical NGS approach.
These advances include (1) high accuracy with a genome error rate of 1 in 10 megabases (2) assembly of diploid haplo-types from individual genome sequences and (3) de novo assembly of individual genomes, which enables discovery of structural variations [13]. With this technology, compre-hensive genetic studies and diverse clinical applications are within reach.
reads Table 1 Clinical assays and emerging technologies for exploring new dimensions of patient data space Genomics Complete individual genome sequences will be done by sequencing families predictive health history Complete individual cell genome sequences cancer Complete MHC chromosomal haplotypes in families autoimmune disease and allergies 300 Actionable gene variants pharmacogenetics-related and disease-related genes Sequence 1000 transcriptomes tissues and single cells stratiﬁcation disease Analyze aging transcriptome proﬁles tissues and single cells wellness Analyze miRNA proﬁles tissues, single cells and blood disease diagnosis Proteomics Organ-speciﬁc blood SRM protein assays 2500 Blood organ-speciﬁc blood proteins from 300 nanoliters of blood in 5 min twice per year (50 proteins from 50 organs) wellness assessment New protein capture agents D-amino acid peptides joined to create dimer or trimer capture agents Array of 12,000 human proteins against autoimmune or allergic sera stratify diseases that kill cells (neurodegenerative) Single molecule protein analyses blood organ-speciﬁc proteins and single cell analyses SWATHe analyses global, dynamical analyses  Hood L and Tian Q  Translational Systems Medicine 183 Systems approach to blood biomarkers: making blood a window into health and disease Since blood baths all organs and receives their biomarkers, it shall reﬂect network disease-perturbations either directly or indirectly a molecular ﬁngerprint in the blood reﬂect-ing disease pathophysiology. We stress that organ-speciﬁc, cell-type speciﬁc or organelle-speciﬁc biomarkers are more informative since they inform as to the tissue, cell type or organelle sources of the disease.
Moreover, blood biomark-ers may also reﬂect general cell death or damage (e.g., bio-molecules released from nucleus or cytoplasma), secreted protein or membrane perturbations through proteolysis. Systems blood biomarkers shall include diverse types of biomolecules: proteins, mRNAs, non-coding RNAs (e.g., microRNAs, long intergenic non-coding RNAs), metabo-lites, etc, while the combination of two or more types increases sensitivity and speciﬁcity of assay.
These markers should be multiparameter consisting of many biomolecules of the same type, and even panels of multiple types of mol-ecules so that multiple networks and features may be accessed.
Ideally, blood biomarker panel shall assess all diseases in a given organ simultaneously.
Another impor-tant point is that, given the vast individual variation, blood biomarkers should be analyzed in a longitudinal manner so that the individual can be their own control against which change can be measured.
Of note, another informa-tion-rich compartment in the blood includes the cellular component, e.g., the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). These PBMCs contain mainly white blood cells (WBCs) for diagnosing inﬂammation, immunity and cell death they also contain rare circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in cancer patients, indicative of tumor progression and recurrence [14,15]. Our method of choice for evaluating blood protein biomarkers is targeted proteomics employing selective reaction monitoring (SRM) mass spectrometry (MS) [3]. This technology allows the analysis of 100 200 proteins quantitatively in 1 h. ISB has developed SRM assays for most of the known 20,333 human proteins.
In particular, we have validated SRM assays for 100 brain-speciﬁc and 100 liver-speciﬁc proteins for human and mouse [16]. These protein panels have been applied in mouse disease models and patient blood samples for successful identiﬁcation of biomarkers for the diagnosis of liver injury, liver ﬁbrosis cirrhosis, prion and other neurological diseases.
For instance, we identiﬁed a panel of 15 brain-speciﬁc blood proteins that indicate the initiation and progression of dis-ease-perturbation of networks (prion accumulation, glial activation, synaptic degeneration, and neuronal cell death) in a mouse model of prion disease [4]. A panel of three liver-speciﬁc proteins successfully stratify liver cirrhosis patients from patients with various degree of liver ﬁbrosis and normal controls [16]. The same strategy is being actively pursued for the identiﬁcation of brain tumor cell membrane protein biomarker in the blood (unpublished data). While it is conceivable to set up a SRM-MS infrastruc-ture to provide blood diagnostics to serve clinical needs for a variety of diseased conditions as discussed above, this requires highly-sophisticated expertise in MS instrumenta-tion and supporting informatics capacities.
The company Integrated Diagnostics is pursuing a systems approach to diagnostics for selected disease applications.
An alternative is to develop targeted protein and antibody chips or chips of protein-catalyzed capture (PCC) agents.
The latter dem-onstrates advantages since it is chemically-stable, low cost, and requires relatively little input of blood samples.
In addition, we are developing a protein Elisa assay on the NanoString n-Counter instrument, in conjunction with their capacity to detect mRNA and miRNA molecules, to generate an assay that combines multiple analytes (mRNA, miRNA, and protein) in a single platform with no loss in sensitivity.
We envision that in a 10-year future, an integrated nanotech/microﬂuidics platform, consisting of 50 organ-speciﬁc blood proteins from each of 50 major human organs, will measure 2500 blood proteins using a fraction of droplet of blood in 5 min at the mid amol level of sensitivity.
The prototype of this nanochip has already been tested in hospitals [17,18]. Single-cell analysis allows interrogation of heterogeneous cell populations at unprecedented resolution Most of the current global molecular proﬁling studies mea-sure mixed diseased cell populations for averaged signals.
However, there are distinct cell types in any given diseased tissues each with its own distinct perturbed genomic and proteomic proﬁles. Although global genome and transcrip-tome sequencing for single cell is still challenging, early eﬀorts have already revealed important population hetero-geneity in tumor cells [19,20]. We envision that more single-cell analysis will be applied clinically.
For instance, one can analyze 10,000 B cells and 10,000 T cells for the functional regions of their immune receptors to inform past and present immune responsiveness, follow vaccinations, and identify autoimmune antibodies.
Single-cell analysis can also be applied concomitantly with various technologies for separating epithelial cells from WBCs in blood, for identifying and monitoring of CTCs. Single-cell transcrip-tome analysis can also be applied to quantize cell popula-tions in cancer tissues and diﬀerentiating progenies of stem cells.
Systems medicine is transforming healthcare leading to predictive, preventive, personalized and participatory (P4) medicine Systems medicine provides fundamental insights into dis-ease network mechanisms to enable diagnosis, therapy and prevention for the individual patient (Figure 1). Family genome sequencing reveals disease and wellness genes and actionable genes.
Transforming blood into a window to distinguish health from disease opens up new way for  184 Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 10 (2012) 181 185 Systems medicine: network of networks Networks organize, integrate and model data to enormously increase the signal to noise Figure 1 Networks organize and integrate information at diﬀerent levels to create biologically meaningful models Networks formulate hypotheses about biological function and provide temporal and spatial insights into dynamical changes.
disease diagnostics, and assessment of drug toxicity and wellness.
Molecular proﬁling stratiﬁes diseases into their distinct molecular subtypes for impedance match with appropriate drugs.
New approaches to drug target discov-ery are being devised re-engineer disease-perturbed net-works with drugs for faster and cheaper drug development.
The convergence of the digital revolution and systems medicine leads to deciphering of complexity and P4 medicine (1) Predictive: the probabilistic health history is revealed by DNA sequence and regular multi-parameter (blood) measurements.
(2) Preventive: design of therapeutic and preventive drugs and vaccines via systems approaches emphasis on wellness.
(3) Personalized: unique individual human genetic varia-tion mandates individual treatment and that patient will be their own control for data analyses.
(4) Participatory: patient-driven social networks for dis-ease and wellness will be a driving force in P4 medi-cine.
Society must access patient data and make it available to biologists for pioneering predictive med-icine of the future.
How does one educate patients, physicians and the healthcare community about P4 The answer is IT for healthcare.
P4 medicine diﬀers from evidence-based medicine in that it is proactive, individualized, with an emphasis not only on disease, but also on wellness.
It involves generation, mining and integration of enormous amounts of data on individual patients to produce predictive and actionable models of wellness and disease.
Large patient populations will be ana-lyzed at single individual level (not population averages) to generate quantized stratiﬁcation of patient populations and create the predictive medicine of the future.
It entails patient-driven social networks.
it There are several societal implications for P4 medicine.
It forces a revision of business plans of almost every sector of healthcare industry, producing enormous economic opportunity.
Digitalization of medicine for the individual patients is a larger revolution than the digitization of infor-mation technologies and communication in that is patient-driven medicine and wellness.
It turns sharply around escalating costs of healthcare democratization of healthcare through (1) early blood diagnosis (2) beneﬁts of wellness e.g., survey biannually 2500 blood organ-spe-ciﬁc protein measurements (50 from each of the 50 major organs) for global early detection of the transition from health to disease (3) digital technologies exponentially increasing in measurement potential and decreasing in cost sculpt for individuals the dimensions of health/dis-ease while dramatically decreasing measurement costs, e.g., sequencing a human genome cost about $300 million dollars in 2000 but only about $3000 in 2012 a 100,000-fold decrease in cost for digitalization of medicine.
Eventually, P4 medicine will create signiﬁcant wealth.
Translational systems medicine should practice proactive P4 medicine A core mission of ISB is to disseminate systems approaches to biology and medicine to the society by and large.
ISB has formed strategic partnerships with Ohio State Univer-sity, Peace Health, and the State of Luxembourg to pro-mote the practice of P4 medicine.
We propose that any institutions wishing to establish a translational systems medicine program shall adopt the ﬁve pillars of a systems approach to disease: an informational view of biology and disease, a cross-disciplinary infrastructure, global experimental systems approaches to capture the dynamics of disease, employ of emerging technologies to search new areas of patient data space and powerful novel analyt-ical tools to handle all the new data generated.
They shall partner with institutions who have systems biology, sys-tems medicine and P4 medicine expertise who can guide, teach and help recruit leadership who understands systems medicine and translational opportunities.
Committed polit-ical and scientiﬁc leadership at both local and national lev-els are also indispensible. Competing interests The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, NIH/NCI NanoSystems Biology Cancer (Grant No.U54 CA151819A), NIH/NIGMS Center  Hood L and Tian Q  Translational Systems Medicine 185 Center for Systems Biology (Grant No.P50GM076547) and NIH/NIAMSD (Grant No.RC2AR059010). References [1] Ideker T, Thorsson V, Ranish JA, Christmas R, Buhler J, Eng JK, et al. Integrated genomic and proteomic analyses of a systematically perturbed metabolic network.
Science 2001 292:929 34.
[2] Bonneau R, Facciotti MT, Reiss DJ, Schmid AK, Pan M, Kaur A, et al. A predictive model for transcriptional control of physiology in a free living cell.
Cell 2007 131:1354 65.
[3] Picotti P, Bodenmiller B, Mueller LN, Domon B, Aebersold R. Full dynamic range proteome analysis of S. cerevisiae by targeted proteomics. Cell 2009 138:795 806.
[4] Hwang D, Lee IY, Yoo H, Gehlenborg N, Cho JH, Petritis B, et al. A systems approach to prion disease.
Mol Syst Biol 2009 5:252. [5] Park H, Li Z, Yang XO, Chang SH, Nurieva R, Wang YH, et al. A distinct lineage of CD4 T cells regulates tissue inﬂammation by producing interleukin 17.
Nat Immunol 2005 6:1133 41.
[6] Tian Q, Feetham MC, Tao WA, He XC, Li L, Aebersold R, et al. Proteomic analysis identiﬁes that 14 3-3zeta interacts with beta-catenin and facilitates its activation by Akt. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004 101:15370 5.
[7] Tian Q, Stepaniants SB, Mao M, Weng L, Feetham MC, Doyle MJ, et al. Integrated genomic and proteomic analyses of gene expression in Mammalian cells.
Mol Cell Proteomics 2004 3:960 9.
[8] Majeti R, Becker MW, Tian Q, Lee TL, Yan X, Liu R, et al. Dysregulated gene expression networks in human acute myeloge-nous leukemia stem cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009 106: 3396 401.
[9] Roach JC, Glusman G, Smit AF, Huﬀ CD, Hubley R, Shannon PT, et al. Analysis of genetic inheritance in a family quartet by whole-genome sequencing.
Science 2010 328:636 9.
[10] Yan X, Ma L, Yi D, Yoon JG, Diercks A, Foltz G, et al. A CD133-related gene expression signature identiﬁes an aggressive glioblastoma subtype with excessive mutations.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 108: 1591 6.
[11] Geiss GK, Bumgarner RE, Birditt B, Dahl T, Dowidar N, Dunaway DL, et al. Direct multiplexed measurement of gene expression with color-coded probe pairs.
Nat Biotechnol 2008 26:317 25.
[12] Roach JC, Glusman G, Hubley R, Montsaroﬀ SZ, Holloway AK, Mauldin DE, et al. Chromosomal haplotypes by genetic phasing of human families.
Am J Hum Genet 2011 89:382 97.
[13] Peters BA, Kermani BG, Sparks AB, Alferov O, Hong P, Alexeev A, et al. Accurate whole-genome sequencing and haplotyping from 10 to 20 human cells.
Nature 2012 487:190 5.
[14] Lin EH, Hassan M, Li Y, Zhao H, Nooka A, Sorenson E, et al. Elevated circulating endothelial progenitor marker CD133 messenger RNA levels predict colon cancer recurrence.
Cancer 2007 110:534 42.
[15] Iinuma H, Watanabe T, Mimori K, Adachi M, Hayashi N, Tamura J, et al. Clinical signiﬁcance of circulating tumor cells, including cancer stem-like cells, in peripheral blood for recurrence and prognosis in patients with Dukes stage B and C colorectal cancer.
J Clin Oncol 2011 29:1547 55.
[16] Qin S, Zhou Y, Lok AS, Tsodikov A, Yan X, Gray L, et al. SRM targeted proteomics in search for biomarkers of HCV-induced progression of ﬁbrosis to cirrhosis in HALT-C patients.
Proteomics 2012 12:1244 52.
[17] Fan R, Vermesh O, Srivastava A, Yen BK, Qin L, Ahmad H, et al. Integrated barcode chips for rapid, multiplexed analysis of proteins in microliter quantities of blood.
Nat Biotechnol 2008 26:1373 8.
[18] Ma C, Fan R, Ahmad H, Shi Q, Comin-Anduix B, Chodon T, et al. A clinical microchip for evaluation of single immune cells reveals high functional heterogeneity in phenotypically similar T cells.
Nat Med 2011 17:738 43.
[19] Navin N, Kendall J, Troge J, Andrews P, Rodgers L, McIndoo J, et al. Tumour evolution inferred by single-cell sequencing.
Nature 2011 472:90 4.
[20] Dalerba P, Kalisky T, Sahoo D, Rajendran PS, Rothenberg ME, Leyrat AA, et al. Single-cell dissection of transcriptional heterogene-ity in human colon tumors.
Nat Biotechnol 2011 29:1120 7.
Leroy Hood, MD, PhD, president and co-founder of the Institute for Systems Biology in Seattle, is a pioneer in systems approaches to biology and medicine.
He and others developed the DNA sequencer and synthesizer, and the protein syn-thesizer and sequencer four instruments that paved the way for the successful mapping of the human genome.
Dr Hood s research has focused on the study of molecular immunology, biotech-nology and genomics.
He is a member of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
Qiang Tian, MD, PhD, Cancer & Stem Cell Group Leader of Institute for Systems Biology, is interested in applying the powerful systems approach with the enabling genomics, proteo-mics, and single cell analysis technologies to address some of the most pressing issues per-taining to human health.
He has led the devel-opment of gene signature panels for cancer patient stratiﬁcation, and has elucidated protein interaction networks for potential therapeutic targeting.
He also contributed to the molecular characterization of multiple Th cell subsets.
