BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol. 25 no. 8 2009, pages 1070–1075

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn426

Data and text mining
Graphical methods for quantifying macromolecules through
bright ﬁeld imaging
Hang Chang1,2,∗, Rosa Anna DeFilippis3, Thea D. Tlsty3 and Bahram Parvin1,4
1Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA, 2Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing, China, 3Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco and
4Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Riverside, USA
Received on March 12, 2008; revised on August 8, 2008; accepted on August 10, 2008
Advance Access publication August 14, 2008
Associate Editor: Jonathan Wren

ABSTRACT
Bright ﬁeld imaging of biological samples stained with antibodies
and/or special stains provides a rapid protocol for visualizing various
macromolecules. However, this method of sample staining and
imaging is rarely employed for direct quantitative analysis due
to variations in sample ﬁxations, ambiguities introduced by color
composition and the limited dynamic range of imaging instruments.
We demonstrate that, through the decomposition of color signals,
staining can be scored on a cell-by-cell basis. We have applied our
method to ﬁbroblasts grown from histologically normal breast tissue
biopsies obtained from two distinct populations. Initially, nuclear
regions are segmented through conversion of color images into
gray scale, and detection of dark elliptic features. Subsequently,
the strength of staining is quantiﬁed by a color decomposition
model that is optimized by a graph cut algorithm. In rare cases
where nuclear signal
is signiﬁcantly altered as a result of sample
preparation, nuclear segmentation can be validated and corrected.
Finally, segmented stained patterns are associated with each nuclear
region following region-based tessellation. Compared to classical
non-negative matrix factorization, proposed method: (i)
improves
color decomposition, (ii) has a better noise immunity, (iii) is more
invariant to initial conditions and (iv) has a superior computing
performance.
contact: hchang@lbl.gov

1 INTRODUCTION
Macromolecules (proteins, nucleic acids, lipids and carbohydrates)
can be rapidly visualized in cells and tissue via staining with
antibodies and/or special stains, followed by bright ﬁeld color
imaging. However, the quantitative analysis of such images is
often hindered by variations in sample preparations, the limited
dynamic range of color cameras, and the fact that image formation
is not at a speciﬁc excitation and emission frequency, which is the
hallmark of ﬂuorescence microscopy. Through consistent sample
preparation, ﬁxation and imaging, we suggest
the signals
associated with a macromolecule can be decomposed in the color
space, and can render a scoring value on a cell-by-cell basis.
Following this protocol, protein, lipid and DNA complexes are
visualized with antibodies and special stains, and then imaged with
∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

that

a color CCD camera attached to a microscope.The key contributions
of this article are in: (i) formulating the color decomposition as a
global optimization problem, (ii) representing the signal complexes,
associated with protein localization, with multiple prior models and
(iii) applying the proposed method to the analysis of an end point on
a cell-by-cell basis. In this context, global optimization is realized
through the graph cut method, multiple prior models are speciﬁed
through user initialization, and signal analysis, on a cell-by-cell
basis, is established through a best effort in establishing cellular
boundaries. The logical ﬂow of these various computational steps is
shown in Figure 1, whereby the user ﬁrst speciﬁes regions associated
with positive staining in an image, the nuclear regions are then
automatically detected as a dark elliptic region (Yang and Parvin,
2003), and are later further reﬁned following color decomposition.
The morphology and position of nuclear features allow the region-
based tessellation of the image, and the subsequent scoring of the
signaling complex on a cell-by-cell basis.

We applied our method to ﬁbroblasts grown from histologically
normal breast tissue biopsies obtained from women from two
distinct populations. The biopsies were digested in solution and
the ﬁbroblasts puriﬁed and grown in vitro. These ﬁbroblasts were
then grown under conditions that support adipocyte differentiation
for 5–7 days before being ﬁxed and stained with hematoxylin and
Oil Red O, which stain DNA and lipids, respectively. Although
hematoxylin and Oil Red O visualize nuclei in blue and lipids in
red, respectively, there is still some overlap in the color space.

This article has been organized as

follows: Section 2
reviews previous research in the area of color decomposition
from histologically stained tissues; Section 4 demonstrates the
effectiveness of our method when stains are co-localized; Section 3
provides the details of our method; Section 5 summarizes the results
of our method and the application of our method to a large dataset
and Section 6 concludes the article.

2 REVIEW OF PREVIOUS WORK
Current practices in the quantitative assessment of histological
samples fall into two categories: standard imaging microscopes
and specialized systems. Standard imaging microscopes use a color
CCD camera and non-coherent light. The images are scored with
non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) (Rabinovich et al., 2003),
which models each dye as an additive factor in the color space, where

 2008 The Author(s)
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[10:25 3/4/2009 Bioinformatics-btn426.tex]

Page: 1070

1070–1075

Bright ﬁeld imaging

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. Images of (a) human mammary ﬁbroblasts and (b) mouse pre-
adipocytes (positive control) grown under conditions that support adipocyte
differentiation for 5–7 days before being ﬁxed and stained with hematoxylin
and Oil Red O.

hindering the use of traditional delineation based on the color
features. However, by converting the color image into a gray-
level image, distinct intensity features of the nuclear region are
accentuated through a decrease in the intensity magnitude. This
decrease in the intensity feature has a trough that can be detected
as a dark elliptic feature. Conversion to a gray-level image is as
follows:

I(x,y)= α∗R(x,y)+β∗G(x,y)+γ ∗B(x,y)

where R, G and B are the red, green and blue channels, respectively,
of the original color image, and α = 0.21, β = 0.72 and γ = 0.07.
Unlike immunoﬂuorescence labeling, thresholding is inadequate for
this class of images. Our approach is to detect elliptic features (Yang
and Parvin, 2003) for the delineation of dark regions in the image.
Let the linear scale-space representation of the original image I0(x,y)
at scale σ be given by:

I(x,y;σ )= I0(x,y)∗G(x,y;σ )

(1)
where G(x,y;σ ) is the Gaussian kernel with a SD of σ . For simplicity
I(x,y;σ ) is also denoted as I(x,y) below. At each point (x,y), the
iso-intensity Contour is deﬁned by:

I(x+x,y+y)= I(x,y)
where (x,y)
is the displacement vector. Expanding and
truncating the above equation using Taylor’s series, we have the
following estimation:

(2)

1
2

where

(x,y)H(x,y)(x,y)T +(Ix,Iy)(x,y)T = 0

(3)

(cid:1)

(cid:2)

H(x,y)=

Ixx Ixy
Ixy Iyy

is the Hessian matrix of I(x,y). The entire image domain is divided
by Equation (2) into two parts:

I(x+x,y+y) > I(x,y)
I(x+x,y+y) < I(x,y)

and

or locally
1
2

and

1
2

(x,y)H(x,y)(x,y)T +(Ix,Iy)(x,y)T >0

(x,y)H(x,y)(x,y)T +(Ix,Iy)(x,y)T <0

If H(x,y) is positive deﬁnite, then the region deﬁned by Equation (4)
is locally convex. Similarly, if H(x,y) is negative deﬁnite, then

1071

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Fig. 1. Computational steps in quantifying stained samples: in a single
image, the user initializes the stained region associated with a signaling
macromolecule. Learned parameters are subsequently used for the rest of
the dataset.

the resulting image is deconvolved by color unmixing. This method
is quite powerful; however, it ignores spatial relationships between
nearby pixels, is sensitive to the initial condition, and may not be
able to deconvolve dyes that have too much overlap in the color
space. In addition to its successful application to spatial data (Lee
and Seung, 1999), NMF has also been used in the analysis of
gene expression data to reveal an intuitive meaning in terms of a
small subset of metagenes (Gao and Church, 2005). Specialized
systems (Papadakis et al., 2003) leverage tunable illumination,
fast hyperspectral imaging and monochromatic CCD cameras. The
primary advantage of such an optical band pass is in its ability
to resolve different stains whose spectra overlap when using the
standard system. However, it still requires additional processing,
from a stack of band pass images, for cell-by-cell analysis.

Our approach relies on a standard microscope with a color CCD
camera (e.g. bright ﬁeld imaging) to demonstrate that the proposed
method: (i) improves color decomposition, (ii) has better noise
immunity and (iii) has superior performance.

3 APPROACH
In our computational protocol, nuclear segmentation and color
decomposition proceed in parallel. Although nuclear segmentation
is not the focus of our article, it is an important step in constructing
a system, and a method is outlined here for completeness. However,
this method can be replaced with other nuclear segmentation
methods. In this system, segmentation of nuclear regions is realized
by detecting elliptic features (Yang and Parvin, 2003) corresponding
to potential dark regions. These regions are further ﬁltered for their
intensities and shape features. At the same time, the amount of
staining is characterized by a graph cut algorithm through color
decomposition. In rare cases, samples may be locally corrupted with
foreign materials leading to small dark patches that resemble the
nuclear signature. These dark patches are further ﬁltered following
color decomposition to eliminate false association to the nuclear
stain. Finally, staining is associated with each nucleus through
region-based tessellation.

3.1 Nuclear segmentation
Examples of treated and positive control images are shown in
Figure 2a and b, respectively. The nuclear intensities,
in the
color space, are quite similar to the surrounding background, thus

[10:25 3/4/2009 Bioinformatics-btn426.tex]

Page: 1071

1070–1075

H.Chang et al.

the region deﬁned by Equation (5) is locally convex. To determine
whether H(x,y) >0 or H(x,y) <0, we analyze this feature in both
cases: (I) H(x,y) >0. Then Ixx >0, Iyy >0, and hence Ixx+Iyy >0,
and positive Laplacian means that (x,y) is a ‘dark point’, i.e. a point
that is darker than its neighbors; and (II) H(x,y) <0. Then Ixx <0,
Iyy <0, and hence Ixx+Iyy <0, and negative Laplacian means that
(x,y) is a ‘bright point’, i.e. a point that is brighter than its neighbors.
From a computational perspective, we have the following
deﬁnition: a point is a bright (dark) elliptic feature at scale σ if
the Hessian matrix of I(x,y;σ ) is negative (positive) deﬁnite at
that point. The net result of applying dark elliptic feature detection
is a binarized mask corresponding to foreground and background.
However, very small regions may have been created as a result
of inherent noise in the image, which are then removed based
on a size threshold. The threshold is determined by the correct
segmentation for a population of nuclear features. In rare cases, the
mask corresponding to the dark elliptic features may be corrupted
by foreign objects, which can be resolved and corrected after signal
decomposition.

Nuclear regions provide the basis for region-based tessellation
along curvilinear boundaries. Formally,
let Ni correspond to
the i-th∈[0,K) nuclei in the image, q∈ Ni, and p be a point
in the image. Then region-based tessellation is deﬁned by
Vi ={p|dist(p,Ni) < dist(p,Nj),j∈{0,1,...,K−1} and j(cid:3)= i where
dist(p,Ni)= minq∈Ni
|p−q|. Computationally, this tessellation is
computed through the application of the watershed method (Vincent
and Soille, 1991) to the distance transform that is computed from
binarized nuclear masks (Jan and Hsueh, 2000).

3.2 Signal decomposition
Signal decomposition, through color unmixing, aims to identify
the signaling macromolecules that are associated with each dye.
For example, Figure 2 shows how labels for nuclei and lipids
are distributed in the RGB space. The main contribution of this
article is in characterizing color unmixing as a segmentation
problem that
incorporates neighborhood information through a
global optimization framework. The optimization framework is
based on the graph-cut method (Boykov and Marie-Pierre, 2001),
which is brieﬂy summarized. In this context, the image is represented

as a graph G=(cid:4) ¯V , ¯E(cid:5), where ¯V is the set of all nodes, and ¯E is
the set of all arcs connecting adjacent nodes. Usually, nodes and
edges correspond to pixels (P) and their adjacency relationship,
respectively. Additionally, there are special nodes that are known as
terminals, which correspond to the set of labels that can be assigned
to pixels. In the case of a graph with two terminals, terminals
are referred to as the source (S) and the sink (T). The labeling
problem is to assign an unique label xp (0 for background, and 1 for
foreground) for each node p∈ ¯V, and the image cutout is performed

by minimizing the Gibbs energy E (Geman and Geman, 1984):

E =

E1(xp)+

(cid:3)
p∈ ¯V

(cid:3)
(p,q)∈¯E

E2(xp,xq)

(8)

where E1(xp) is the likelihood energy, encoding the data ﬁtness cost
for assigning xp to p, and E2(xp,xq) is the prior energy, denoting
the cost when the labels of adjacent nodes, p and q, are xp and
xq, respectively. The likelihood energy is computed in an eight-
connected neighborhood. Figure 3 shows how a local neighborhood
is partitioned through a two-terminal graph-cut segmentation.

1072

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

two-terminal

Fig. 3. An example of
(class) graph-cut segmentation:
(a) an image grid (3× 3), where ‘F’ and ‘B’ correspond to foreground and
background seeds, respectively; (b) a graph constructed from image (a); (c)
an optimum cut shown as a red line; and (d) a ﬁnal labeling result where
grid points are assigned to terminals S and T after the cut.

The optimization algorithms could be classiﬁed into two
groups: Goldberg–Tarjan ‘push-relabel’ methods (Goldberg and
Tarjan, 1988), and Ford–Fulkerson ‘augmenting paths’ (Ford and
Fullkerson, 1962) . The details of the two methods can be found
in Cook et al. (1998).

We initialize our system with multiple models of foreground
and background, speciﬁed by the user stroke, from a subset of
images. An underlying feature distribution, corresponding to a user
stroke, is then represented with the Gaussian mixture model, in
the color space, i.e. each foreground and background signature is
not represented with a single Gaussian model. Let the conditional
density for a pixel feature, Cp, belonging to a multi-colored object
O be a mixture with M component densities:

GMMO(Cp)= M(cid:3)

j=1

(cid:4)

p(Cp|j)P(j)

(9)

M

where a mixing parameter P(j) corresponds to the weight of
component j and where
is a Gaussian with mean µ and covariance matrix . In RGB color
space:

j=1 P(j)= 1. Each mixture component
(cid:5)− 1

(Cp−µj)T −1

(Cp−µj)

(10)

exp

(cid:6)

j

p(Cp|j)=

1
2 || 1
3

2
j

(2π)

2

Then the data ﬁtness term is deﬁned as,

GMMB(Cp)

GMMF(Cp)+GMMB(Cp)
GMMF(Cp)+GMMB(Cp)

GMMF(Cp)

, if xp = Foreground
, if xp = Background

(11)




E1(xp)=

in which GMMF(Cp) and GMMB(Cp) are the probabilities of feature
Cp (in RGB space) from the foreground and background models,

[10:25 3/4/2009 Bioinformatics-btn426.tex]

Page: 1072

1070–1075

respectively. For example,

GMMF(Cp)= M(cid:3)

j=1

p(Cp|j)P(j)

(12)

where M = 10 was manually selected in our implementation to
capture wide variations in staining. P(j) and (µj, j) for p(Cp|j) are
estimated by EM algorithm (Tomasi, 2004). And the smoothness
term is deﬁned as,

1

dist(p,q)

E2(xp,xq)= we(p,q)∝exp(−|Cp−Cq|)·

(13)
where |Cp−Cq| is the Euclidean distance between feature vectors
of Cp and Cq in RGB space, and dist(p,q) is the Euclidean distance
between p and q in the image grid. Next, we construct the graph
G according to Table 1 and optimizing the objective function
with the graph cut algorithm (Boykov and Marie-Pierre, 2001).
After decomposition, nuclear segmentation is further validated by
removing nuclear candidates that partially overlap with the signaling
molecule. However, such an overlap is a rare event, and it is
always due to sample contamination in a small area. In cases
where macromolecules of interest are localized in nuclei, then the
experiment needs to be designed properly, i.e. (i) assure that the dye
has sufﬁcient color separation with nuclear labeling hematoxylin,
(ii) use another dye for labeling nuclei or (iii) label for cytoplasm

Table 1. Edge weights for
neighborhood system, and µ is the weight for smoothness

the graph construction, where N is the

Edge
p→ S
p→ T
we(p,q)

Weight

GMMF (p)

GMMF (p)+GMMB(p)
GMMF (p)+GMMB(p)
µ·exp(−|Cp−Cq|)·

GMMB(p)

For
p∈P
p∈P
{p,q}∈ N

1

dist(p,q)

Bright ﬁeld imaging

as a reference. IHC is a visualization and scoring protocol for
pathologists, and staining is always designed properly to assure color
separation.

3.3 Validation with synthetic data
To evaluate the performance and error rate of the system, a synthetic
image has been generated that simulates the nuclear size, shape
and contrast associated with complexes. Nuclear size and shape are
derived from the average behavior of nuclear features, following
segmentation, from a subset of images. Contrast is derived from
the user-based annotation of regions corresponding to positive and
negative staining from the same subset of images. Gaussian noise is
added, and the signal-to-noise ratio is changed from 12 dB to 0 dB,
from left to right, respectively. Subsequently, segmentation error
is quantiﬁed against the ground truth, and results are summarized
in Figure 4 and Table 2. This error corresponds to mismatches
(e.g. differences) between the known prior mask and the computed
segmentation.

3.4 Comparison with NMF
Figure 5 shows the signal decomposition results of the image in
Figure 2a, based on graph cut and NMF with identical initialization.
We used an improved version of NMF, based on sparseness
constraints. The matlab code is available online (Hoyer, 2004), and
has been rewritten in C++ for comparative analysis. The sparseness

Table 2. Comparison of segmentation errors for synthetic images of Figure 4
based on graph cut and NMF, respectively

Method

Figure 4a

Figure 4b

Figure 4c

Figure 4d

Graph cut
NMF

0.5%
0.8%

1.2%
4.7%

3.5%
31.2%

5.4%
43.3%

Errors are measured against known ground truth.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 4. Noise is added to a synthetic image at 12 dB (a), 7 dB (b), 3 dB (c) and 0 dB (d), and the segmentation results based on graph cut (µ=100) and NMF
are shown in the second and third rows, respectively.

1073

[10:25 3/4/2009 Bioinformatics-btn426.tex]

Page: 1073

1070–1075

H.Chang et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 5. A comparison of signal decomposition by graph cut (µ= 100) (a) and
NMF (b) indicates superior performance with the graph-cut method.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 6. Decomposition (µ= 100) of color space when nuclear and antibody
stains colocalize: (a) a bright ﬁeld image of human mammary tissue
stained for phosphorylated γ H2AX and hematoxylin, and (b) its color
decomposition.

constraint enables discovery of parts-based representation, and
is shown to have a better quality than standard NMF. The
results indicate that NMF decomposition is more noisy, mainly
because it ignores neighborhood information. Other linear unmixing
techniques may also produce noisy output, since regularization is
often ignored. It is important to note that NMF is inherently a
gradient descent method, and therefore, user-based initialization
remains an integral component. Otherwise, the method converges
to a wrong ﬁxed point.
Finally, with respect to the computational complexity, the costs
for graph cut and NMF, based on the same image (1280× 960), are
10 s and 10 min, respectively.

4 SIGNAL DECOMPOSITION WITH

COLOCALIZED SIGNALS IN THE COLOR
SPACE

In the previous example, the signal from Oil Red O is registered
outside of the nuclear regions, and therefore there is little overlap
between stains in the color space. In order to examine the efﬁcacy of
our proposed method for colocalized staining, we imaged samples
stained for phosphorylated γ H2AX, which localizes to the nucleus.
In this experiment, the user provides examples of signals associated
with each stain for establishing the prior knowledge. Subsequently,
energy functions were computed according to Table 1, and optimal
partitions were computed. An example, shown in Figure 6, indicates
postive and negative staining, where the results are examined against
manual scoring. We have used three representative images from
a dataset for comparative analysis. These three images that were
selected to represent a diverse signature of samples, were scored by

1074

Table 3. Number of misclassiﬁed nuclei in each image for positive and
negative stains, followed by the total number of cells in each image

No. of positive nuclei No. of negative nuclei Total no. of cells

Image 1 10
Image 2 17
Image 3 4

8
12
7

715
395
381

a pathologist, and then compared with automated analysis. Because
the process is tedious, a minimal number of images have been
selected. Results are shown in Table 3, where the second and third
columns correspond to the number of positive-and negative-stained
nuclei that have been misclassiﬁed when compared to the ground-
truth data. The last column lists the total number of cells in each
image. The average error is <5%.

5 BIOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION: A CASE STUDY
We have applied our method to a dataset of 192 images of ﬁbroblasts
obtained from women from two distinct patient populations. These
samples are imaged on a Nikon Eclipse TE 2000 E, which is
equipped with a color camera with a spatial resolution of 1280× 960
pixels and a dynamic range of 8 bits per channel in RGB space.
The illumination power is maintained at the same level, and all
images are automatically corrected for shading and non-uniformities
against a blank slide. Images are processed, and the amount of
lipid is quantiﬁed for each cell in each image. The net result of
color decomposition is a binarized mask, shown in red in Figure 8,
corresponding to positive stains, where the intensity in the red
channel is aggregated on a cell-by-cell basis. In addition to color
decomposition, Figure 8 indicates nuclear position, in green, and
how the space between nuclear regions are partitioned through
region-based tessellation, in yellow. Tessellation allows the signal
complex to be associated with the corresponding nuclear region.
The binarized masks provide the context for aggregating intensity
features in the red channel, and associating them to each nucleus.
Finally,
the results are represented as two probability density
functions for each population, as shown in Figure 7. The KS test
between these two distributions computes a P-value of <0.0001,
thus indicating that the two populations are different.

One of the concerns regarding population study is due to the
impact of error in nuclear segmentation for aggregating lipid signals.
Our experience indicates that the error in nuclear segmentation is
less than a few percent. Therefore, given a very large population of
cells, such an error will be buried as noise. It will only be an issue
if the central question is to search for outliers in a study.

6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have developed a novel method for signal decomposition in
the color space for scoring the amount of staining associated with
macromolecules. The method is based on graph cut, which has a
superior performance to NMF. Subsequently, strength of staining is
associated to each cell through nuclear segmentation and region-
based tessellation. In addition, we have demonstrated the efﬁcacy
of our method in samples when the stains are co-localized in

[10:25 3/4/2009 Bioinformatics-btn426.tex]

Page: 1074

1070–1075

(a)

s

l
l

e
C

 
f

 

t

o
e
g
a
n
e
c
r
e
P

(b)

s

l
l

e
C

 
f

 

t

o
e
g
a
n
e
c
r
e
P

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
0

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0
0

100

200

100

200

400

700
300
Fat content-cell by cell basis

500

600

400

700
300
Fat content-cell by cell basis

500

600

800

900

1000

800

900

1000

Fig. 7. Probability density functions corresponding to the fat content on a
cell-by-cell basis for each of the two populations, where (a) corresponds to
a population represented by Figure 8c and (b) corresponds to a population
represented by Figure 8a. The KS test computes a P-value of 0.001 indicating
that these two populations are different.

the same subcellular regions. Our method has been applied to
a dataset of ﬁbroblasts derived from the two patient populations
that are different when placed under adipocyte differentiation
conditions. Our continued research will focus on other end points
for these primary cells in order to visualize and quantify a more
comprehensive representation of active macromolecules.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Authors thank Dr Colleen Fordyce and Dr Kurt Thorn of UCSF for
cell-culture support and imaging expertise.

Funding: National Cancer Institute (1P01CA107584-01A1); US
Department of Energy, Ofﬁce of Biological and Environmental
Research (DE-AC03 SF0098).

Bright ﬁeld imaging

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Fig. 8. Segmentation and color decomposition from two images in the
dataset indicate how region-based tessellation enables quantifying signal
macromolecules on a cell-by-cell basis. (µ= 100, σ = 2.5)

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Boykov,Y. and Marie-Pierre,J. (2001) Interactive graph cuts for optimal boundary and
region segmentation of objects in N-D images. In Proceedings of IEEE ICCV.
pp. 105–112.

Cook,W.J. et al. (1998) Combinatorial Optimization. John Wiley & Sons.
Ford,L. and Fullkerson,D. (1962) Flows in Networks. Princeton University Press.
Gao,Y. and Church,G. (2005) Improving molecular cancer class discovery through

sparse non-negative matrix factorization. Bioinformatics, 21, 3970–3975.

Geman,S. and Geman,D. (1984) Stochastic relaxation, gibbs distribution and the

bayesian restoration of images. IEEE Trans. PAMI, 6, 721–741.

Goldberg,A.V. and Tarjan,R.E. (1988) A new approach to maximum-flow problem.

J. Assoc. Comput. Mach., 35, 921–940.

Hoyer,P. (2004) Non-negative matrix factorization with sparseness constraints. J. Mach.

Learn. Res., 5, 1457–1469.

Jan,S. and Hsueh,Y. (2000) Primitive spatial relations based on SKIZ. Images Vis.

comput., 597–605.

Lee,D. and Seung,H. (1999) Learning the parts of object by non-negative matrix

factorization. Nature, 401, 788–791.

Papadakis,A. et al. (2003) A novel spectral microscope system: application in

quantitative pathology. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 50, 207–217.

Rabinovich,A. et al. (2003) Unsupervised color decomposition of histologically stained

tissue samples. Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med.

Tomasi,C. (2004) Estimating Gaussian mixture densities with EM - a tutorial. Available

at www.cs.duke.edu/courses/spring04/cps196.1/handouts/EM/tomasiEM.pdf .

Vincent,L. and Soille,P. (1991) Watersheds in digital spaces: an efﬁcient algorithm
based on immersion simulations. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 13,
583–598.

Yang,Q. and Parvin,B. (2003) Harmonic cut and regularized centroid transform
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 50,

localization of subcellular structures.

for
469–476.

[10:25 3/4/2009 Bioinformatics-btn426.tex]

Page: 1075

1070–1075

1075

