BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 25 no. 1 2009, pages 121–122

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn567

Sequence analysis
RANKPROP: a web server for protein remote homology detection
Iain Melvin1,∗, Jason Weston1, Christina Leslie2 and William Stafford Noble3,4,∗
1NEC Laboratories of America, Princeton, NJ, 2Computational Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 3Department of Genome Sciences and 4Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Received on June 26, 2008; revised and accepted on October 29, 2008
Advance Access publication November 6, 2008
Associate Editor: Burkhard Rost

ABSTRACT
Summary: We present a large-scale implementation of the Rankprop
protein homology ranking algorithm in the form of an openly
accessible web server. We use the NRDB40 PSI-BLAST all-versus-
all protein similarity network of 1.1 million proteins to construct
the graph for the Rankprop algorithm, whereas previously, results
were only reported for a database of 108 000 proteins. We also
describe two algorithmic improvements to the original algorithm,
including propagation from multiple homologs of the query and better
normalization of ranking scores, that lead to higher accuracy and to
scores with a probabilistic interpretation.
Availability: The Rankprop web server and source code are available
at http://rankprop.gs.washington.edu
Contact: iain@nec-labs.com; noble@gs.washington.edu

1 INTRODUCTION
Rankprop (Weston et al., 2004) is a network-based inference
algorithm for identifying subtle protein sequence similarities,
corresponding to remote homology relationships or to structural
similarities. The algorithm operates on a protein similarity network,
a graph in which each node is a protein and each weighted edge
connecting two proteins indicates their similarity. Such a network
can be built using existing tools, such as PSI-BLAST (Altschul et al.,
1997).

The key idea of the Rankprop algorithm is to extract global
information from a protein similarity network by propagating
outward from a user-speciﬁed query protein. Effectively,
the
algorithm sums over all possible paths from the query to each
target protein. Thus, after propagation, the resulting activation score
for each node includes global information about that protein’s
relationship to the query. Ranking proteins by these scores is
analogous to performing a database search using a tool such as PSI-
BLAST, except that the ranking induced by Rankprop reﬂects the
global topology of the protein similarity network.

In Weston et al. (2004), PSI-BLAST is used to measure sequence
similarity, and the unnormalized weight for the edge from node i
to node j is Wij =exp(−Sj(i)/σ ), where Sj(i) is the PSI-BLAST
E-value assigned to protein i given query j, and the parameter σ
is a positive constant. Edges are only included in the network for

i

i

i

i

(cid:1)

j Wij.

E-values smaller than a ﬁxed threshold. We obtain a stochastic
connectivity matrix M for the protein similarity network by row-
normalizing edge weights Wij
to obtain transition probabilities:
Mij = Wij/
Given such a network and a query sequence q, the Rankprop
algorithm is simple to describe. First, all nodes are assigned initial
activation scores that reﬂect each target protein’s similarity to q.
Like the edge weights, these scores are computed from PSI-BLAST
E-values using the same equation. At each iteration of the algorithm,
the activation score at a given node is replaced by the weighted sum
of the scores from all of its incoming edges. The update rule includes
a diffusion constant α that controls the rate of diffusion through
the network. Formally, we deﬁne the initial activation scores as
=exp(−Sq(i)/σ ). Viewing Pt as the column vector of activation
P0
levels at iteration t, the algorithm is given by Pt+1
i
+P0
if Pi(cid:2)= q and Pt+1
=1 otherwise, where α∈(0,1). One can show
that this iterative procedure converges to a ﬁxed point, which in
practice happens in a small number of iterations. The output of
the Rankprop algorithm is a ranking of the nodes in the network
according to their ﬁnal activation values. Proteins that receive a
high activation score are linked to the query via many strongly
weighted paths and vice versa. A multidomain query protein will
produce strong matches to any target protein that contains one or
more of the query domains. A single domain query A may connect
through a multidomain protein AB to infer a false relationship with
B. However, previous work (Weston et al., 2004) has found that
as long as the query sequence is connected to many other proteins,
then the true homologs will be mutually reinforcing and receive a
higher rank.

= αMPt

In this work, we extend the original Rankprop algorithm in
two ways: (1) improving accuracy by propagating simultaneously
from proteins that are very closely related to the query, and (2)
improving the interpretability of the scores produced by Rankprop
by empirically mapping them to probabilities. The mapped score can
be interpreted as the probability that the target protein is a member
of the same SCOP superfamily as the query. We also announce the
availability of a free web server that allows individual queries against
a protein similarity network derived from the NRDB40, comprising
1.1 million targets.

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

2 METHODS
The Rankprop server uses the PSI-BLAST all-versus-all similarity matrix
for NRDB40 provided by the PairsDB website (Heger et al., 2008). NRDB40

 2008 The Author(s)
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

I.Melvin et al.

is a subset of the non-redundant sequence database, ﬁltered so that no pairs
exhibit >40% sequence identity.

We generalize the Rankprop algorithm to accept a set Q of query proteins,
rather than a single query protein. To use this extra information we perform
propagation as usual, but we constrain the activation scores for all the query
points such that they are highly ranked. In particular, we choose the set
Q to be all the proteins that have a match with the initial query q with a
PSI-BLAST E-value <0.001. We then constrain our algorithm to have Pj =
1−Sq(j),∀j∈ Q. This modiﬁcation is useful because, instead of propagating
from a single query source node in the graph, we can propagate from several
source nodes that all belong to the same family or superfamily that we are
searching for.

The original Rankprop algorithm outputs scalar values that are not directly
interpretable. In the new version of the algorithm, we map each Rankprop
score to an estimate of the probability that the corresponding query and
target proteins belong to the same structural superfamily. We employ the
SCOP database (Murzin et al., 1995) to compute a histogram of empirical
frequencies of the activation levels Pi for each protein i. More speciﬁcally, we
choose bin centers vk and compute the following quantities: nk, the number
of times Pi falls into bin vk, and sn, the number of times that the latter
occurs and i is in the same superfamily as the query. We are interested
in the value sk /nk, which can be interpreted as the probability for each
activation value bin of the target being in the same superfamily as the
query. We choose the bin centers v=(0,0.01,0.02, ...,0.2,0.3,...,1), and
we enforce monotonicity in the ﬁnal output by setting pi/ni = pi−1/ni−1 if
pi/ni < pi−1/ni−1.

3 RESULTS
Table 1 compares our large-scale Rankprop results with PSI-
BLAST (using NRDB40 and the same blastpgp parameters as
PairsDB: -j 10 -e 1 -h 0.001 -b 10000 -v 10000 )
and the previously published version of Rankprop (using the
SWISSPROT database, 108k proteins). Rankprop NRDB40 is a
straightforward scaling up of the previous Rankprop algorithm to
NRDB40. In addition, Rankprop+homologs NRDB40 employs the
extensions described in Section 2. Accuracy is measured following
the methodology given in Weston et al. (2004): SCOP version 1.59
is split into train and test portions, and hyperparameters are chosen
by using the training set. Then, each test protein is treated as a
query, and the quality of a method’s protein ranking is measured
by using the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve, up to the ﬁrst (ROC1) or 50th (ROC50) false positive. We
report results as average ROC1 and ROC50 scores across all 3083
test proteins. Using a larger network yields improvements across all
four performance metrics, and propagating from multiple queries
improves the performance still further. A Wilcoxon signed rank test,
corrected for multiple tests, shows that all differences in Table 1
are signiﬁcant at 0.01, except for the three pairs of methods marked
with asterisks.

We also evaluate the performance of Rankprop using a combined
ROC curve across all the queries in our test set, following the
protocol of Altschul et al. (1997). Figure 1 shows the combined
ROC curves for Rankprop NRDB40 (ranked by activation value),
Rankprop+homologs NRDB40 (ranked by probability) and PSI-
BLAST (ranked by E-value). Compared with average per-query
ROC scores, the combined ROC curve requires that scores are well

122

Table 1. Ranking accuracy

Method

PSI-BLAST
RankProp SWISSPROT
RankProp NRDB40
RankProp+homologs NRDB40

Family

Family

S-Fam

S-Fam

ROC1
∗
∗

0.833
0.816
0.872
0.884

ROC50

0.851
0.906
0.923
0.928

ROC1
∗
∗

0.609
0.592
0.696
0.710

ROC50

0.628
0.725
0.779
0.775

∗
∗

*Indicate pairs of values that are not different at P < 0.01 (Wilcoxon signed rank).

PSI-BLAST
Rankprop SWISSPROT
 sigma 100
 homologs e<1e-3 sigma 100

 1

 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

s
e
v
i
t
i
s
o
P

 
f

o

 

n
o

i
t
c
a
r
F

 0

 0

 500

 1000
 1500
False positives

 2000

 2500

Fig. 1. Combined ROC curve across multiple queries. For each method,
search results from 3083 queries were sorted into a single list. The ﬁgure
plots, for varying thresholds in the ranked list, the fraction of all known
homologs (SCOP superfamily members) that fall above the threshold, as a
function of the number of non-superfamily members above the threshold.

calibrated from one query to the next. The ﬁgure shows that the
mapping of Rankprop scores to probabilities signiﬁcantly improves
the calibration, yielding better performance than PSI-BLAST for all
but the ﬁrst few false positives (across 3083 queries).

The Rankprop web server ﬁrst looks for an exact match of the
query sequence against the sequences in NRDB40. If such a match is
found, the server will retrieve the precomputed PSI-BLAST results
from the database and then apply the Rankprop algorithm. In this
case the server takes around 90 s to process a query. If the sequence
is not found in the database, then the server will run PSI-BLAST
ﬁrst, which on average takes an additional 15 min.

Funding: National Institutes of Health award (R01 GM074257).

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Altschul,S.F. et al. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein

database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res., 25, 3389–3402.

Heger,A. et al. (2008) Pairsdb atlas of protein sequence space. Nucleic Acids Res., 36,

D276–D280.

Murzin,A.G. et al. (1995) SCOP: a structural classiﬁcation of proteins database for the

investigation of sequences and structures. J. Mol. Biol., 247, 536–540.

Weston,J. et al. (2004) Protein ranking: from local to global structure in the protein

similarity network. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci., 101, 6559–6563.

