BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 25 no. 1 2009, pages 119–120

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn578

Genome analysis
DNAPlotter: circular and linear interactive genome visualization
Tim Carver1,∗, Nick Thomson1, Alan Bleasby2, Matthew Berriman1 and Julian Parkhill1
1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, CB10 1SA and 2European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome
Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK
Received on September 16, 2008; revised on November 3, 2008; accepted on November 4, 2008
Advance Access publication November 5, 2008
Associate Editor: John Quackenbush

ABSTRACT
Summary: DNAPlotter
is an interactive Java application for
generating circular and linear representations of genomes. Making
use of the Artemis libraries to provide a user-friendly method of
loading in sequence ﬁles (EMBL, GenBank, GFF) as well as data
from relational databases, it ﬁlters features of interest to display on
separate user-deﬁnable tracks. It can be used to produce publication
quality images for papers or web pages.
Availability: DNAPlotter is freely available (under a GPL licence)
for download (for MacOSX, UNIX and Windows) at the Wellcome
Trust Sanger Institute web sites: http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/
Artemis/circular/
Contact: artemis@sanger.ac.uk

1 INTRODUCTION
Circular and linear DNA diagrams provide a powerful tool for
illustrating the features of a genome in their full genomic context.
CGView (Stothard and Wishart, 2005) is a circular genome viewer
that produces PNG, JPEG or scalable vector graphics (SVG) format.
It is primarily designed to be part of a pipeline and not an interactive
and editable viewer. GenomeDiagram (Pritchard et al., 2006) is
a Python module, which can also be used to generate diagrams.
GenomePlot (Gibson and Smith, 2003), GenoMap (Sato and Ehira,
2003) and Microbial Genome Viewer (MGV; Kerkhoven et al.,
2004) are GUI based but do not provide the ability to directly read
in ﬁles in the common sequence formats or a ﬁltering tool to deﬁne
tracks.

Circos (http://mkweb.bcgsc.ca/circos/)

is web-based genome
comparison visualizer that is conﬁgured from ﬂat ﬁles. It can be
conﬁgured for comparisons within a genome or between multiple
genomes. There are also commercial packages available that draw
circular and linear plots.

Below we present DNAPlotter, a collaborative project combining
graphics from the Jemboss (http://emboss.sf.net/Jemboss/) DNA
viewer and Artemis (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Software/Artemis/)
libraries to read ﬁles and ﬁlter features, which has been designed to
be a graphical means of customizing circular and linear diagrams.

2 IMPLEMENTATION
DNAPlotter can be run as a standalone application or from within
Artemis (Berriman and Rutherford, 2003; Rutherford et al., 2000).

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

Written in Java, DNAPlotter is platform independent. The main
advantage of this program is that it is a fully interactive interface
in which the track features can be customized and conﬁguration
changes are applied immediately to the ﬁgure. Under the Options
menu there is a checkbox for switching between the circular
(Fig. 1A) and linear (Fig. 1B) representation of the DNA and
associated features.

DNAPlotter

reads the common sequence formats (EMBL,
Genbank, GFF) using the Artemis ﬁle reading library. The program
reads in a sequence ﬁle, which may or may not contain features, such
as coding sequences. DNAPlotter displays the sequence as a circular
or linear plot. Additional feature ﬁles can be read in and overlaid on
the sequence. As Artemis code is used for DNAPlotter, features can
also be read from the Generic Model Organism Database (GMOD,
http://www.gmod.org) Chado relational database schema (Carver
et al., 2008).

DNAPlotter uses Artemis libraries to ﬁlter features to be displayed
on tracks for both circular and linear plots. The built-in track
manager (Fig. 1C) enables the user to deﬁne what gets displayed.
Each row in the track manager deﬁnes the ﬁlter for selecting what
is shown on that track. It also allows a list of labels or gene names
to be pasted in. So, for example, a list of regions or genes can be
speciﬁed. The size of each track and its position is speciﬁed in the
track manager.

The colour for the features can be taken from the colour qualiﬁer
deﬁned for the feature or,
if not speciﬁed, from the Artemis
predeﬁned colour code. Alternatively, the colour can be set for all
features belonging to a track.

Tracks can also be added by reading in additional ﬁles. This means
that it is straightforward, for example, to mark the position of genes
for which orthologues have been calculated.

Details for a feature are displayed in mouse over tool-tips.
By double clicking on a feature the display properties for that feature
can be edited, e.g. coordinates, line width and colour. Labels and
arrows can be added to a feature. Alternatively, these properties
can be adjusted using the DNA Wizard utility. Features can also be
dragged in the circular plot and this will move the position of all
features in the track.
The GC content and GC skew [(G− C)/(G + C)] graphs can also
be displayed. There are options for the graphs to set the window and
step size for the calculation. The graph positions and colour scheme
can also be changed. Users can also load in their own graph data in
the form of a single value for each base position.

The resulting images can be saved as JPEG, PNG, BMP, WBMP
or PostScript. PostScript is the best format for high resolution and

 2008 The Author(s)
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

T.Carver et al.

Fig. 1. (A, B) showing Salmonella typhi genome as a circular and linear plot, respectively. The tracks from the outside represent: (1) Forward CDS;
(2) Reverse CDS; (3) Pseudogenes 4. Salmonella Pathogenicity Islands (red); (5) repeat regions (blue); (6) rRNA and tRNA (green); (7) %GC plot 8. GC
skew [(GC)/(G+C)]. (C) A generated example showing a transcriptome graph (black and yellow) on a circular plot for a prokaryotic genome. The tracks from
the outside represent: (1) Forward CDS; (2) Reverse CDS; (3) tRNA; (4) rRNA. (D) Snapshot of the track manager showing ﬁltering criteria.

publication quality images. The circular and linear plots can also be
sent directly to a PostScript printer.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Maria Fookes and Tim Perkins (Wellcome
Trust Sanger Institute) for the data Figure 1C is based on.

Funding: The Wellcome trust.

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Berriman,M. and Rutherford,K. (2003) Viewing and annotating sequence data with

Artemis. Brief. Bioinform., 4, 124–132.

Carver,T. et al. (2008) Artemis and ACT: viewing, annotating and comparing sequences
stored in a relational database. Bioinformatics, doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btn529.
Gibson,R. and Smith,D.R. (2003) Genome visualization made fast and simple.

Bioinformatics, 19, 1449–1450.

Kerkhoven,R. et al. (2004) Visualization for genomics: the microbial genome viewer.

Bioinformatics, 20, 1812–1814.

Pritchard,L. et al. (2006) GenomeDiagram: a python package for the visualization of

large-scale genomic data. Bioinformatics, 22, 616–617.

Rutherford,K. et al.

(2000) Artemis:

sequence visualization and annotation.

Bioinformatics, 16, 944–945.

Sato,N. and Ehira,S. (2003) GenoMap, a circular genome data viewer. Bioinformatics,

19, 1583–1584.

Stothard,P. and Wishart,D.S. (2005) Circular genome visualization and exploration

using CGView. Bioinformatics, 21, 537–539.

120

