BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 24 no. 23 2008, pages 2798–2800

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn520

Data and text mining
GEOmetadb: powerful alternative search engine for the Gene
Expression Omnibus
Yuelin Zhu1,2, Sean Davis1, Robert Stephens2, Paul S. Meltzer1 and Yidong Chen1,∗
1Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892 and 2Advanced
Biomedical Computing Center, National Cancer Institute-Frederick/SAIC-Frederick Inc., Frederick, MD 21702, USA
Received on April 22, 2008; revised on August 7, 2008; accepted on October 3, 2008
Advance Access publication October 7, 2008
Associate Editor: Joaquin Dopazo

ABSTRACT
The NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) represents the largest
public repository of microarray data. However, ﬁnding data in GEO
can be challenging. We have developed GEOmetadb in an attempt to
make querying the GEO metadata both easier and more powerful. All
GEO metadata records as well as the relationships between them are
parsed and stored in a local MySQL database. A powerful, ﬂexible
web search interface with several convenient utilities provides query
capabilities not available via NCBI tools. In addition, a Bioconductor
package, GEOmetadb that utilizes a SQLite export of the entire
GEOmetadb database is also available, rendering the entire GEO
database accessible with full power of SQL-based queries from
within R.
Availability: The web interface and SQLite databases available
at http://gbnci.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/geo/. The Bioconductor package is
available via the Bioconductor project. The corresponding MATLAB
implementation is also available at the same website.
Contact: yidong@mail.nih.gov

1 INTRODUCTION
The NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/geo/) represents the largest public repository of microarray
data in existence (Edgar et al., 2002; Barrett et al., 2007).
The Bioconductor project
(Gentleman et al., 2004) contains
hundreds of state-of-the-art methods for the analysis of microarray
and genomics data. Previously we published software, called
GEOquery (Davis and Meltzer, 2007), which effectively establishes
a bridge between GEO microarray data and Bioconductor and
facilitates reanalysis using novel and rigorous statistical and
bioinformatic tools. However, a difﬁculty that remains in dealing
with GEO is to ﬁnd, based on the experimental metadata, the
microarray data that are of interest especially for large-scale
and programmatic access of GEO data. As part of the NCBI
Entrez search system, GEO can be searched online via web pages
or using NCBI eUtils (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query/
static/eutils_help.html). However, the NCBI/GEO web search is not
yet full featured, particularly for programmatic access. NCBI eUtils
offers another option for ﬁnding data within the vast stores of GEO,
but it is cumbersome to use, often requiring multiple complicated
eUtils queries to get the relevant information. GEOmetadb was

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

developed in an attempt to make querying the GEO metadata
both easier and more effective. GEOmetadb includes a web-based
query engine, supported by a MySQL database backend, with
several convenient utilities and a Bioconductor package, called
GEOmetadb, which queries a locally installed GEOmetadb SQLite
database that we update regularly and supply for download; each
can be used independently of the other.

2 RESULTS
2.1 GEO metadata parsing
GEO has an open, adaptable design that can handle variety and a
minimum information about a microarray experiment (MIAME)-
compliant (Brazma et al., 2001) infrastructure that promotes fully
annotated submissions. The basic record types in GEO include
Platforms (GPL), Samples (GSM), Series (GSE) and DataSets
(GDS), of which GDS records are assembled by GEO curators
and others are supplied by submitters. Essentially, information in
each GEO record can be divided into two parts, a metadata part
and the data part. The information in metadata part is critical
for ﬁnding GEO microarray data of interest. NCBI offers several
different methods to access GEO records, which we utilize to
capture all GEO metadata for different GEO data types accordingly.
Hypertext preprocessor (PHP, http://www.php.net) functions were
written to parse, extract, reformat, construct data elements and
interact with a MySQL database (http://www.mysql.com/) for
storage and querying. The PHP function for parsing GDS SOFT
ﬁles was adopted from the EzArray software (Zhu et al., 2008).
The GEOmetadb MySQL database was designed to store parsed
GEO metadata and relationships between them (Fig. 1). All data in
GEOmetadb are faithfully parsed from GEO and no attempt is made
to curate, semantically recode, or otherwise clean up GEO data.
All ﬁeld names are also taken from GEO records except for minor
changes to improve usability in SQL queries. Fields containing
multiple records are generally stored as delimited text within the
same record; this denormalization signiﬁcantly reduces complexity
and improves efﬁciency of queries. SQLite 3 database (http://www.
sqlite.org/) is a widely used, cross-platform SQL database engine
which is a self-contained, embeddable, serverless, transactional SQL
database engine. The RSQLite package (James, 2008) includes an
embedded SQLite database engine and can interact with any SQLite
database; each database exists as a simple ﬁle, which is easily
exchanged and is platform independent. An R script converts the

 2008 The Author(s)
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

gse table

gse
title
bioc-package
type
overall_design
pubmed_id
summary
contributor
web_link
supplementary_file
status
submission_date
last_update_date
. . .

gds table

gds_subset

gds
gpl
gse
. . .

gse_gpl

gse
gpl

sMatrix

gse
gpl
. . .

gse_gsm

gse
gsm

gds
title
description
. . .

gpl table

gpl
title
technology
. . .

gsm table

gsm
gpl
type
channels
. . .

Fig. 1. Diagram of GEO entity relationships in GEOmetadb.

GEOmetadb MySQL database to an SQLite 3 database ﬁle that
contains data identical to those in the GEOmetadb MySQL database.
The SQLite version of GEOmetadb is maintained and distributed for
local installation.

2.2 GEOmetadb bioconductor package
The GEOmetadb Bioconductor package is simply a thin wrapper
around the GEOmetadb SQLite database. The package also includes
extensive documentation and example queries. The function
getSQLiteFile is the standard method for downloading and unzipping
the most recent GEOmetadb SQLite ﬁle from the server. The
function geoConvert performs conversion of one GEO entity to other
associated GEO entities, providing a very fast, convenient mapping
between GEO types. To convert ‘GPL96’ to other possible GEO
entities in the GEOmetadb.sqlite:

> conversion <- geoConvert("GPL96")
> sapply(conversion, dim)

gse gsm gds sMatrix

[1,] 532 15923 236 539
[2,]
2

2

2

2

The example provided below utilizes RSQLite function
dbGetQuery to extract all affymetrix GeneChips that have .CEL
supplementary submission to GEO.

> rs <- dbGetQuery(con, paste("select
+ gpl.bioc_package,gsm.gpl,",
+ "gsm,gsm.supplementary_file",
+ "from gsm join gpl on gsm.gpl=gpl.gpl",
+ "where gpl.manufacturer=’Affymetrix’",
+ "and gsm.supplementary_file like

’%CEL.gz’"))

> rs[1:3,]

bioc_package

gpl

gsm
hu6800 GPL80 GSM575
hu6800 GPL80 GSM576
hu6800 GPL80 GSM577

1
2
3

GEOmetadb

Fig. 2. Screen-capture of GEOmetadb online search: combined GSE-GPL-
GSM search.

2 ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/geo/DATA/
supplementary/samples/GSMNnnn/GSM576/GSM576.
cel.gz
3 ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/geo/DATA/
supplementary/samples/GSMNnnn/GSM577/GSM577.
cel.gz

2.3 The GEOmetadb online search tool
The GEOmetadb online search tool is a web-based search interface
for searching, viewing and downloading GEO metadata stored in
the GEOmetadb MySQL database. GEO metadata records can be
searched by individual data type or by a ﬂexible, efﬁcient, powerful
combined GSE-GPL-GSM search, as shown in Figure 2, where
GEO entities in the tables are linked by relationships between them.
Essential query ﬁelds are provided with drop-down menu for popular
entries, and keyword search for full-text querying from multiple text
ﬁelds in GEO. Other features include multiple ﬁeld query, query
within results, creating lists, ﬂexible display options, downloading
and detailed views of any results.

it

is critical

3 CONCLUSIONS
With the continued growth in the volume and complexity of
microarray data available via NCBI GEO,
that
researchers have efﬁcient, ﬂexible, powerful methods for querying
those data. While GEO offers several options for ﬁnding microarray
data, GEOmetadb provides an alternative, yet much more ﬂexible
and efﬁcient, set of tools for both online and programmatic access to
GEO metadata. We expect that improved access to GEO metadata
will not only enhance researchers’ abilities to ﬁnd data of interest,
but also provide a possibility for users to create a customized
GEO metadata database, e.g. annotating experiments with controlled
vocabulary and integrating with other biological data sources.

supplementary_file
1 ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/geo/DATA/
supplementary/samples/GSMNnnn/GSM575/GSM575.
cel.gz

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank BioInforx for the BxAF search functionality
used on the web query pages and the NCBI GEO staff for valuable
input and support during the development process.

2799

Y.Zhu et al.

Funding: Intramural Research Program of the NIH, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, USA.
Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Edgar,R. et al. (2002) Gene Expression Omnibus: NCBI gene expression and

hybridization array data repository. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 207–210.

Barrett,T. et al. (2007) NCBI GEO: mining tens of millions of expression proﬁles—

database and tools update. Nucleic Acids Res., 35, D760–D765.

Brazma,A. et al. (2001) Minimum information about a microarray experiment

(MIAME)-toward standards for microarray data. Nat. Genet., 29, 365–371.

Gentleman,R.C. et al.

(2004) Bioconductor: open software development

for

computational biology and bioinformatics. Genome Biol., 5, R80.1-R80.16.

Davis,S. and Meltzer,P.S. (2007) GEOquery: a bridge between the Gene Expression

Omnibus (GEO) and Bioconductor. Bioinformatics, 23, 1846–1847.

Zhu,Y. et al.

(2008) EzArray: a web-based highly automated Affymetrix
expression array data management and analysis system. BMC Bioinformatics,
9, 46–55.

James,D.A. (2008) RSQLite: SQLite interface for R. R package version 0.6-8, http://

cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RSQLite/index.html.

2800

