BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 25 no. 4 2009, pages 541–542

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn655

Gene expression
SAFEGUI: resampling-based tests of categorical signiﬁcance in
gene expression data made easy
Daniel M. Gatti1,∗, Myroslav Sypa1, Ivan Rusyn1, Fred A. Wright2 and William T. Barry3
1Department of Environmental Sciences & Engineering, 2Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599 and 3Department of Biostatistics & Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, NC 27705, USA
Received and revised on November 19, 2008; accepted on December 16, 2008
Advance Access publication December 19, 2008
Associate Editor: David Rocke

ABSTRACT
Summary: A large number of websites and applications perform
signiﬁcance testing for gene categories/pathways in microarray data.
Many of these packages fail to account for expression correlation
between transcripts, with a resultant
inﬂation in Type I error.
Array permutation and other resampling-based approaches have
been proposed as solutions to this problem. SAFEGUI provides a
user-friendly graphical
interface for the assessment of categorical
signiﬁcance in microarray studies, while properly accounting for
the effects of correlations among genes. SAFEGUI
incorporates
both permutation and more recently proposed bootstrap algorithms
that are demonstrated to be more powerful in detecting differential
expression across categories of genes.
Availability: http://cebc.unc.edu/software/
Contact: fwright@bios.unc.edu; dmgatti@email.unc.edu

1 INTRODUCTION
The computational pipeline for gene expression studies has
improved in recent years with a degree of consensus surrounding
pre-processing and normalization, analysis of differential expression
and biological interpretation of the ﬁndings (Allison et al., 2006).
A typical experiment involves a set of microarrays from one or
more treatment groups, where series of gene-speciﬁc statistical tests
are carried out to produce a list of differentially expressed genes
of interest to the investigator. This list is then passed to software
which tests for enrichment of biological categories among signiﬁcant
genes, aiding in biological interpretation and generating new leads
for followup. Several software packages and websites exist to carry
out this type of analysis (Khatri and Draghici, 2005).

As recently noted, software of this type has one property
in common;
they employ an enrichment score that assumes
independence between genes, a property which does not apply in
microarray studies (Goeman and Buhlmann, 2007; Rhee et al.,
2008). The violation of this assumption leads to inﬂated P-values
(Barry et al., 2008), even for categories that are moderately
correlated, and may lead to seriously biased conclusions.

Array permutation, in which the arrays are randomly assigned
to treatment groups, produces an empirical null distribution for
enrichment statistics, and has been shown to reduce the Type I

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

error associated with overrepresentation analysis (ORA) methods
(Barry et al., 2005; Goeman and Buhlmann, 2007). Several packages
exist to perform permutation-based signiﬁcance testing (Breslin
et al., 2004; Subramanian et al., 2005). More recently, bootstrapping
has been implemented as an alternative and more powerful
resampling scheme to test for functional category enrichment (Barry
et al., 2008). One stumbling block for biologists is that some of
these packages require scripting or the use of a command-line
interface. SAFEGUI introduces a graphical interface to R code, for
loading gene expression datasets and performing resampling-based
signiﬁcance testing of user-speciﬁed gene sets, Gene Ontology (GO)
categories, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Gene and Genomes (KEGG)
pathways or PFAM families.

2 SAFEGUI
SAFEGUI is written in Java in order to provide cross-platform
compatibility, and relies upon the Signiﬁcance Analysis of Function
and Expression (SAFE) package (Barry et al., 2005) written in
R (R Development Core Team, 2006). The release of SAFE 2.0
coincides with the release of SAFEGUI, and adds several new
features, including new statistics for differential expression and
pathway enrichment, as well as new procedures for error control
and resampling. SAFE provides a highly generalized environment
for category testing, with a greater variety of options than other
resampling category enrichment procedures.

When SAFEGUI starts, the user is presented with the main
window. The user selects a data ﬁle which consists of a row of
sample group labels, followed by gene expression measurements.
The user selects the appropriate microarray platform and SAFEGUI
automatically retrieves the corresponding annotation data from
Bioconductor
(Gentleman et al., 2004). The user selects a
gene-speciﬁc ‘local’ statistic to test for differential expression
(e.g. an F-statistic in a one-way ANOVA for a multi-class
experimental design). Finally, the user can select from several
options to test category enrichment correct for multiple testing of
categories/pathways. These ‘global’ enrichment statistics can be
categorical, such as Fisher’s Exact Test of category membership
versus statistical signiﬁcance of the genes,
thus providing a
resampling version of common genelist enrichment tests (Khatri
and Draghici, 2005). Other global statistics can directly use
the full continuous range of
the local statistics. Examples
include the Wilcoxon rank sum or Kolmogorov–Smirnov statistics.

 2008 The Author(s)
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

D.M.Gatti et al.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1. Results window showing signiﬁcant GO categories on the left and (a)
a safe plot for the selected GO category and (b) the GO tree with signiﬁcant
categories highlighted.

SAFEGUI enables permutation and bootstrap resampling of arrays,
and both methods preserve the correlation structure of the expression
measurements. Using existing Bioconductor annotation, SAFEGUI
enables testing of GO categories (Ashburner et al., 2000), KEGG
pathways (Ogata et al., 1999) and PFAM motifs (Bateman et al.,
2000).

Once the options are selected, SAFEGUI performs the analysis
and presents the output in results window (Fig. 1a). The table on the
left shows the signiﬁcant categories/pathways sorted by nominal or
corrected P-value. Upon selecting a category, several tabs appear
on the right: the ﬁrst shows lists of up- and downregulated genes
(for two-condition experiments). The second tab shows the safeplot
(Barry et al., 2005), a cumulative distribution of ranked local
statistics. The third tab shows a GO graph (if applicable) in which
each category is colored according to its statistical signiﬁcance
(Fig. 1b). All tabular and graphical results can be written to output
for further analysis.

SAFE 2.0 and SAFEGUI also allow the user to select

the
univariate Cox proportional hazards model to relate gene expression
to censored survival data for category testing. The use of a Cox
model on the expression of gene categories has been shown to be
more predictive of survival than the use of individual genes, and
may provide greater biological insight (Barry et al., 2005).

2.1 Bootstrap resampling
The release of the Bioconductor package SAFE 2.0 adds several
bootstrap resampling methods for testing gene categories, which
have been shown to control Type I error while providing more
power than permutation methods (Barry et al., 2008). Empirical

542

category P-values are calculated using two standard approaches.
(i) The argument method = ‘bootstrap.t’ invokes pivot tests for the
exclusion of a null value from Gaussian conﬁdence interval, using on
resampled estimates of the mean and variance of the global statistic;
(ii) method = ‘bootstrap.q’ invokes tests based on the exclusion of a
null value from the alpha-quantile interval of the resampled global
statistic. For both the bootstrap-based tests, a null value for the
global statistic must be speciﬁed that is insensitive to expression
correlation, and bootstrapping is thus limited to the use of the
Pearson, Wilcoxon and T-tests.

3 CONCLUSIONS
SAFEGUI introduces a user-friendly graphical user interface to a
powerful statistical package for the analysis of category or pathway
signiﬁcance from microarray data.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The research described in this article has not been subjected to
the Agency’s peer review and policy review and therefore does
not necessarily reﬂect the views of the Agency and no ofﬁcial
endorsement should be inferred.

Funding: United States Environmental Protection Agency
(RD832720, RD833825 and F08D20579,
in part). However,
the research described in this article has not been subjected to
the Agency’s peer review and policy review and therefore does
not necessarily reﬂect the views of the Agency and no ofﬁcial
endorsement should be inferred. UNC Environmental Sciences &
Engineering Interdisciplinary Fellowship (to D.M.G.).

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Allison,D.B. et al. (2006) Microarray data analysis: from disarray to consolidation and

consensus. Nat. Rev. Genet., 7, 55–65.

Ashburner,M. et al. (2000) Gene ontology: tool for the uniﬁcation of biology. The Gene

Ontology Consortium. Nat. Genet., 25, 25–29.

Barry,W.T. et al. (2005) Signiﬁcance analysis of functional categories in gene expression

studies: a structured permutation approach. Bioinformatics, 21, 1943–1949.

Barry,W.T. et al. (2008) A statistical framework for testing functional categories in

microarray data. Ann. Appl. Stat., 2, 286–315.

Bateman,A. et al. (2000) The Pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res., 28,

263–266.

Breslin,T. et al. (2004) Comparing functional annotation analyses with Catmap. BMC

Bioinformatics, 5, 193.

Gentleman,R.C. et al.

(2004) Bioconductor: open software development

for

computational biology and bioinformatics. Genome Biol., 5, R80.

Goeman,J.J. and Buhlmann,P. (2007) Analyzing gene expression data in terms of gene

sets: methodological issues. Bioinformatics, 23, 980–987.

Khatri,P. and Draghici,S. (2005) Ontological analysis of gene expression data: current

tools, limitations, and open problems. Bioinformatics, 21, 3587–3595.

Ogata,H. et al. (1999) KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. Nucleic

Acids Res., 27, 29–34.

R Development Core Team (2006) R: a Language and Environment for Statistical

Computing, Vienna, Austria, available at http://www.R-project.org.

Rhee et al. (2008) Use and misuse of the gene ontology annotations. Nat. Rev. Genet.,

7, 509–515.

Subramanian,A. et al. (2005) Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based
approach for interpreting genome-wide expression proﬁles. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 102, 15545–15550.

