BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 25 no. 3 2009, pages 415–416

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn647

Gene expression
arrayQualityMetrics—a bioconductor package for quality
assessment of microarray data
Audrey Kauffmann1,∗, Robert Gentleman2 and Wolfgang Huber1
1EMBL European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK
and 2Computational Biology - FHCRC, 1100 Fairview Avenue North, Seattle, WA 98109, USA
Received on October 1, 2008; revised on December 2, 2008; accepted on December 11, 2008
Advance Access publication December 23, 2008
Associate Editor: David Rocke

ABSTRACT
Summary: The assessment of data quality is a major concern in
microarray analysis. arrayQualityMetrics is a Bioconductor package
that provides a report with diagnostic plots for one or two colour
microarray data. The quality metrics assess reproducibility, identify
apparent outlier arrays and compute measures of signal-to-noise
ratio. The tool handles most current microarray technologies and is
amenable to use in automated analysis pipelines or for automatic
report generation, as well as for use by individuals. The diagnosis
of quality remains, in principle, a context-dependent judgement, but
our tool provides powerful, automated, objective and comprehensive
instruments on which to base a decision.
Availability: arrayQualityMetrics is a free and open source package,
under LGPL license, available from the Bioconductor project at
www.bioconductor.org. A users guide and examples are provided
with the package. Some examples of HTML reports generated
by arrayQualityMetrics can be found at http://www.microarray-
quality.org
Contact: audrey@ebi.ac.uk
Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at
Bioinformatics online.

1 INTRODUCTION
As microarray data quality can be affected at each step of the
microarray experiment processing
(Schuchhardt et al., 2000),
quality assessment is an integral part of the analysis. There are
freely available tools allowing quality assessment for a speciﬁc
microarray type, such as Affymetrix (Parman and Halling, 2005),
Illumina
(Dunning et al., 2007) and two-colour cDNA arrays
(Buness et al., 2005). Other free tools are designed to identify a
particular problem among which are spot quality (Li et al., 2005)
or hybridization quality (Petri et al., 2004). Some tools perform
outlier detection from quality metrics done before (Freue et al.,
2007), or propose interactive quality plots
(Lee et al., 2006).
We developed a Bioconductor
(Gentleman et al., 2004) package,
arrayQualityMetrics, with the aim to provide a comprehensive
tool
that works on all expression arrays and platforms and
produces a self-contained report which can be web-delivered. The
Supplementary table shows a comparison with the functionality

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

and scope of other Bioconductor packages concerned with quality
assessment or outlier detection.

information about

2 DESCRIPTION
to perform an analysis using the arrayQualityMetrics
Input:
package, one needs to provide the matrix of microarray intensities
and optionally,
the samples and the probes
in a Bioconductor object of class AffyBatch, ExpressionSet,
NChannelSet or BeadLevelList. These classes are widely used and
well documented. The manner of calling the arrayQualityMetrics
function to create a report is the same for all of these classes, and
it can be applied to raw array intensities as well as to normalized
data. Applied to raw intensities,
the quality metrics can help
with monitoring experimental procedures and with the choice of
normalization procedure; application to the normalized data is more
relevant for assessing the utility of the data in downstream analyses.
Individual array quality: the MA-plot allows the evaluation of
the dependence between the intensity levels and the distribution of
the ratios (Fig. 1a) (Dudoit et al., 2002). For two-colour arrays,
a probe’s M-value is the log-ratio of the two intensities and the
A-value is the mean of their logarithms. In the case of one colour
arrays, the M-value is computed by dividing the intensity by the
median intensity of the same probe across all arrays. A false
colour representation of each array’s spatial distribution of feature
intensities (Fig. 1b) helps in identifying spatial effects that may be
caused by, for example, gradients in the hybridization chamber, air
bubbles or printing problems.

Homogeneity between arrays: to assess the homogeneity between
the arrays, boxplots of the log2 intensities and density estimate plots
(Fig. 1c) are presented.

Between array comparison: Figure 1d shows a heatmap of
between array distances, computed as the mean absolute difference
of the M-value for each pair of arrays,

dxy=mean

|Mxi−Myi|,

i

where Mxi is the M-value of the i-th probe on the x-th array.
Consider the decomposition of Mxi:

Mxi= zi+βxi+εxi

where zi
is the probe effect for probe i (the same across all
arrays), εxi are i.i.d random variables with mean zero and βxi
is a sparse matrix representing differential expression effects.

(1)

(2)

 2008 The Author(s)
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

A.Kauffmann et al.

Fig. 1. (a) MA-plot for an Agilent microarray. The M-values are not centered
on zero meaning that there is a dependency between the intensities and the
log-ratio. (b) Spatial distribution of the background of the green channel
for an Illumina chip. There is an abnormal distribution of high intensities
at the top border of the array. (c) Density plot of the log-intensities of an
Affymetrix set of arrays (E-GEOD-349 ArrayExpress set). The density of
one of the arrays is shifted on the x-axis. (d) Heatmap of the ArrayExpress
Affymetrix data set E-GEOD-1571. Array 18 is an outlier.

Under these assumptions, all values dxy are approximately the same
and deviations from this can be used to identify outlier arrays.
The dendrogram can serve to check if the experiments cluster in
accordance with the sample classes.

Affymetrix speciﬁc plots: four Affymetrix-speciﬁc metrics are
evaluated if the input object is an AffyBatch. The RNA degradation
plot from the affy package (Gautier et al., 2004), the relative log
expression (RLE) boxplots and the normalized unscaled standard
error (NUSE) boxplots from the affyPLM package (Brettschneider
et al., 2007) and the QC stat plot from the simpleaffy package
(Wilson and Miller, 2005) are represented.

Scores: to guide the interpretation of the report, we have included
the computation of numeric scores associated with the plots. Outliers
are detected on the MA-plot, spatial distributions of the features’
intensities, boxplot, heatmap, RLE and NUSE. The mean of the
absolute value of M is computed for each array and those that lie
beyond the extremes of the boxplot’s whiskers are considered as
possible outliers arrays. The same approach, i.e. using the whiskers
of the boxplot, is applied to the following: the mean and interquartile
range (IQR) from the boxplots and NUSE, the sums of the rows of
the distance matrix, and the relative amplitude of low versus high
frequence components of the Fourier transformation. In the case

416

of the RLE plot, any array with a median RLE higher than 0.1 is
considered an outlier.

Report: the metrics are rendered as ﬁgures with legends in
a detailed report and the scores are used to provide a summary
table. Examples of reports are provided at http://www.microarray-
quality.org/quality_metrics.html.

3 CONCLUSION
arrayQualityMetrics supports the quality assessment of many
types of microarrays in R. After preparation of the data, a single
command line is used to create the report. The main beneﬁts of
arrayQualityMetrics are its simplicity of use, the ability to have
the same report for different types of platforms, and the opportunity
for users or developers to extend it for their needs. This tool can
be used for individual data analyses or in routine data production
pipelines, to provide fast uniform reporting.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the developers of the R and Bioconductor
packages that we are using, especially Ben Bolstad, Mark Dunning,
Crispin Miller, Gregoire Pau and Deepayan Sarkar.

Funding: EU FP6 (EMERALD, Project no. LSHG-CT-2006-037686
to A.K.). National Institutes of Health (P41HG004059 R.G.)

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Brettschneider,J. et al. (2007) Quality assessment for short oligonucleotide arrays.

arXiv:0710.0178v2.

Buness,A. et al. (2005) arrayMagic: two-colour cDNA microarray quality control and

preprocessing. Bioinformatics, 21, 554–556.

Dudoit,S. et al. (2002) Statistical methods for identifying differentially expressed genes

in replicated cdna microarray experiments. Stat. Sinica, 12, 111–139.

Dunning,M.J. et al. (2007) beadarray: R classes and methods for Illumina bead-based

data. Bioinformatics, 23, 2183–2184.

Freue,G.V.C. et al. (2007) MDQC: a new quality assessment method for microarrays

based on quality control reports. Bioinformatics, 23, 3162–3169.

Gautier,L. et al. (2004) affy – analysis of affymetrix genechip data at the probe level.

Bioinformatics, 20, 307–315.

Gentleman,R.C. et al.

(2004) Bioconductor: Open software development

for

computational biology and bioinformatics. Genome Biol., 5, R80.

Lee,E.-K. et al. (2006) arrayQCplot: software for checking the quality of microarray

data. Bioinformatics, 22, 2305–2307.

Li,Q. et al. (2005) Donuts, scratches and blanks: robust model-based segmentation of

microarray images. Bioinformatics, 21, 2875–2882.

Parman,C. and Halling,C. (2005) affyQCReport: QC Report Generation for affyBatch

objects, R package version 1.17.0.

Petri,A. et al. (2004) Array-a-lizer: a serial DNA microarray quality analyzer. BMC

Bioinformatics, 5, 12.

Schuchhardt,J. et al. (2000) Normalization strategies for cDNA microarrays. Nucleic

Acids Res,28, E47.

Wilson,C.L. and Miller,C.J. (2005) Simpleaffy: a bioconductor package for Affymetrix

quality control and data analysis. Bioinformatics, 21, 3683–3685.

