BIOINFORMATICS

Vol. 25 ISMB 2009, pages i69–i76
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp194

Alignment of the UMLS semantic network with BioTop:
methodology and assessment
Stefan Schulz1,∗, Elena Beisswanger2, László van den Hoek3, Olivier Bodenreider4 and
Erik M. van Mulligen3
1Institute of Medical Biometry and Medical Informatics, University Medical Center Freiburg, Stefan-Meier-Str. 26,
79104 Freiburg, 2Jena University Language and Information Engineering (JULIE) Lab, Germany, 3Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands and 4National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD, USA

ABSTRACT
Motivation: For many years, the Uniﬁed Medical Language System
(UMLS) semantic network (SN) has been used as an upper-
level semantic framework for the categorization of
terms from
terminological resources in biomedicine. BioTop has recently been
developed as an upper-level ontology for the biomedical domain. In
contrast to the SN, it is founded upon strict ontological principles,
using OWL DL as a formal representation language, which has
become standard in the semantic Web. In order to make logic-based
reasoning available for the resources annotated or categorized with
the SN, a mapping ontology was developed aligning the SN with
BioTop.
Methods: The theoretical foundations and the practical realization
of the alignment are being described, with a focus on the design
decisions taken, the problems encountered and the adaptations
of BioTop that became necessary. For evaluation purposes, UMLS
concept pairs obtained from MEDLINE abstracts by a named entity
recognition system were tested for possible semantic relationships.
Furthermore, all semantic-type combinations that occur in the UMLS
Metathesaurus were checked for satisﬁability.
Results: The effort-intensive alignment process required major
design changes and enhancements of BioTop and brought up several
design errors that could be ﬁxed. A comparison between a human
curator and the ontology yielded only a low agreement. Ontology
reasoning was also used to successfully identify 133 inconsistent
semantic-type combinations.
Availability: BioTop, the OWL DL representation of the UMLS SN,
and the mapping ontology are available at
http://www.purl.org/biotop/.
Contact: stschulz@uni-freiburg.de

high-throughput

1 INTRODUCTION
advanced
As
information technology have impressively increased the amount
of data,
the resulting information congestion has well-known
consequences such as fragmentation of data and knowledge and
duplication of research efforts (Stevens, 2000).

experimental methods

and

Factual information about proteins, genes, diseases and other
relevant biomedical entities are increasingly available in structured
databases but their dissemination by unstructured, texts i.e. research
articles, still prevails. It is estimated that as much as 80% of new
scientiﬁc facts are communicated only in their original journal

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

publication (Jelier, 2005), the authors relying on a limited group
of curators to manually extract, annotate and transfer these facts
into the appropriate databases.

Although the pooling of such facts in databases like UniProt
(Mulder, 2008) offers clear advantages over
the traditional
publication process, it would be of great beneﬁt to concentrate all
this information in a structured manner in one centralized repository:
ongoing research information, peer-reviewed articles, external,
authoritative knowledge bases, together with formalizations of the
basic kinds of entities and their interrelations in formal ontologies.
Several projects [e.g. WikiProteins (Mons, 2008)] try to achieve this
goal.

Although resource annotation can rely on huge terminological
sources as they have evolved in the last decades, automatic
reasoning services for tasks including hypothesis generation and
knowledge discovery require sound ontologies, whereas they may
produce suboptimal results when based on traditional terminological
systems. For this reason, we set out to examine how a formal domain
ontology covering the basic kinds of entities in the biomedical
domain can replace an informal legacy system. More precisely, we
created a mapping between the UMLS SN (McCray, 2003) and
BioTop (Beisswanger, 2008), and assessed through this mapping
how each resource contributes to the interpretation of the relation
between pairs of co-occurring concepts.

The article is organized as follows: after giving an overview
of basic concepts like terminology and ontology (Section 2)
we describe the resources used, the mapping approach and the
evaluation methodology (Section 3). Eventually we present our
results and discuss them in the context of related work (Sections
4 and 5).

2 BACKGROUND
We here introduce the basic concepts underlying our work, viz.
terminology, ontology and description logics.

2.1 Terminology
Both text mining and manual annotation require some kind of
semantic standard. Originally,
this issue was supposed to be
addressed by controlled vocabularies and terminology systems
(DeKeizer, 2000a, b;
ISO, 2000), a heterogeneous group of
mostly language-oriented artefacts that relate the various senses or
meanings of linguistic entities to one another (e.g. by assessing
the synonymy between ‘Nephroblastoma’ and ‘Wilms’ Tumor’).
Sets of (quasi-) synonymous terms are commonly referred to

 2009 The Author(s)
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[09:53 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp194.tex]

Page: i69

i69–i76

S.Schulz et al.

as ‘concepts’, and in many terminology systems concepts are
furthermore related by informal semantic relationships often
following vague natural
language predicates (narrower than,
associated with, etc.). Terminology systems are generally built to
serve a well-deﬁned purpose such as document retrieval, resource
annotation, the recording of mortality and morbidity statistics or
billing. In the medical ﬁeld, the largest terminological system
is the Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS) (Bodenreider,
2004; UMLS, 2009) in which synonymous terms from different
source vocabularies are clustered into concepts, each of which is
categorized using a system of semantic types (STs) (McCray, 1995).
Today, the UMLS comprises 1.9 million concepts and almost 7
million terms from close to 150 sources.

2.2 Ontology
In reaction to the language- and purpose-oriented and informal
approaches to representing a given domain,
there has been a
growing interest in using formal methods for precisely describing
the invariant and language-independent properties of the entities
in a domain. In biomedicine, the Gene Ontology (GO) (Ashburner,
2000) was the pioneer of moving from a purpose-oriented annotation
vocabulary to a more principled resource. Similarly, collaborative
initiatives have emerged such as the Open Biomedical Ontologies
(OBO) Foundry (Smith, 2007), the continuing development of
SNOMED CT (SNOMED, 2009), which is increasingly challenged
and guided by ontological principles, as well as increasing
mutual awareness between the Semantic Web and Life Sciences
communities (Ruttenberg, 2007; Sagotsky, 2008).

The term ‘ontology’ stems from analytical philosophy, concerned
with the question of ‘what exists?’ (Quine, 1948). It became popular
by information sciences, and despite quite contradictory deﬁnitions
(Ku´snierczyk, 2006) it has increasingly been used to refer to domain
representation of various kinds. In order to emphasize the use of a
formal language in domain representations, we here subscribe to
the concept of formal ontologies (Guarino, 1998) as theories that
attempt to give precise representations of the types of entities in
reality, of their properties and of the relations among them, using
axioms and deﬁnitions that support algorithmic reasoning.

2.3 Upper-level ontologies
The purpose of upper domain ontologies is to deﬁne the foundational
kinds and relations relevant to the entire domain. In the life sciences,
this includes classes like gene, protein, cell, tissue, nucleotide,
population, organism, diagnostic procedure and biological function,
among others. Upper domain ontologies can either be used alone
as a source of basic categories (e.g. for the coarse annotation of
resources) or as a common reference for more specialized domain
ontologies.

In contrast to domain-speciﬁc ontologies such as the GO, upper
ontologies propose to trade detail for scope by introducing general
categories that are the same across all domains. Whether or not this
is achievable and desirable has been subject of debate. Nevertheless,
several upper-level ontologies have been developed and are being
maintained such as BFO1 (Smith, 2007a), DOLCE2 (Gangemi,

1Basic Formal Ontology.
2Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering.

i70

2002; Masolo, 2003), SUMO3 (Pease, 2008) or GFO4 (Heller,
2004). More recently, development of application-oriented domain
ontologies such as the OBO5 ontologies have led to the proposal
of a kind of intermediate-level ontologies, also called top-domain
ontologies, such as the Simple Bio Upper Ontology (Rector, 2006),
GFO-Bio (Hoehndorf, 2008) or BioTop (Beisswanger, 2008). In
contrast
the
pragmatic UMLS SN6 , developed 15 years ago, can be regarded
as the archetype of a biomedical domain upper ontology (McCray,
2003). Moreover, the SN has already proved its usefulness in
providing a consistent categorization of all concepts represented in
the UMLS Metathesaurus.

to these recent and more theory-laden resources,

From an upper-level ontology viewpoint, domain upper
ontologies play the role of domain ontologies, but from a domain
perspective they act as upper ontologies. For example, the placement
of BioTop under BFO or DOLCE could be seen as a domain ontology
placed under an upper ontology. Conversely, BioTop itself may also
play the role of an upper ontology when linked to the Cell Ontology
(CO) or the GO.

Different upper-level ontologies not only use different formalisms
for their representation but also represent the domain in slightly
different ways. As a consequence, the constraints they impose on
domain-speciﬁc ontologies affect the result of reasoning services
based on these upper-level ontologies.

2.4 Description logics
Since the 1980s, the application of formal reasoning on ontology
structures has led to various formalisms. Later on, the vision of
the Semantic Web (Berners-Lee, 2001) has resulted in a signiﬁcant
standardization of representation languages, formats and reasoning
engines.

One of the most noteworthy standards of the Semantic Web was
the development of the Web ontology language OWL (Horrocks,
2003) and especially its expressive but still computable subset,
OWL description logic (DL). DLs constitute a family of decidable
fragments of ﬁrst-order logic which have a clean and intuitive
syntax (Baader, 2007). They come in various ﬂavours, ranging
from lightweight to highly expressive ones. The trade-off between
expressivity of the logic and computability (and thus, scalability)
of its reasoning has to be made in order to properly address
the ontology application. Whereas overly inexpressive DL may
lead to underspeciﬁcations that imply unintended models of the
ontology, highly expensive reasoning makes it infeasible from
practical viewpoints. OWL DL constitutes a compromise between
expressiveness and decidability and is supported by DL classiﬁers
like RACER, Fact++ and Pellet (Haarslev, 2003; Tsarkov, 2006;
Sirin, 2007).

Description logics are built around the notions of ‘class’ and
‘relationship’ and follow model-theoretic semantics. Classes such
as Heart are interpreted as sets of all instances belonging to that
class, i.e. here all particular hearts in the domain. Relationships
then are sets of pairs of class instances like hasPart, which extends
to all pairs of objects in the domain that are related in terms of
parts and wholes. So are all pairs of heart instances with their

3Suggested Upper-Merged Ontology.
4General Formal Ontology.
5Open Biomedical Ontologies.
6Uniﬁed Medical Language System.

[09:53 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp194.tex]

Page: i70

i69–i76

respective mitral valve instances in the extension of hasPart. We
will illustrate DL syntax and semantics through a set of increasingly
complex examples, starting with the class Liver, which in our domain
extends to all individual livers of all organisms. Analogously, the
class BodilyOrgan then extends to all individual bodily organs.
When those two statements are put together, we can introduce
the key concept of taxonomic subsumption: the class BodilyOrgan
forms a superclass of the class Liver, i.e. the former subsumes the
latter if and only if all particular livers are also instances of the
class BodilyOrgan. In DL notation, this taxonomic subsumption
is expressed by the (cid:3) operator, e.g. Liver (cid:3) BodilyOrgan, and is
also known as subtype, subclass or is-a relationship. It is important
to stress that this kind of relationship always relates two classes.
In contradistinction to this, the instantiation relationship relates an
individual entity to some class, e.g. the particular liver of the ﬁrst
author of this article to the class Liver.

Such simple class statements can then be combined by different
the (cid:4) (‘and’) operator and the
operators and quantiﬁers, e.g.
existential quantiﬁer∃ (‘exists’). For example, InﬂammatoryDisease
(cid:4)∃ hasLocation.Liver denotes all instances that belong to the class
InﬂammatoryDisease and are further related through the relationship
hasLocation to some instance of the class Liver. This example
actually gives both necessary and sufﬁcient conditions in order to
fully deﬁne the class Hepatitis:
Hepatitis ≡ InﬂammatoryDisease (cid:4)∃ hasLocation.Liver.
The equivalence operator ≡ indicates that every instance of
hepatitis is necessarily an inﬂammatory disease that is located in
some liver. But through the equivalence operator, one can go in the
other direction as well and say that any inﬂammatory disease that is
located in some liver can be classiﬁed as hepatitis. In practice, the
term on the left and the expression on the right are equivalent.

The constructors

introduced so far allow for automated
classiﬁcation and the computation of equivalence, but not for
satisﬁability checking. This is, however, important, wherever the
validity of an assertion is to be assured. For instance, the assertion
Immaterial Object (cid:3)∀ hasPart.ImmaterialObject
restricts the
value of the role hasPart by using the universal quantiﬁer ∀ (‘only’).
It should therefore reject any assertion that states that an immaterial
object (e.g. a space) has a material object as part. However, a naïve
use of this construct tends to fail. The reason of this is the so-
called open world assumption: unless otherwise stated, everything is
possible. The following class Strange Object ≡ Immaterial Object
(cid:4)∃ hasPart.MaterialObject would remain consistent as long as we
do not explicitly state that there is nothing that can be both a material
and an immaterial object: Immaterial Object (cid:3)¬ MaterialObject
(with ¬ being the negation operator ‘not’). This means that nothing
can be equally an instance of either object, i.e. the two classes are
disjoint.

3 MATERIALS AND METHODS
3.1 UMLS SN
The provision of an overarching conceptual umbrella over the biomedical
domain was the rationale for the development of the UMLS SN (McCray,
2003). A tree of 135 STs forms the backbone of the SN. It is partitioned
into the branches ‘entity’ and ‘event’,
in which nodes are linked by
subclass relations. In addition, the SN contains a hierarchy of 53 associative
relationships (e.g. location_of, treats). These relationships are used to form
612 assertions (e.g. Tissue, location_of, Diagnostic Procedure) from which

Alignment of the UMLS semantic network with BioTop

6 252 additional assertions can be inferred. For each semantic relationship,
domain and range are speciﬁed in terms of one or more STs. Each concept
from the UMLS Metathesaurus is categorized by at least one ST from the
SN.

The UMLS SN is a widely used resource in biology and medicine.
However, it suffers from some well-known shortcomings (class descriptions
that are ambiguous or vague, relatively low granularity, arbitrary divisions)
(Schulze, 2004). In view of that we wanted to assess these limitations by
making them explicit in an OWL DL representation and to explore alternative
upper domain ontologies.

3.2 BioTop
BioTop (Beisswanger, 2008; Schulz, 2006) originated from a redesign and
enrichment of the GENIA ontology. Like the UMLS SN, its backbone
is constituted by a taxonomic tree, consisting of 334 classes. Its relation
hierarchy is populated with 60 relations with domain and range constraints.
The main difference from the UMLS SN is given by its use of OWL
DL (see Section 3.1). BioTop contains 636 logical axioms among which
there are subclass, disjointness and equivalence axioms. The latter (61)
enable the computation of additional taxonomic links using DL reasoners.
BioTop exhibits links to the upper-level ontologies DOLCE (Gangemi, 2002;
Masolo, 2003), BFO (2007a) and the OBO relation ontology (Smith, 2005).
Furthermore, it provides mappings to OBO Foundry ontologies (e.g. GO,
CO, FMA, ChEBI).

3.3 Mapping
Our main objective of bridging between the UMLS SN and BioTop was
to capitalize on the categorization of the UMLS Metathesaurus with SN
types on the one hand, and to beneﬁt from the ontologically sound and
computationally more sophisticated architecture of BioTop on the other.
The aim was to represent the totality of the SN knowledge using BioTop,
encompassing the SN types and hierarchical organization as well as the
semantic relations with their domain and range restrictions. In order to meet
this requirement, an analysis of the UMLS SN semantics in the light of
description logics and its transformation into the formalism used by BioTop
had to be performed. Technically, the plan was to use a central mapping ﬁle,
which imported both UMLS SN and BioTop, and served as a store for class
and relation equivalences and restrictions. In order to provide mappings for
each UMLS SN type, we adjusted the coverage of BioTop wherever justiﬁed.

3.4 Assessment methodology
3.4.1 Formative evaluation of BioTop: We used the logic-driven
knowledge reengineering described by Schulz (2001), which employs an
iterative approach. Each major ontology redesign (including mapping) step
is checked by a description logics reasoner, the results of which are then
analysed and corrected under two perspectives: ﬁrst, the classes tagged as
‘inconsistent’ are identiﬁed and the causes are investigated and repaired;
second, every time the ontology has reached a consistent state, the logical
entailments are analysed for adequacy. Whenever inadequate entailments are
encountered, the causes are investigated and ﬁxed.

3.4.2 Consistency of SN-type combinations: As numerous UMLS
Metathesaurus concepts are categorized by more than one ST,
their
consistency against BioTop should be checked, based on the SN-BioTop
map. On the basis of the assumption that combinations of STs linked to
Metathesaurus concepts constitute conjunctions, all occurring combinations
are identiﬁed and then attached to the ontology.

3.4.3 Named entity co-occurrence: Named entity recognition (NER) is
a widely used text mining technique (Park, 2006). A well-known problem
in NER is when the word or phrase to be recognized is ambiguous, i.e. it
denotes different things. The implementation of the UMLS SN in BioTop
offers the possibility to check ambiguous named entities for whether the

i71

[09:53 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp194.tex]

Page: i71

i69–i76

S.Schulz et al.

competing referent concepts are compatible with respect to the SN relations
allowed for UMLS STs. We obtained ∼100 million unique pairs from ∼15
million PubMed abstracts that had been mined with the state-of-art named
entity (NE) recognizer Peregrine (Schuemie, 2007) to recognize UMLS
concepts and Uniprot identiﬁers referred to within the same sentence. We
here consider only the UMLS concept pairs. The task was to manually
assess a sample of ∼300 UMLS concept pairs. The curator assessed the
plausibility of the linkage between the two concepts in the sentence context.
Each co-occurring pair was ﬁrst checked against the SRSTRE1 table from
the SN and alternatively against the mapping ontology, based on the OWL
DL implementation of the BioTop/UMLS SN integration.

4 RESULTS
4.1 Mapping of UMLS STs
DL-based ontologies are hierarchies of types (classes) that can
be instantiated by particular entities only. According to (McCray,
2002) we can consider the SN as a hierarchy of upper-level
classes (regardless of the naming of some of the types that suggest
a meta-level
the type Functional Concept).
The categorization relation (that attaches UMLS Metathesaurus
concepts to SN types) can therefore be mostly interpreted as
a taxonomic subsumption relation (is-a). Exceptions include
geographical locations and a few other true instances, e.g. laws and
persons. In these cases the categorization relation is to be interpreted
as an instance-of relation.

interpretation, e.g.

The mapping was done as follows. First of all, the taxonomic
tree of the UMLS SN types was remodelled in OWL (SN.OWL) by
expressing the taxonomic subsumption (is-a) as OWL subclasses.
No further assumptions were made. Especially, no partitions were
introduced, as the source and its documentation do not make any
statements as to whether STs are mutually exclusive. On the basis
of the textual (SN, BioTop) and the formal (BioTop) deﬁnitions
available we then attempted to map each ST to BioTop. Lexical
mapping criteria were not used. In cases of doubt, domain experts
were consulted. The mapping was performed in close collaboration
among the authors. At several occasions, problems encountered
when accommodating STs in BioTop were discussed in face to face
meetings, conference calls and e-mail discussions. In controversial
cases other existing ontologies, e.g. OBI, were consulted. For the
mapping a new OWL-bridging ﬁle was created that referenced both
resources with owl:imports statements using the Protégé 4 ontology
editor.7 This allowed us to bring together two resources that were out
of our direct control and to introduce new assertions linking them.
Mapping the STs of the SN to BioTop the following cases could

be distinguished.

4.1.1 Direct match: The ST is equivalent to a class in BioTop,
or the difference is small enough that creating a separate new class
alongside an existing one would not be justiﬁed; e.g. Animal in
BioTop has the exact same meaning as in the SN.

4.1.2 Restriction: No BioTop class is a straight match for the ST,
but it can be deﬁned by restricting an existing BioTop class, e.g.
AnatomicalAbnormality is mapped to the expression: OrganismPart
(cid:4)∃ bearerOf.PathologicalCondition, where OrganismPart and
PathologicalCondition are existing BioTop classes and bearerOf
is an existing BioTop relation.

7http://www.protege.stanford.edu/.

i72

4.1.3 Union:
If the ST cannot be deﬁned by a single class, it
corresponds to the union of several classes. Any combination of the
previously described types can participate in the union. For example,
the SN type Gene or Genome was mapped to the disjunction
biotop:Gene (cid:9) biotop:Genome.

4.1.4 Out of scope: The ST cannot be expressed using any of
the options above; the immediate solution was to create a new
class inside the mapping ﬁle itself, deﬁned as the subclass of an
existing BioTop class and map the ST to this new class. In the
incremental mapping/BioTop redesign process, all ST leaf nodes
(but two) introduced this way were recreated in BioTop. The non-
matching STs (e.g. ‘daily or recreational activity’) were mapped to
a more general BioTop class.

4.1.5 No match: The ST is regarded meaningless for BioTop
in one of the following cases: its deﬁnition does not sufﬁciently
differentiate it from its parent, it is too abstract, or it is only
included in the SN as a ‘housekeeping’ node in order to group
more meaningful child nodes. For example, Chemical Viewed
Functionally has a meta-class meaning (it groups UMLS concepts,
but is useless as a distinguishing criterion for their individuals) which
cannot be represented by BioTop. Leaving the class undeﬁned allows
for the existing subsumption hierarchy of the SN to reason up to the
nearest parent that does have a mapping, in this case Substance. Most
STs on an upper level have imprecise deﬁnitions and do not coincide
with any BioTop class, e.g. Idea or concept (‘An abstract concept,
such as a social, religious or philosophical concept’.), the deﬁnition
of which seems not plausible to its subtypes, e.g. Geographic Area.
The names, textual deﬁnitions and the hierarchical context of
SN types created mapping difﬁculties in many cases. For instance,
the ontologically crisp distinction between function and process is
mixed up in the SN. So does the type Phenomenon or Process
subsume Pathologic Function, which is a parent of, e.g. Neoplastic
Process. As a result, some upper-level classes were mapped not to
a single class in BioTop but to the union of several classes. An
example is Spatial Concept, deﬁned by the union of Body Location
or Region, Body Space or Junction, Geographic Area and Molecular
Sequence. Others were mapped to quite complex expressions
including disjunctions, value restrictions and exclusions.

4.2

Interpretation and mapping of UMLS semantic
relations

The treatment of UMLS SN semantic relations turned out to be more
complicated thus requiring a two-step approach; they ﬁrst have to be
semantically interpreted and properly built into an OWL DL model
before they can be mapped to BioTop. Their simple interpretation
as description logics relations (object properties) is semantically
problematic as SN relations range over STs (i.e. instantiable classes)
whereas object properties range over individual entities. Such an
interpretation of concept to concept relations in the light of formal
logic has been repeatedly discussed in the recent years (Smith, 2005).
For example, ﬁve different possible interpretations of SN triples are
discussed in Kashyap (2003).

For most UMLS semantic relations there is a quite complex
arrangement of domain and range restrictions, in which certain
range restrictions are only valid with certain domain restrictions. For
instance, the UMLS SN restricts the domain of the treats relation to

[09:53 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp194.tex]

Page: i72

i69–i76

drugs and physicians, and its range to patients and diseases (among
others). However, it does not allow the combination of drug and
patient, or health professional and disease.8

                 Range     
Domain
Disease
Person

Drug 

allowed 
disallowed 

Physician 

disallowed 
allowed 

We could, of course, ignore this and take simply the union of the
extension of the UMLS concepts as the restriction of new BioTop
relations that have to be included into the ontology. Thus we would
have to accept unintended models, e.g. that a drug treats a person.
We discussed and implemented different solutions how to

adequately represent these constraints using OWL DL.

As a ﬁrst solution, we introduced subrelations, in the following
style (again simpliﬁed):
treatsMED (cid:3) treats (domain: Drug, range: Disease)
treatsPHY (cid:3) treats (domain: Physician, range: Person).
In this ﬁrst step, we obtained a total number of 210 relations (OWL
object properties).

However, we have to acknowledge that this is a rather cosmetic
solution, because such a model is only able to reject unwanted
assertions if the specialized relations but not the general ones
are used. Furthermore, by lack of disjointness statements in the
class hierarchy it cannot even be rejected that, e.g., something is
both a drug and a physician. This is, however, not a fault of the
representation language but an underspeciﬁcation of the UMLS SN.
As a second solution we discussed the following, as it achieves

the desired result without the creation of subrelations.

Drug (cid:3)∀treats.Disease
Physician (cid:3)∀treats.Person
Together with:
∃treats.Disease (cid:3) Drug
∃treats.Person (cid:3) Physician
The drawback is here that this solution uses general concept
the OWL DL

inclusions (GCIs). Although they are part of
speciﬁcations, they were not supported by our tools.

Both approaches, however, face a severe problem when it comes
to the mapping to BioTop, as the latter includes only a relatively
low number of relations. Enhancing BioTop by the whole array of
SN relations would conﬂict with its design principle to keep the set
of relations small but semantically precise, restricting them to those
that are needed for BioTop class deﬁnitions. This is not the case with
most SN relations: treats, interacts, diagnoses, etc. Instead, BioTop
contains, in its Processual Entity branch, already classes such as
Treating, Interacting, etc. … which convey the same meaning and
can be regarded as reiﬁcations.
TreatingPerson (cid:3) Action (cid:4)
∃ has_agent. Physician (cid:4) ∃ has_patient. Person (cid:4)
∀ has_agent. Physician (cid:4) ∀ has_patient. Person
TreatingDisease (cid:3) Action (cid:4)
∃ has_agent. Drug (cid:4)∃ has_patient. Disease (cid:4)
∀ has_agent. Drug (cid:4)∀ has_patient. Disease
Treating ≡ TreatingPerson (cid:9) TreatingDisease

8For the sake of understandability the example is simpliﬁed and does not use
the lengthy UMLS SN names.

Alignment of the UMLS semantic network with BioTop

We therefore decided to map—as an alternative approach—the

SN relational constraints—expressed as triples—such as

D1 REL R1, D2 REL R2, D3 REL R3, …, Dn REL Rn (Di referring
to domain and Ri to range) to an equally uncomplicated DL formula.
As a consequence, we do not need to create new DL relations (which
would contradict the DL design principles), but simplify the above
formula:

REL1 (cid:3)∀ has_domain. D1 (cid:4) ∀ has_range. R1
REL2 (cid:3)∀ has_domain. D2 (cid:4) ∀ has_range. R2
REL3 (cid:3)∀ has_domain. D3 (cid:4) ∀ has_range. R3
RELn (cid:3)∀ has_domain. Dn (cid:4) ∀ has_range. Rn
REL ≡ REL1 (cid:9) REL2 (cid:9) REL3 (cid:9) … (cid:9) RELn
has_domain and has_range are then mapped to biotop:

...

has_agent and biotop:has_patient.

Of course, the agent/patient reading does not make sense with
many spatial or temporal relations. In these cases we extended the
map by additional value restrictions.

Finally, there are SN relations that cannot be expressed as relations
between particulars because they simply do not relate anything at
the level of particulars. The prototypical example is ‘prevent’, such
as in the statement ‘contraceptive drugs prevent pregnancy’. On a
UMLS concept level it is, without doubt, sensible to express this in a
relational form, such as ‘prevents (contraceptive drugs; pregnancy)’.
Such a close-to-human-language assertion on prevention carries
several
implicit assumptions that must be made clear before
expressing it via an ontology; preventing pregnancy does not
exclude the possibility of becoming pregnant but it brings about
a strong risk reduction. Furthermore, there is both a temporal and
a dose association between the drug and the risk. We can therefore
rephrase ‘Contraceptive drugs prevent pregnancy’ as follows: ‘The
administration of contraceptive drugs of an adequate dose and
regularity to a woman reduces her pregnancy risk within a deﬁned
timeframe’ or more simply: ‘The administration of contraceptive
drugs to a woman reduces her pregnancy risk within a deﬁned
timeframe’. We could express this as follows:
PregnancyRiskReductionBySubstanceIntake (cid:3)
Action (cid:4)∃ has_agent.Substance (cid:4)
∀has_agent.Substance (cid:4)
∃ has_patient. (Risk (cid:4) (∃ inheres_in. Organism (cid:4)
∀ inheres_in. Organism)
(cid:4)∀risk_of.Pregnancy)
This digression illustrates the difﬁculty if not impossibility of
an ontologically precise formal reconstruction of seemingly simple
close-to-language predicates.

For

the semantic relationship mapping we proceeded the
following way: all relationships were reiﬁed (i.e. expressed as
classes) and added as OWL classes using value restrictions on the
roles has_agent and has_patient. Those relationships which had a
direct correlate in BioTop (i.e. the SN spatiotemporal relationships)
were additionally mapped directly to BioTop relationships (object
properties). In both cases the domain and range-speciﬁc subrelations
were accounted for by additional subclasses/subrelations (in analogy
to the ‘Treating’ example above). The reiﬁcation classes were
furthermore provided with so-called covering axioms that assure the
enforcement of one of the child classes with their restrictions. Again,
no mappings were performed for some upper-level relationships

i73

[09:53 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp194.tex]

Page: i73

i69–i76

S.Schulz et al.

(and, accordingly, to upper-level reiﬁcation classes), for the same
reasons as explained for the type hierarchy.

The ﬁnal result of the mapping of each ST to BioTop yielded 132
equivalence and 19 subclass axioms in the mapping ontology. The
OWL reconstruction of the UMLS SN comprised 626 classes and
1530 axioms, and BioTop grew from 200 to 334 classes, 30 to 40
object properties and from 470 to 636 axioms.

Table 1. Named entity co-occurrence results

judgement:

Expert
concepts related

Expert
judgement:
concepts unrelated

SN: related
SN: unrelated
BioTop: related
BioTop: unrelated

31
21
52
0

22
71
90
3

4.3 Assessment results
The whole mapping exercise constituted an ideal testbed for the
ongoing quality assurance and formative evaluation of BioTop.
Because of the constant need of inconsistency checking and
resolving, many hidden errors in BioTop were detected, especially
faulty disjointness axioms (e.g. Organic Chemical was disjoint
from Carbohydrate), unrecognized ambiguities (e.g. Sequence as
information entity versus molecular structure) as well as granularity
mismatches (e.g. Chromosome as molecule). The maintenance
work was, however, very time consuming, totalling at least one
person year, divided among ﬁve modellers. A signiﬁcant advance
for inconsistency checking and resolution was achieved by the
use of a new Protégé add-in that presents precise explanations
of entailments in OWL ontologies (Horridge, 2008). Runtime
performance, however, proved to be a major drawback. The more
axioms are being added (especially negations, disjointness axioms,
and inverse properties) the more the performance decreases so that
classiﬁcation time now constitutes a major obstacle in the whole
ontology construction and maintenance process.

Nevertheless,

it was possible to use the ontology in order
to validate an important feature in UMLS, viz. multiple ST
categorization. In the 2008 Metathesaurus (totalling more than 1.80
million concepts) release there are 397 different combinations of
two to four STs, linked by about 220 000 UMLS concepts. On
the basis of the assumption that STY combinations should be
interpreted as conjunction, we checked each occurring combination
for consistency. The DL classiﬁer recognized 133 combinations
as inconsistent, affecting a total of 6116 UMLS concepts. The
most frequently occurring unsatisﬁable type combination was
Manufactured Object with Health Care Related Organization (e.g.
Hospital as building versus organization).

The preliminary results of the named entity experiment are,
less encouraging (Table 1). Because of so many
however,
ambiguities, the curator had made a clear assessment of semantic
relatedness in only half of the cases. The comparison of the manual
classiﬁcation to the automated one (into ‘true’ and ‘false’) clearly
demonstrates the dilemma. The checking against the UMLS SN table
STSTR1 shows a certain correlation with the curator’s judgment but
still produces many false negatives and false positives. BioTop—
via the SN and the mapping ontology—rejects extremely few
associations.

In order to correctly interpret these results, we emphasize that the
question of whether two UMLS concepts are related is not the same
as to ask whether their STs exhibit some allowed relationship. For
instance, the expert rating for the association between Superoxide
reductase (ST: Enzyme) and Aldehyde (ST: Organic Chemical) was
negative. Of course, this does not mean that any kind of association
between Enzyme and Organic Chemical should de disallowed. On
the contrary, these two STs are closely associated, which is not

i74

changed by the fact that most random combinations of some enzyme
with some chemical are irrelevant.

The low rate of rejections by BioTop demonstrates the problem of
the so-called open-world semantics (Baader, 2007), i.e. all models
are accepted unless they are explicitly falsiﬁed. In the case a
description logics ontology is used for this kind of consistency
check, the modellers have to be very meticulous in ‘ﬁlling the
holes’. On the other hand, it must be acknowledged that the OWL
reconstruction of the idiosyncratic categorization in SN required
many disjunctive statements which resulted in a relaxation of the
domain and value restrictions. In any way, it is known to be difﬁcult
to keep an OWL model ‘water-proof’ in this aspect, and OWL
has recently been criticized that it is generally ill-suited for tasks
like schema validation (Rajsky, 2008). However, we argue that
this is not an inherent but rather a tooling problem, at least for
those description logics dialects that support some kind of negation.
As a consequence, we performed a thorough fault analysis and
could identify and ﬁx several underspeciﬁcations that gave rise to
unintended models.

5 RELATED WORK
There are many reports in the literature about
the conversion
of thesauri, frame knowledge bases and ontologies from various
representational formats into description logics. Examples are
Pisanelli (1998) and Schulz (2001) for the UMLS; Beck (2003),
Dameron (2005) and Golbreich (2006) for the Foundational Model
of Anatomy; Wroe (2003) and Egana (2008) for the GO and Heja
(2007) for ICD-10. What most of these approaches have in common
is (i) that the mapping is not straightforward, (ii) it relies on several
ontological basic assumptions that are not explicitly stated in the
sources, e.g. on disjointness axioms, on the intended meaning and the
algebraic properties of relationships and (iii) that not all knowledge
conveyed by the sources is expressible in description logics, due to
the language constraints.

the logical

The UMLS SN was targeted by Kashyap (2003) who concluded
that
interpretation of the semantic relations in the
SN should depend on the application in which the ontology is
to be used. More speciﬁcally, ontological aspects of the UMLS
SN were discussed by Schulze-Kremer (2004). The latter authors
acknowledge the importance of the SN for the semantic integration
of terminology but spot a number of weaknesses future revisions
should address. A major point of criticism is the mixture of concrete
with abstract entities, real entities with ‘bauplan’ entities, objects
with their roles, functions and processes. This mainly coincides with
our mapping experiences as described in Sections 4.1 and 4.2.

[09:53 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp194.tex]

Page: i74

i69–i76

6 CONCLUSION
We have described the ongoing development and improvement of a
semantic resource, the life science ontology BioTop in the light of
the mapping to the legacy UMLS SN. The purpose of this effort is
to bring together the large amount of data categorized by the latter
with the formal foundation of the former, using emerging standards
and tools developed by the Semantic Web community. Semantic
and terminological support is especially important for facilitating an
opening of the curation process towards a broader community. The
alignment of a formal ontology with a relatively informal system of
hierarchically ordered categories like the UMLS SN challenges the
ontology engineer to formally re-interpret the latter and to overcome
its ontological shortcomings. The logical machinery of description
logics, implemented in reasoning engines, was an indispensable
part of the mapping process, which, ultimately, not only provided
a consistent mapping ontology but contributed, by large, to error
detection and improvement of BioTop.

We described two assessment experiments. One of them, aiming
at satisﬁability checking of SN-type combinations yielded good
results that revealed hidden ambiguities of UMLS concepts. The
other, however, generated rather poor results. It attempted to use
the ontology for determining which UMLS concept pairs were
closely related to each other. As a result, the mapping ontology
rejected very few models, thus supporting the recent critique on
the suitability of OWL for schema veriﬁcation. However, this
result also challenged the evaluation scenario:
judgements on
the relatedness of very speciﬁc instances can not be necessarily
carried over to judgements at the level of STs. Nevertheless, it
was disappointing because the modellers had spent a great effort
in partitioning the BioTop ontology in order to antagonize the
unwarranted effects of the open-world assumption. This is an
issue where more sophisticated tool support for OWL ontology
construction and validation is desperately needed, in order to grant
formal ontologies and logic-based reasoning a central place in
future high-throughput and high-impact life sciences knowledge
management technologies.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Martin Boeker (Freiburg) and Holger Stenzhorn
(Freiburg) for their BioTop maintenance efforts, as well as Robert
Hoehndorf (Leipzig) and Alan Rector (Manchester) for fruitful
discussions.

Funding: EC STREP project
‘BOOTStrep’ (FP6 – 028099);
Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health;
National Library of Medicine.

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Ashburner,M. et al. (2000) Gene ontology: tool for the uniﬁcation of biology. Nat.

Genet., 25, 25–29.

Baader,F. et al.

(2007). The Description Logic Handbook. 2nd edn. Theory,
Implementation, and Applications. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Beck,R. and Schulz,S. (2003) Logic-based remodeling of the DIGITAL ANATOMIST
Foundational Model. In AMIA 2003–Proceedings of the Annual Symposium of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 687–691. Washington, DC, November
8–12. Hanley & Belfus, Philadelphia, PA.

Alignment of the UMLS semantic network with BioTop

Beisswanger,E. et al. (2008). BioTop: an upper domain ontology for the life sciences.
A description of its current structure, contents and interfaces to OBO ontologies.
Appl. Ontol., 3, 205–212.

Berners-Lee,T. et al. (2001) The semantic web. Sci. Am., 284, 34–43.
Bodenreider,O. (2004) The Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS): integrating

biomedical terminology. Nucleic Acids Res., 1(Database issue), D267–D270.

Dameron,O. et al. (2005) Challenges in converting frame-based ontology into OWL:
the Foundational Model of Anatomy Case-Study. In AMIA 2005–Proceedings
the American Medical Informatics Association,
of
Washington, DC, Hanley & Belfus, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 181–185.

the Annual Symposium of

de Keizer,N.F. and Abu-Hanna,A. (2000) Understanding terminological systems.
II: Experience with conceptual and formal representation of structure. Methods
Information Med., 39, 22–29.

de Keizer,N.F. et al. (2000) Understanding terminological systems. I: Terminology and

typology. Methods Information Med., 39, 16–21.

Egaña Aranguren,M. et al. (2008) In situ migration of handcrafted ontologies to reason-

able forms. Data Knowl. Eng. 66, 147–162.

Gangemi,A. et al. (2002) Sweetening ontologies with Dolce. In Gómez-Pérez,A.
and Benjamins,R.V. (eds). Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management:
Ontologies and the Semantic Web. Proceedings of
the 13th International
Conference–EKAW 2002. Springer, Berlin, pp. 166–181.

Golbreich,C. et al. (2006) The Foundational Model of Anatomy in OWL: Experience
and perspectives. J. Web Semant.: Sci., Services Agents World Wide Web, 4, 181–195.
Guarino,N. (1998). Formal ontology in information systems. In Proceedings of

FOIS’98. Amsterdam, IOS Press, Trento, Italy, June 6–8, pp. 3–15.

Haarslev,V. and Möller,R. (2003) Racer: an OWL reasoning agent for the semantic
web. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Applications, Products and
Services of Web-Based Support Systems, in Conjunction with 2003 IEEE/WIC
International Conference on Web Intelligence, Sanibel Island, Florida, USA.

Héja,G. et al. (2007) GALEN-based formal representation of ICD10. Int. J. Med.

Inform., 76, 118–123.

Heller,B. and Herre,H. (2004). Ontological categories in GOL. Axiomathes, 14, 57–76.
Hoehndorf,R. et al. (2008) GFO-Bio: A biological core ontology. Appl. Ontol., 3,

219–227.

Horridge,M. et al. (2008) Laconic and precise justiﬁcations in OWL. In Proceedings
of the 7th International Conference on the Semantic Web. Springer, Karlsruhe,
Germany, pp. 323–338.

Horrocks,I. et al. (2003) From SHIQ and RDF to OWL: the making of a Web ontology

language. Journal of Web Semantics, 1, 7–26.

International Organization for Standardization (ISO) (2000): ISO 1087–1: Terminology

work–Vocabulary–Part 1. Theory and Applications. Geneva, Switzerland.

Jelier,R. et al. (2005) Co-occurrence based meta-analysis of scientiﬁc texts: retrieving

biological relationships between genes. Bioinformatics, 21, 2049–2058.

Kashyapm,V. and Borgida,A. (2003) Representing the UMLS Semantic Network using
OWL: (Or “What’s in a Semantic Web link?”). In Fensel,D. et al. (eds), The
SemanticWeb–ISWC, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, pp. 1–16.

Ku´snierczyk,W.

(2006) Nontological

(sic!) engineering. Formal ontology in
information systems. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference FOIS 2006,
IOS Press, Baltimore MD, USA, pp. 39–50.

Masolo, et al. (2003) WonderWeb Deliverable D18 Ontology Library. Infrastructure for
the semantic Web. Available at http://wonderweb.semanticweb.org (last accessed
date March 23, 2009).

McCray,A.T.(2003) An upper-level ontology for the biomedical domain. Comp. Funct.

Genomics, 4, 80–84.

McCray,A.T. and Bodenreider,O. (2002) A conceptual framework for the biomedical
domain In Green,R. et al. (eds). The Semantics of Relationships: An Interdisciplinary
Perspective. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Boston, MA, pp. 181–198.
McCray,A.T. and Nelson,S.J. (1995) The representation of meaning in the UMLS.

Methods Information Med., 34, 193–201.

Mons,B. et al. (2008) Calling on a million minds for community annotation in

WikiProteins. Genome Biol., 9, R89.

Mulder,N.J. et al. (2008) In silico characterization of proteins: UniProt, InterPro and

Integr8. Mol. Biotechnol., 38, 165–177.

Park,J.C. and Kim,J.-J. (2006) Named entity recognition. In Ananiadou,S. and
McNaught,J. (eds). Text Mining for Biology and Biomedicine. Artech House,
Boston, MA, pp. 121–142.

Pease,A. (2008) The suggested upper merged ontology (SUMO). Available at

http://www.ontologyportal.org/ (last accessed date March 23, 2009).

Pisanelli,D.M. (1998) An ontological analysis of the UMLS Metathesaurus. In
Proceedings of the 1998 AMIA Annual Fall Symposium. Hanley and Belfus,
Philadelphia, PA, pp. 810–814.

Quine,O. (1948) On What There Is. Rev. Metaphys., 2, 21–38.

i75

[09:53 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp194.tex]

Page: i75

i69–i76

S.Schulz et al.

Rajsky,P.

and

using

practice

industry

data model

(2009) Canonical

–
system integration. Available

data
models. Theory
at
http://www.it.toolbox.com/blogs/system-integration-theory (last accessed date
March 23, 2009).
at
al.
http://www.cs.man.ac.uk/∼rector/ontologies/simple-top-bio (last accessed date
March 23, 2009).

ontology. Available

standard

(2006).

Simple

upper

bio

of

et

Rector,A.

Ruttenberg,A. (2007) Advancing translational research with the Semantic Web. BMC

Bioinformatics, 8(Suppl. 3), S2.

Sagotsky,J.A. et al. (2008) Life Sciences and the web: a new era for collaboration. Mol.

Syst. Biol., 4, 201.

Schuemie,M. et al. (2007) Peregrine:

lightweight gene name normalization by
dictionary lookup. In Proceedings of the Biocreative 2 Workshop. Centro Nacional
de Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain, pp. 131–140.

Schulz,S. and Hahn,U. (2001) Medical knowledge reengineering – converting major
portions of the UMLS into a terminological knowledge base. Int. J. Med. Inform.,
64, 207–221.

Schulz,S. et al. (2006) From GENIA to BioTop – towards a top-level ontology for
biology. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Formal Ontology
in Information Systems (FOIS 2006). Baltimore, MD, pp. 103–114.

Schulze-Kremer,S. et al. (2004) Revising the UMLS Semantic Network. Available at
http://www.ontology.buffalo.edu/medo/UMLS_SN.pdf (last accessed date March
23, 2009).

Sirin,E. (2007) Pellet: a practical OWL-DL reasoner. Web semantics: science, services
and agents on the world wide web. Software Engineering and the Semantic Web.
Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 51–53.

Smith,B. (2007). The OBO foundry: coordinated evolution of ontologies to support

biomedical data integration. Nat. Biotechnol., 25, 1251–1255.

Smith,B.

Grenon,P.

and
Basic
http://www.ifomis.uni-saarland.de/bfo/

(2007)

formal
(last

ontology.

accessed

Available
date

at
March 23, 2009).

Smith,B. et al. (2005) Relations in biomedical ontologies. Genome Biol., 6, R46.
SNOMED Clinical Terms (2009). Copenhagen:

International Health Standards
Development Organisation. Available at http://www.ihtsdo.org (last accessed date
April 21, 2009).

Stevens,R. et al. (2000) Ontology-based knowledge representation for bioinformatics.

Brief. Bioinform., 1, 398–416.

Tsarkov,D. and Horrocks,I.

(2006) FaCT++ description logic reasoner: system

description. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci., 4130, 292–297.

UMLS (2009). Uniﬁed Medical Language System. National Library of Medicine,

Bethesda, MD.
Wroe,C.J. et al.

(2003). A methodology to migrate the gene ontology to a
description logic environment using DAML+OIL. Pac. Symp. Biocomput., 8,
624–635.

i76

[09:53 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp194.tex]

Page: i76

i69–i76

