BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 25 no. 16 2009, pages 2090–2091

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp329

Databases and ontologies
An active registry for bioinformatics web services
S. Pettifer1,∗, D. Thorne1, P. McDermott1, T. Attwood1, J. Baran1, J. C. Bryne2,
T. Hupponen3, D. Mowbray1 and G. Vriend4
1School of Computer Science, The University of Manchester, UK, 2Computational Biology Unit, Bergen Center for
Computational Science, Bergen, Norway, 3CSC, the Finnish IT Center for Science, Espoo, Finland and 4Centre for
Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Received on February 25, 2009; revised on April 28, 2009; accepted on May 17, 2009
Advance Access publication May 21, 2009
Associate Editor: Alex Bateman

ABSTRACT
Summary: The EMBRACE Registry is a web portal that collects
and monitors web services according to test scripts provided by the
their administrators. Users are able to search for, rank and annotate
services, enabling them to select the most appropriate working
service for inclusion in their bioinformatics analysis tasks.
Availability and implementation: Web site implemented with PHP,
Python, MySQL and Apache, with all major browsers supported.
(www.embraceregistry.net)
Contact: steve.pettifer@manchester.ac.uk

1 INTRODUCTION
‘Web services’ have become important tools in bioinformatics,
allowing databases and algorithms to be accessed programmatically
as computational components
in programs, workﬂows and
interactive analysis tools. Although these services are becoming
common, with an growing adoption of standard protocols and
technologies, the mechanisms for collecting and publicizing them
are less mature. Service providers commonly resort to advertising
their tools informally by email, or by listing them on institutional
web pages and project wikis. This rather ad hoc approach has been
sufﬁcient to get web services into the mainstream of bioinformatics
research and development; however, it comes with a number of
limitations that are now being recognized by the community: ﬁnding
suitable web services is difﬁcult unless you know where to look;
determining whether a web service is still operational is a matter of
trying the service and seeing whether it appears to work correctly;
and using a web service in the ﬁrst instance requires a considerable
amount of expertise—a problem that can be compounded by not
knowing whether the service is in fact working as advertised.

A number of mechanisms for ﬁnding services have emerged over
recent years (Goble et al., 2008). Particularly notable in this ﬁeld
are BioMoby Central (Wilkinson and Links, 2002), and the DAS
Registry (Prlic et al., 2007), which provide single points of contact
for ﬁnding biological services based on those speciﬁc technologies.
The more general SeekDa (seekda.com) search engine indexes many
thousands of SOAP-based services found by automated ‘crawling’
of the web, including several hundred that are relevant to biology or
bioinformatics. Of these, only the DAS registry (which is restricted

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

to recording DAS services) actively monitors the behaviour and
status of its contents. Though tools exist to test the validity or
presence of web service interfaces (e.g. www.soapui.org), these
are unable to determine whether or not a the logic of service is
functioning. It is still commonplace, therefore, to ﬁnd services that
are broken or no longer maintained.

The EMBRACE Network of Excellence has produced a web
service registry that attempts to tackle these problems. Inspired
by the project’s own need to collect and advertise the growing
number of databases and tools developed by project partners, and
by the need within the consortium to share experiences about the
provision and use of web services, the registry allows users to
register, annotate, monitor and search for services, and acts as a
‘web2.0’-style community server, putting users and providers in
touch with one another. Unlike ‘passive’ mechanisms for recording
the existence of web services, this registry actively monitors the
registration and ongoing behaviour of a service, giving providers
and consumers up-to-date status notiﬁcations by email or via Twitter
(www.twitter.com),
if a service is behaving unexpectedly. The
existence of a formal registration mechanism raises the question
of what exactly constitutes a web service, and debates on this matter
continue in the bioinformatics community and beyond (Stockinger
et al., 2008). The approach of the this project, embodied in its
registry, is to recommend a set of industry-standard technologies
deﬁned by the Web Service Interoperability organization and to
provide tools that help developers move towards adopting these,
while at the same time recognizing that a wide variety of other
approaches exist for pragmatic or historical reasons. The registry
therefore allows all manner of services to be added, and aims to
provide documentation and support for users wishing to bring their
services in line with standard practices. The registry thus supports
WSDL/SOAP, REST, DAS and ‘home grown’ service types, with
the dual intention of lowering the barriers to adoption and actively
encouraging best practice.

2 FUNCTIONALITY AND ARCHITECTURE
One of the effects of the loosely coupled environment afforded
by web services is that automated tasks rely on tools and
resources provided by institutions located all around the world. The
unexpected failure of one of these tools can have dire consequences
for an analysis task. Even with today’s comparatively reliable

 2009 The Author(s)
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[15:53 14/7/2009 Bioinformatics-btp329.tex]

Page: 2090

2090–2091

Active registry for bioinformatics web services

Table 1. Service status icons and their meanings

Green: the service is working correctly according to
all known tests—it should be safe to use this service
now.

Amber: the service is experiencing problems—it may
respond, but you should treat any results you get back
with caution.
Red: the service is badly broken—it is very unli-
kely that you will be able to use this service until the
problem is repaired.
Blue: the service status is unknown, typically because
the service provider has not registered sufﬁcient infor-
mation for regular tests to be carried out.

Fig. 1. The architecture of the EMBRACE registry.

network connectivity, the heterogeneous nature of the back-end
infrastructure that drives most bioinformatics web services means
that occasional interruptions to services are inevitable. Determining
reliably whether a service is working correctly at any given
moment has been a real problem. The EMBRACE registry addresses
this problem by combining automated monitoring mechanisms
with high-level application-speciﬁc tests deposited by the service
providers. The results from these tests are used to generate easy-to-
read reports about the availability and reliability of a service over
time. The registry itself is programmatically accessible as a web
service, allowing other tools to automatically register and modify
services and tests, as well as querying content.

the rest of

Figure 1 shows the registry’s architecture. The Drupal community
server (www.drupal.org) acts both as a readily customizable web2.0-
style foundation for
the registry (including user
registration and management, forums, blogs, tagging, rating and
search facilities), and as a content management framework. Custom
Drupal modules provide web service-speciﬁc functionality, with
MySQL acting as a back-end database server. A separate Python
harness, executing in an isolated virtual machine to limit damage
caused by rogue code, executes whatever tests exist for a particular
service and reports their status to the database.

Some of the reasons for service failure are impossible to
differentiate from one another from a client’s point of view, and
simply result in the service being unavailable. These errors can
be detected by the generic tests run by the registry, (e.g. is the
server currently accessible via the internet? If it is a DAS service,
is it still returning an XML document that conforms to the DAS
schema? If it is a WSDL service, are messages valid according to its
WSDL description?). Other, perhaps more pernicious, problems can
occur when the service is ostensibly working but is in fact returning
plausible, but erroneous results. To detect these, the registry relies
on the service-speciﬁc tests uploaded by the tool’s curator (e.g. does
this service correctly predict region X on protein Y?). The results of
all these tests are combined to give an overall health status for each
service, which is represented by one of the status indicators shown
in Table 1. Although, in many ways, a gross simpliﬁcation of the
reality, these indicators provide a useful overview of a service’s state

for both providers and consumers; users can register an interest in
particular services, and be notiﬁed by email, RSS or Twitter when
their status changes.

3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The registry has been active since October 2008; at the time of
writing, it has accumulated ~700 services from around 60 distinct
users, principally from within the EMBRACE, BioSapiens and
Enﬁn projects. Initially developed to collect the output of these
projects, its monitoring and testing facility has already been of
real use to service providers, identifying numerous service outages
before they have become problems to the consumers. In several
cases, it has also spotted signiﬁcant but intermittent problems
with what were considered to be ‘production quality’ services that
had been thought to be running reliably for some considerable
time. Based on the notiﬁcations generated by the registry, these
services have now all been ﬁxed, and have been running reliably,
with conﬁdence in their behaviour added by continued registry
testing. We are now working closely with the BioCatalogue project
(www.biocatalogue.org; Goble et al., 2008), funded by the UK
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, with a
view to migrating the registry’s content. This will ensure that its
functionality and accumulated data will be secure beyond the end
of the EMBRACE network, in early 2010.

Funding: The EMBRACE project
is funded by the European
Commission within its 6th Framework Programme, under the
thematic area ‘Life sciences, genomics and biotechnology for
health’, contract number LHSG-CT-2004-512092.

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Goble,C. et al. (2008) Data curation + process curation=data integration + science. Brief.

Bioinform., 9, 506–517.

Prlic,A. et al. (2007) Integrating sequence and structural biology with DAS. BMC

Bioinformatics, 8.

Stockinger,H. et al. (2008) Experience using web services for biological sequence

analysis. Brief. Bioinform., 9, 493–505.

Wilkinson,M.D. and Links,M. (2002) BioMOBY: an open-source biological web

services proposal. Brief. Bioinform., 3, 331–341.

2091

[15:53 14/7/2009 Bioinformatics-btp329.tex]

Page: 2091

2090–2091

