BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 25 no. 20 2009, pages 2755–2757

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp408

Systems biology
FBA-SimVis: interactive visualization of constraint-based
metabolic models
Eva Grafahrend-Belau1,∗, Christian Klukas1, Björn H. Junker1 and Falk Schreiber1,2
1Leibniz-Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research (IPK) Gatersleben and
2Institute of Computer Science, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Germany
Received on March 1, 2009; revised on June 24, 2009; accepted on June 28, 2009
Advance Access publication July 3, 2009
Associate Editor: John Quackenbush

ABSTRACT
Summary: FBA-SimVis is a VANTED plug-in for the constraint-
based analysis of metabolic models with special
focus on the
visual exploration of metabolic ﬂux data resulting from model
analysis. The program provides a user-friendly environment for model
reconstruction, constraint-based model analysis, and interactive
visualization of the simulation results. With the ability to quantitatively
analyse metabolic ﬂuxes in an interactive and visual manner, FBA-
SimVis supports a comprehensive understanding of constraint-
based metabolic ﬂux models in both overview and detail.
Availability: Software with manual and tutorials are freely available
at http://fbasimvis.ipk-gatersleben.de/
Contact: grafahr@ipk-gatersleben.de
Supplementary information: Examples and supplementary data are
available at http://fbasimvis.ipk-gatersleben.de/

1 INTRODUCTION
Mathematical modelling of metabolism offers new approaches to
improve the understanding of complex biological processes. Flux
balance analysis (FBA) is a constraint-based modelling approach
which allows the prediction of optimal metabolic yield and steady
state ﬂux distributions under different environmental conditions
and genetic backgrounds (Varma and Palsson, 1994). Due to its
predictive power and the advantage of not requiring the knowledge
of kinetic parameters, FBA has successfully been applied to a variety
of biological systems to study different aspects of metabolism
(Kauffman et al., 2003; Reed and Palsson, 2003).

Several software tools have been developed to perform FBA,
including packages freely available for academic research such
as CellNetAnalyzer (Klamt et al., 2007), the COBRA Toolbox
(Becker et al., 2007) and FBA (http://gcrg.ucsd.edu/Downloads/
Flux_Balance_Analysis).

Although most of these tools offer a variety of constraint-based
analysis techniques, they have been mainly focused on model
analysis while comparative data examination and interpretation in
terms of interactive visualization of FBA results has only been
considered to a minor extent.

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

To provide a visual analysis of FBA results in an interactive way,
aimed at facilitating the analysis and interpretation of metabolic
ﬂuxes in response to genetic and/or environmental conditions, we
developed FBA-SimVis, a framework for integrated constraint-
based model analysis and visualization. It has been implemented
as a plug-in for the open source program VANTED (Junker et al.,
2006).

2 METHODS AND IMPLEMENTATION
FBA-SimVis is a user-friendly tool for the visual exploration and analysis
of constraint-based metabolic models. It is implemented as a plug-in for
VANTED, an analysis and visualization software for biological networks
containing experimental data. The plug-in extends the Java-based VANTED
system by integrating methods for constraint-based model analysis and
interactive ﬂux visualization. The analysis techniques are implemented in
MATLAB using the CLP solver (COIN-OR Linear Program Solver) for
linear and non-linear optimization. The MATLAB routines are based on the
free library of the COBRA Toolbox, which has been modiﬁed to meet our
demands, for example, by integrating a non-linear optimization procedure
to handle the problem of alternate optimal solutions possibly produced by
linear optimization offered by the toolbox. Due to its underlying quadratic
optimization, the non-linear optimization routine does not produce multiple
optima, thus having the advantage of reducing redundant scenarios. To
provide a MATLAB environment-independent application of the software,
the MATLAB routines are integrated as standalone executables, making
the plug-in readily available to users free of charge. The main features of
FBA-SimVis are described below.

2.1 Model reconstruction
FBA-SimVis and the VANTED system provide a model reconstruction
environment. Via the graphical user interface, the user can create and edit a
metabolic model by using a simple drag-and-drop mechanism for network
creation and a text menu for network reﬁnement. Data content in the text
ﬁelds and in the interactive network map can be edited, stored and modiﬁed
individually by the user.

To reconstruct a metabolic model the user can either create a new model
in the visual manner described above (i.e. using the graphical model editor
to edit existing or dropping new elements onto the canvas), or import a
model via SBML from ﬁles (e.g. by dropping the ﬁle onto the canvas) or
model databases, and layout the corresponding network map by using the
different layout algorithms provided by VANTED. Once the metabolic model
is reconstructed, the model can be exported in the form of a network map and
a SBML ﬁle, which together form the basis for subsequent model analysis
and ﬂux visualization.

 The Author(s) 2009. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.5/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[15:27 17/9/2009 Bioinformatics-btp408.tex]

Page: 2755 2755–2757

E.Grafahrend-Belau et al.

Fig. 1. This picture shows example visualisations for (A) ﬂux balance analysis, (B) knock-out analysis, (C) robustness analysis, and (D) ﬂux variability
analysis for a small example network and (E) visualisation of a partial ﬂux map of a large model of barley seed metabolism.

2.2 Constraint-based model analysis
FBA-SimVis integrates various methods for the constraint-based analysis of
metabolic models:

analysis techniques (e.g. shortest path length, connectivity analysis, cycle
detection) and statistical analysis techniques (e.g. t-test, correlation analysis,
cluster analysis) which can also be used for an in-depth topological and
statistical analysis of the modelling results.

(1) Flux balance analysis is based on the optimization of an objective
function, which is used as an evaluation criterion to identify an optimal
ﬂux distribution among all possible steady state ﬂux distributions that
meets the objective. FBA can be used to predict optimal metabolic
yield and steady state ﬂux distributions under different environmental
conditions and genetic backgrounds.

(2) Knock-out analysis (i.e. the deletion of a given enzyme or gene) is
performed by setting the ﬂux trough a particular reaction to zero
and calculating the objective function. In silico knock-out analysis
provides an efﬁcient method to study the essentiality of a reaction
in a metabolic network and to gain insight into metabolic changes
caused by the deletion.

(3) Robustness analysis is performed by varying a particular ﬂux over
a speciﬁed range of values and recalculating the objective function.
As the resulting curve depicts the sensitivity of the objective function
to that particular ﬂux, robustness analysis can be used to assess the
effect of reducing ﬂux trough particular reaction on a given objective.
(4) Flux variability analysis is performed by constraining the objective
function to the optimal value and computing the minimal and maximal
ﬂux through every reaction in the network (range of ﬂuxes). Flux
variability analysis can be used to study the redundancies of the
metabolic model under investigation.

In addition to the constraint-based analysis techniques provided by FBA-
SimVis, the original VANTED tool offers a variety of graph theoretical

2.3 Model and ﬂux visualization
The visualization of the constraint-based analysis results is done in a highly
interactive way. Instead of just visualizing a ﬁxed picture showing the
computed ﬂux distribution, FBA-SimVis provides an interactive graphical
user interface where user interactions directly affect
the visualization.
Automatic mapping of the computed net ﬂux onto the network map is done
by scaling the width of the reaction edges according to the ﬂux and displaying
the ﬂux values next to the corresponding reaction edges.

FBA-SimVis allows users to compare metabolic ﬂuxes in response
to varying genetic and/or environmental conditions in an interactive and
comparative way by providing a dynamic parameter analysis. It offers
different visualizations for the various constraint-based analysis results:

(1) To investigate the inﬂuence of varying environmental conditions, up to
three different parameters speciﬁed by the user can be varied by slider
interactions, with the resulting ﬂux distribution being automatically
displayed on the network map, see Figure 1A.

(2) The dynamic variation of the genetic background

is performed
by interacting with a button panel which comprises the enzymatic
reactions to be knocked-out, and which results in the automatic
display of the ﬂux distribution of the speciﬁed knock-out simulation,
see Figure 1B. In addition, an overview perspective allows the
quantiﬁcation of the sensitivity of a given objective function to
the knock-out of any of the network reactions by expressing the

2756

[15:27 17/9/2009 Bioinformatics-btp408.tex]

Page: 2756 2755–2757

optimal value (i.e. the numerical value of the objective function)
of the enzymatic deletion as a fraction of the optimal value of the
‘reference scenario’ (i.e. the simulation with the complete enzyme
set). The interactive parameter analysis supports a fast and intuitive
understanding of the simulated ﬂux data, allowing insights into
metabolic and physiological changes of metabolism in response to
varying genetic and/or environmental conditions.

(3) The visualization of simulation results obtained from robustness
analysis is offered in two ways, either displaying the sensitivity
curve for each of the network reactions within the respective reaction
nodes (Fig. 1C), or by displaying the ﬂux distribution of a particular
enzymatic reaction, which can be varied by slider interactions. While
the ﬁrst option provides a rapid and comparative overview of all
reactions included in the network, the second option offers the user the
possibility to obtain detailed insights into speciﬁc enzyme/objective
function dependencies.

(4) Simulation results of ﬂux variability analysis

are provided by
displaying the minimal and maximal ﬂux for each of the network
reactions within the respective reaction nodes, see Figure 1D.

(5) To further support comparative data evaluation (i.e. the comparison
of ﬂux distributions) and automatic layout, VANTED provides
different chart types (e.g. pie and bar plots) facilitating direct data
comparison and offers several graph layout algorithms (e.g. force-
directed, hierarchical and circular layouts) to automatically arrange
the network elements. Moreover, the user has the possibility to
save and reload ﬂux distribution patterns for subsequent analysis.
In addition to the interactive visualization of simulated ﬂux data
computed by FBA-SimVis, the software supports the visualization of
any kind of ﬂux data provided by external analysis. Details about data
formats supported by the system can be found on the FBA-SimVis
website.

3 EXAMPLE
An application example of how to use FBA-SimVis is provided for a
small metabolic network. The metabolic model as well as a step-by-
step description of model analysis and interactive ﬂux visualization
are available at the FBA-SimVis website.

Figure 1A–D summarize the visualization of the constraint-based
analysis results of the small example network, demonstrating the
usefulness of the interactive visualization routines for comparative
evaluation of the simulation results which support a fast and intuitive
understanding of metabolic ﬂuxes in both overview and detail. The
different views have been discussed in the previous section.

In addition, an application example of a large metabolic model of
barley seed metabolism is given in Figure 1E. This model comprises
more than 250 reactions and shows the usability of the analysis and
visualization routines for large real world models.

FBA-SimVis

4 DISCUSSION
FBA-SimVis is a user-friendly tool for the visual exploration
and analysis of constraint-based metabolic models. Due to the
integration of constraint-based analysis techniques with interactive
visualization routines, FBA-SimVis offers a holistic analysis of
stoichiometric models of metabolism. Although different tools such
as CellNetAnalyzer (Klamt et al., 2007) or the COBRA Toolbox
(Becker et al., 2007) provide a variety of constraint-based analysis
techniques, these programs mainly focus on model analysis, while
model reconstruction and visualization of analytical results are only
partly supported. Other tools offering divers routines for model
reconstruction and ﬂux visualization are MetVis (Noack et al.,
2007) and YANAsquare (Schwarz et al., 2007). These tools refer
to external programs to perform FBA, nevertheless, the tools and
external programs are also independent of commercial software
and freely available. Besides providing a comprehensive analysis of
constraint-based metabolic models by combining methods for model
reconstruction, analysis and visualization, FBA-SimVis offers a
unique combination of features not present in other analytical tools
including easy change of parameters and optimization routines to
facilitate model analysis and highly interactive visualization, and
speciﬁc statistical analysis routines to support the comparative
evaluation of simulation results.

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Becker,S.A. et al. (2007) Quantitative prediction of cellular metabolism with constraint-

based models: the COBRA Toolbox. Nature Protocols, 2, 727–738.

Junker,B.H. et al. (2006) VANTED: a system for advanced data analysis and
visualisation in the context of biological networks. BMC Bioinformatics, 7,
109.1–109.13.

Kauffman,K.J. et al. (2003) Advances in ﬂux balance analysis. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.,

14, 491–496.

Klamt,S. et al. (2007) Structural and functional analysis of cellular networks with

CellNetAnalyzer. BMC Syst. Biol., 1, 1–13.

Noack,S. et al. (2007) Visualizing regulatory interactions in metabolic networks. BMC

Biol., 5, 46.1–46.17.

Reed,J.L. and Palsson,B.Ø. (2003) Thirteen years of building constraint-based in silico

models of Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol., 185, 2692–2699.

Schwarz, R. et al. (2007) Integrated network reconstruction, visualization and analysis

using YANAsquare. BMC Bioinformatics, 8, 313.1–313.10.

Varma,A. and Palsson,B.Ø. (1994) Review: metabolic ﬂux balancing: basic concepts,

scientiﬁc and practical. Bio/Technology, 12, 994–998.

[15:27 17/9/2009 Bioinformatics-btp408.tex]

Page: 2757 2755–2757

2757

