BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol. 25 no. 20 2009, pages 2670–2676

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp415

Gene expression
Statistical lower bounds on protein copy number from
ﬂuorescence expression images
Lee Zamparo1 and Theodore J. Perkins2,∗
1Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada H3G 1M8 and 2Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6
Received on April 20, 2009; revised on June 11, 2009; accepted on June 28, 2009
Advance Access publication July 2, 2009
Associate Editor: John Quackenbush

ABSTRACT
Motivation: Fluorescence imaging has become a commonplace
for quantitatively measuring mRNA or protein expression in cells
and tissues. However, such expression data are usually relative—
absolute concentrations or molecular copy numbers are typically not
known. While this is satisfactory for many applications, for certain
kinds of quantitative network modeling and analysis of expression
noise, absolute measures of expression are necessary.
Results: We propose two methods for estimating molecular
copy numbers from single uncalibrated expression images of
tissues. These methods rely on expression variability between cells,
due either to steady-state ﬂuctuations or unequal distribution of
molecules during cell division, to make their estimates. We apply
these methods to 152 protein ﬂuorescence expression images
of Drosophila melanogaster embryos during early development,
generating copy number estimates for 14 genes in the segmentation
network. We also analyze the effects of noise on our estimators and
compare with empirical ﬁndings. Finally, we conﬁrm an observation of
Bar-Even et al., made in the much different setting of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, that steady-state expression variance tends to scale with
mean expression.
Availability: The data are all drawn from FlyEx (explained within), and
is available at http://ﬂyex.ams.sunysb.edu/FlyEx/. Data and MATLAB
codes for all algorithms described in this article are available at
http://www.perkinslab.ca/pubs/ZP2009.html.
Contact: tperkins@ohri.ca

1 INTRODUCTION
Fluorescent imaging is widespread in the analysis of mRNA and
protein expression in single cells,
in populations of cells and
within tissues or organisms. Such data are useful for a wide
variety of purposes: determining the effects of gene knockouts,
over/underexpression, or promoter manipulations, understanding
regulatory networks, determining co-expression of genes or
co-location of gene products, which may indicate complexing,
identifying markers for tissue types or processes, inferring protein
function and so on.

As useful as such data are, a limitation is that

it usually
only gives relative expression values. Greater ﬂuorescent intensity
∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

implies greater expression, but the actual concentrations or copy
numbers of molecules being imaged are usually not known.
Knowing expression in absolute terms can be important for detailed
quantitative modeling (Brown and Sethna, 2003) and for extracting
biologically meaningful parameters. For example, most current
ﬁtting methods, even if couched in chemical terms, express reaction
rates in ﬂuorescence units (e.g. Tian et al., 2007), rather than
in molecules or moles. Absolute expression is also relevant for
understanding the sources of noise or variability in gene expression
(Bar-Even et al., 2006; Bundschuh et al., 2003; Rao et al., 2002;
Raser and O’Shea, 2005; Rosenfeld et al., 2005; Swain, 2004; Swain
et al., 2002; Thattai and van Oudenaarden, 2001; Vilar et al., 2002),
and potentially for recent analyses of information processing in gene
regulatory networks (Andrews and Iglesias, 2007; Andrews et al.,
2006; Gregor et al., 2007; Libby et al., 2007; Tkacik et al., 2008).
There are imaging techniques that can result in concentration
or copy number information, such as ﬂuorescence- and image-
correlation spectroscopy (Elson and Magde, 1974; Wiseman et al.,
2000), ﬂuorescence-intensity distribution analysis (Kask et al.,
1999) and photon-counting histogram analysis (Chen et al., 1999).
Alternatively, the intensity signal can be calibrated by measuring
expression of mRNAs or proteins that are at known concentrations
(e.g. Bar-Even et al., 2006; Gregor et al., 2007). However, none
of these approaches is nearly as common in practice as direct,
uncalibrated measurement of ﬂuorescent intensity.

We present two different methods for estimating copy numbers
of ﬂuorescently labeled molecules from single uncalibrated images.
We were particularly motivated by our previous work on modeling
regulation of genes in the segmentation network of Drosophila
melanogaster (Perkins et al., 2006), and we use data on this
system in our study. However, our approach is readily applicable to
similar data from other organisms. Both methods rely on variability
in the expression data to estimate absolute expression. The key
intuition is that variability is greater when absolute expression is
smaller, because the inherent stochasticity of the biochemistry is
more pronounced when molecule numbers are small. However,
as we work with single still images, it is variation between cells
(or more properly, between nuclei) that we exploit, rather than
variability over time. This type of variability has previously been
exploited to estimate protein concentration in growing colonies of
Escherichia coli (Rosenfeld et al., 2005, 2006). One of our methods
is very similar to one of the approaches used in these works.

 The Author(s) 2009. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.5/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[14:49 17/9/2009 Bioinformatics-btp415.tex]

Page: 2670 2670–2676

A

B

Fig. 1. (A) An image from FlyEx (Poustelnikova et al., 2004) showing
expression of maternal-class gene bicoid (blue), gap gene giant (green) and
pair-rule gene even-skipped (red) in Drosophila embryo as9. (B) An image
showing an embryo (ab18) in which nuclei have just divided or are ﬁnishing
dividing, and in which sibling pairs can readily be identiﬁed.

2 BIOLOGICAL SYSTEM AND DATA
Within several hours after fertilization, one of the ﬁrst developmental
gene networks to come online in the Drosophila embryo is the
segmentation network (Rivera-Pomar and Jäckle, 1996; Scott and
Carroll, 1987). The segmentation network establishes patterns of
gene expression that mark the eventual body segments of the
grown organism—divisions of the body along the anterior–posterior
axis. The network is broadly organized as a genetic cascade,
with successive groups of genes (maternal, gap, pair-rule, segment
polarity) expressing ever more spatially reﬁned signals (Fig. 1A).

The data that we use are available online from the FlyEx
database (Poustelnikova et al., 2004), which contains images of
Drosophila embryos undergoing segmentation. The experiments
measured gene expression using ﬂuorescence tagged antibodies in
ﬁxed embryos. Speciﬁcally, primary antibodies were raised against
the segmentation genes by repeated injection into either rabbits,
guinea pigs or rats (Janssens et al., 2005; Kosman et al., 1998). The
ﬁxed embryos were incubated with dilutions of these antibodies. The
embryos were also incubated with commercially available secondary
antibodies that bind to the primary antibodies, and that are cross-
linked to ﬂuorescent dyes (Alexa488, Alexa555 and Alexa647).
These dyes were excited by means of lasers, and imaged using a
confocal microscope. For each embryo, a 1024 × 1024 pixel image
was captured, with each of the three channels in the image recording
the intensity of a different tagged protein.

At this stage of development, the embryo is a syncytium—a
single cell with multiple nuclei that divide periodically and roughly
simultaneously. The proteins represented in the database are all
transcription factors and they tend to congregate in the nuclei. Thus,
the nuclei can readily be identiﬁed. A series of image processing
algorithms locates the nuclei and calculates the expression of
each protein in each nucleus in terms of intensity units, ranging
from 0 to 255 (Janssens et al., 2005; Surkova et al., 2009). It is this

Protein copy numbers from ﬂuorescence data

per-nucleus-derived data, also available from the FlyEx database, to
which our methods are applied.

3 METHODS
Our methods for estimating protein copy number assume that the observed
intensity of a nucleus in a particular channel is proportional to the copy
number of the corresponding protein in that nucleus. The proportionality
factor, denoted ν, may vary for different proteins, but is assumed to be
consistent across different embryos imaged in the same manner. Both
methods work by estimating ν, from which protein copy numbers in each
nucleus can be derived based on their intensity. The two methods are not
alternatives to each other, but rather apply in different situations.

We describe the methods as producing statistical lower bounds on protein
copy number. ‘Statistical’ comes from the fact that the methods posit
probabilistic models about how the intensity data are generated. The ‘lower
bound’ comes from the fact that the models attribute all variability in protein
expression to fundamental stochastic chemical processes. In fact, the data
include other sources of variability, or noise, which we discuss further below.
As such, the true variability in protein expression tends to be overestimated
by our methods, resulting in copy number estimates that are biased low.

3.1 Binomial estimation method
The binomial estimation method applies to embryos in which nuclei have
recently undergone division, and sibling pairs can be easily identiﬁed
(Fig. 1B). The method assumes that proteins in the mother of each sibling
pair pass independently and with equal probability to each daughter nucleus.
The difference in intensities of the siblings can then be related to absolute
concentration.

More formally, let i1 and i2 denote the members of a sibling pair, and i
denote their (unobserved) mother nucleus. Let Ni be the unknown number of
ﬂuorescent molecules in the mother, and Ni1 and Ni2 the unknown numbers of
molecules in the daughters. We assume that Ni1 and Ni2 are both distributed
as binomial with Ni tries and p=1/2 success probability. Of course, Ni1
and Ni2 are not independent binomial random variables. Assume that no
protein is lost in the division process, then Ni1+Ni2= Ni. One justiﬁcation
for this model is as follows. Many of the transcription factor molecules
under discussion bind the DNA non-speciﬁcally in ‘random’ places. Before
the nuclear division, each protein can thus be thought of as equally likely
to be on the DNA copy that goes to one daughter as it is to be on the DNA
copy that goes to the other daughter. Proteins that are not bound to the DNA,
assuming they are uniformly distributed throughout the nucleoplasm, are
also equally likely to end up in either daughter nucleus. This is because each
daughter receives close to half of the nucleoplasm of the mother.
We assume that the observed ﬂuorescence is proportional to the number
of molecules present: Oij = νNij. If we can estimate ν, then we can estimate
protein copy number in each nucleus simply by solving the previous equation
for Nij. Each sibling pair provides us with one estimate for ν as:

ˆνi = (Oi1−Oi2)2
Oi1+Oi2

(1)

This is very similar to the estimator used by Rosenfeld and colleagues (2005,
2006), who applied it to sibling data from ﬂuorescent image sequences of
growing colonies of E.coli. The main difference is that Rosenfeld et al.,
working with time series data, also had intensity measurements for the mother
cells before division, and these could be used in place of the denominator
above. One mathematical rationale behind the estimator is that its expected
value, treating Ni as given and Ni1, Ni2, Oi1 and Oi2 as dependent random

2671

[14:49 17/9/2009 Bioinformatics-btp415.tex]

Page: 2671 2670–2676

L.Zamparo and T.J.Perkins

variables, is:

(cid:1)
(cid:1)

E(ˆνi) = E

= E

(cid:2)

(Oi1−Oi2)2
Oi1+Oi2
(cid:2)
(νNi1−νNi2)2
νNi1+νNi2
(cid:4)
(cid:3)
(Ni1−Ni2)2
(cid:4)
νNi
(2Ni1−Ni)2

= ν2E
(cid:3)

= ν

E

Ni
= ν4Var(Ni1)
= ν

Ni

A

B

(cid:5)

M

M
i=1

The estimates from each sibling pair can be combined into an overall estimate
ˆνi, where M is the total number
for ν based on simple averaging: ˆν= 1
of sibling pairs. This estimator can also be justiﬁed as giving the value
of ν that maximizes the likelihood of the Oij, if one approximates the
binomial distributions with normal distributions having the same means and
variances. (Proof omitted.) Rosenfeld et al. (2006) also explored models with
observation noise, and derived a Bayesian parameter estimation approach.
We return to this issue in Section 5. The crux of the matter, however, is that
simple noise models are not consistent with the variability we see in the data
or our estimators, and so we have not attempted any correction.

To apply this method to a given image, one must identify the sibling pairs.
For our study, we identiﬁed 22 embryos in the FlyEx database that showed a
reasonable number of pairable nuclei. We identiﬁed these embryos by visual
examination of the ﬂuorescence images of all cleavage cycle 10 through 13
embryos, as well as cleavage cycle 14A, time class 1 embryos—a total of
approximately 400 embryos. We experimented with several algorithms to
automatically pair nuclei, primarily based on proximity. However, given the
relatively small number of images to be analyzed in this way and desiring to
have the highest ﬁdelity pairings possible, we ultimately settled on pairing
the nuclei by hand (aided by an interactive MATLAB routine we developed).
We did not pair up all nuclei in each image, as appropriate pairings were not
always clear. We also avoided pairing nuclei near the edge of the embryo,
as the intensity of these nuclei was often affected by their proximity to the
edge. The on-line material contains a complete speciﬁcation of the pairings
used. We leave reliable automatic pairing as a topic for future research.

3.2 Poisson estimation method
Our second approach is intended for embryos that are signiﬁcantly past their
most recent nuclear division, and are at a more steady- state behavior. As with
the binomial estimator, the essential intuition is that variability in expression
can somehow be related to copy numbers. However, it is far from clear what
an appropriate model for the steady-state distribution of protein copy number
might be. In simpler, prokaryotic situations, stochastic chemical kinetic
models have been quite successful at capturing and explaining stochasticity
in gene expression (see Raj and van Oudenaarden, 2008, for a recent
review). Such models usually incorporate stochastic production and decay
of mRNAs and proteins, and possibly other processes. A common ﬁnding is
that variability in protein levels is often due more to variability in the mRNA
levels than to the inherent stochasticity in protein production and decay. Bar-
Even et al. (2006), in an empirical study using Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
found that under a variety of conditions and for a variety of genes, variance
in protein expression across cells in a population was proportional to mean
protein expression. By analyzing different possible sources of expression
variability, they came to the conclusion that mRNA ﬂuctuations were the
main cause, just as in the bacterial models. On the other hand, Bagh et al.
(2008), analyzing expression driven by plasmids in E.coli, observed that
the SD of expression scales with mean expression, with most variability
attributable to cell size.

2672

Fig. 2. The relationship between mean and variance of protein expression.
(A) An embryo image (bd5) divided into a grid, with 20 divisions along the
anterior–posterior axis and 10 divisions along the dorsal–ventral axis. For the
blue and red channels (representing Bicoid and Caudal protein, respectively),
expression is relatively constant within each grid box. This is less true for
the green channel (representing Even-skipped protein). (B) For each box
we compute the mean and variance of the per-nucleus expression values
for all nuclei within the box. If expression variance scales with mean, as
observed by Bar-Even et al. (2006) for S.cerevisiae, then we should see
a linear relationship between log variance and log mean, with a slope of
approximately one. This is consistent with the data from this embryo. Best
ﬁt lines have slopes of 1.06 (blue channel), 0.94 (red channel) and 1.73 (green
channel). The larger slope for Even-Skipped likely results from the spatially
non-uniform expression pattern within each grid cell, adding another source
of variance to the data besides real biological variability, rather than a true
violation of the proportionality of mean expression and the variance of
expression. Similar results were obtained from other embryos.

3.2.1 Model assumptions and estimator As in Bar-Even et al. (2006),
we ﬁnd that protein expression variance scales roughly linearly with mean
protein expression (Fig. 2). However, we consider it unlikely that mRNA
ﬂuctuations are as signiﬁcant a source of noise as they are in that study or in
the bacterial models. The Drosophila embryo is not cellularized at this stage.
For most of the segmentation genes, mRNAs are transcribed and exported
from the nuclei and accumulate in inter-nuclear space, apparently at much
greater concentration than is typical for the models or experiments cited
above. This observation is based on mRNA stains in embryos at the same
developmental stage (Jaeger et al., 2007), although like proteins, mRNA
copy numbers have not been quantiﬁed in this setting. Proteins are translated
from mRNAs in the extra-nuclear space, and are taken up quickly by nearby
nuclei, where they may eventually decay. Assuming that the total amount of
mRNA in the vicinity of a nucleus is relatively constant, the main factors
inﬂuencing protein expression would thus be a stochastic production and
uptake along with stochastic decay.

Based on this reasoning, and consistent with the observation in Figure 2,
we assume that the number of proteins in a nucleus, Ni, is Poisson distributed,
with a nucleus-speciﬁc Poisson parameter λi. As for the previous estimator,

[14:49 17/9/2009 Bioinformatics-btp415.tex]

Page: 2672 2670–2676

Protein copy numbers from ﬂuorescence data

where s, a and b parameters, and coordinates are expressed as fractions
of embryo length. All three parameters are optimized numerically over
the discrete set of values {0,0.025,0.05,...,1.5}, to maximize the variance
of expression intensity along the anterior–posterior axis. After correcting
for splay, we use the same local quadratic regression scheme described

above to predict ˆE(Oi), except that nearby nuclei are determined based on a

weighted Euclidean distance with anterior–postetior distance counting three
times as much as dorsal–ventral distance. In this way, ‘nearby’ nuclei are
preferentially located dorsal or ventral to nucleus i, which, because of splay
correction means within the same stripe. Using a 10% subset of the data, we
estimate that the combination of splay correction and preferential dorsal–
ventral distance weighting reduces squared prediction error for pair-rule
nuclear expression by approximately one-third.

4 RESULTS
We applied the binomial method to the hand-pairings for the 22
embryos we identiﬁed from our survey of the FlyEx database, and
we applied the Poisson method to all cleavage cycle 14A, time class
8 embryos in the database—a total of 130 embryos. For each gene
and each method, the estimates for ν are based on the per-nucleus or
per-nucleus-pair estimates pooled across all embryos involving that
gene. It turned out that taking the simple mean of these individual
estimates, as described in Section 3, was problematic. Some of the
per-nucleus estimates from the Poisson method were negative—
resulting from poor (technically impossible) negative estimates of
expected intensity. The binomial and Poisson methods also produced
some dramatically large per-nucleus or per-nucleus-pair estimates.
When traced back, these obvious outliers had a variety of causes.
Some were due to problems with the underlying data, such as
falsely detected nuclei in the images or segmentation errors. Some
also resulted from poor expected intensity estimates in the Poisson
method, particularly for complex parts of the pair-rule expression
patterns. As a general hedge against such errors, we used trimmed
means to estimate ν, throwing out the 10% largest per-nucleus or
per-nucleus-pair estimates before averaging.

Table 1 summarizes the results of the binomial and Poisson
estimators. The estimates for ν are shown for each gene, along with
the predicted copy number under conditions of maximal expression.
The prediction is obtained simply as 255/ˆν, as 255 is the maximum
possible intensity in the images. The genes are segregated into three
classes according to the standard categories of maternal, gap and
pair-rule genes.

For the maternal and gap genes, the Binomial and Poisson
methods were in broad agreement. For all genes, the estimates of ν
by each method were within a factor of four of each other. There
was particularly good agreement for the caudal gene. Estimated
copy numbers for the proteins corresponding to these genes ranged
from the high hundreds to the low-to-mid thousands. The binomial
method reported uniformly lower estimates for ν than the Poisson
method, and thus predicts higher copy numbers.

The agreement between the two methods was worse for the even-
skipped gene, with the binomial estimate for ν being one-sixth as
large as the Poisson estimate. The Poisson estimates for ν for the
pair-rule genes were mostly in the range of 0.5 to 1.0, making for
copy number estimates in the low hundreds of proteins per nucleus.

5 DISCUSSION
Agreement of the binomial and Poisson estimators on the maternal
and gap genes is encouraging, giving us some conﬁdence in the

2673

Fig. 3. Splay correction for local regression/smoothing of pair-rule gene
expression patterns. (A) Red channel of image of embryo FEScc01 (fushi-
tarazu gene). (B) Mean intensity as a function of anterior–posterior position.
(C) Simulated embryo image after splay correction. (D) Mean intensity after
correction. Parameters of the coordinate transform are chosen to maximize
the variance, along the anterior–posterior axis, of mean intensity.

we assume that the observed ﬂuorescent intensity of a nucleus, Oi, is
proportional to the expression. Thus, Oi = νNi. Under these conditions,

Var(Oi)
E(Oi)

= ν2Var(Ni)
νE(Ni)

= ν

(2)

If we could estimate the mean and variance of Oi, we could get an estimate
of ν, and by extension, an estimate of Ni. The problem is that expression in
each nucleus is being driven at a different rate λi. With a single observation,
Oi, of each nucleus, how can we estimate both the ﬁrst and second moments?
The solution we propose is to rely on the spatial smoothness of the nuclear
expression levels. Nearby nuclei usually show similar expression levels,
because they are subject to similar regulatory signals. For each nucleus
i, then, we can use other nuclei in the vicinity to estimate E(Oi). Our
method for making this estimate is described below. For the moment, assume
we have estimates ˆE(Oi) for every nucleus. We then produce per-nucleus

ˆνi = (Oi− ˆE(Oi))2
ˆE(Oi)

(3)

M
i=1

These estimates are averaged across nuclei, to generate our overall estimate
ˆνi/M. This estimator can also be justiﬁed as the maximum
likelihood solution,
if one approximates the Poisson distributions by
corresponding normal distributions with the same means and variances. We
omit the proof, which is straightforward.

estimates of ν.

ˆν=(cid:5)

3.2.2 Estimating expected intensity We propose a local regression scheme
to predict the expected intensity of each nucleus. The maternal and gap
genes have fairly simple, spatially smooth expression patterns. For these,

we generate ˆE(Oi) in three steps: (i) ﬁnd the 20 nuclei closest to nucleus i;

(ii) ﬁt their observed intensities by quadratic least squares regression, as a
function of anterior–posterior and dorsal–ventral position; and (iii) evaluate
the regressor at the coordinates of nucleus i.

For the pair-rule genes, this scheme works to a degree, but can be
improved. The expression patterns of these genes have sharp discontinuities
and are spatially complex, being present in seven vertical stripes (Fig. 1A).
For a nucleus i in one of these stripes, the nuclei that are dorsal or ventral
of i and within the same stripe are better predictors of Oi than are nuclei
to the anterior or posterior. Finding such nuclei reliably takes some effort,
however, as the stripes are not perfectly vertical, but rather are slanted and
curved. (‘Splayed’ is the term used in the Drosophila community.) Thus, we
begin by applying a coordinate transformation intended to make the stripes
vertical. We use a simpliﬁed version of a method developed by Spirov and
colleagues (Spirov and Holloway, 2003; Spirov et al., 2001, 2002, Fig. 3).
Dorsal–ventral coordinates of each nucleus, DVi, are left unchanged, but
anterior–posterior coordinates are transformed as

(cid:2)
AP
i

= APi+s(APi−a)(DVi−b)2

[14:49 17/9/2009 Bioinformatics-btp415.tex]

Page: 2673 2670–2676

L.Zamparo and T.J.Perkins

Table 1. Copy number estimates from the binomial and Poisson estimation
methods, along with estimates for the intensity-to-copy-number scale factor ν

A

B

Gene

bicoid
caudal

giant
hunchback
Krüppel
knirps
tailless

even-skipped
fushi-tarazu
hairy
odd-skipped
paired
runt
sloppy-paired

Binomial method
ˆν

Peak Copy #

Poisson method
ˆν

Peak Copy #

0.17
0.25

0.041
0.19
0.032
–
–

0.16
–
–
–
–
–
–

1500
1000

6200
1300
8000
–
–

1600
–
–
–
–
–
–

0.35
0.28

0.15
0.31
0.094
0.13
0.37

0.98
0.79
0.78
0.57
0.87
0.51
1.9

730
900

1700
820
2700
2000
700

260
320
330
450
300
500
140

methods. However, both methods are expected to produce copy
number estimates that are biased low. Their agreement should not be
interpreted as evidence of correctness of the estimates. Gregor et al.
(2007) performed experiments to calibrate observed ﬂuorescence to
absolute expression of Bicoid protein. They estimated that in the
highest expressing nuclei, Bicoid is present at a concentration of
55±3 nM, or 33±1.8 molecules/µm3. If we assume that nuclei
are spherical with an estimated 6.5 nm diameter, or a volume of
144 µm3, then the Bicoid concentration estimate corresponds to
4750±260 molecules per nucleus. This value is just over three times
as large as we obtained from the binomial method, and 6.5 times
as large as from the Poisson method. Of course, the Gregor et al.
estimate is itself subject to a number of potential biases, and should
not be treated as ground truth. To our knowledge, however, it is the
only available experimental estimate of Bicoid protein copy number,
and it suggests that our estimates may be signiﬁcantly low. Whether
our estimates for other genes are off by a similar factor is unknown.
Wu et al. (2007) used an approach similar in broad strokes to ours
to estimate Bicoid protein copy numbers. Bicoid is unique among
the proteins studied here in that the protein is translated only at
the anterior pole of the embryo, from where it diffuses through the
embryo and enters nuclei to regulate transcription. Although this
mechanism is much different than that of the other segmentation
genes, Wu et al. (2007) show that it too leads to a theoretical
expectation of Poisson-distributed copy numbers in each nucleus.
They compared ﬂuctuations in computer simulations of stochastic
diffusion with observed ﬂuctuations in ﬂuorescent intensity [in data
from the FlyEx database (Poustelnikova et al., 2004), though they
used different embryos than we did]. From this, they estimated copy
numbers in the anterior ﬁfth of the embryo, where the nuclei with the
highest expression are, at between 200 molecules per nucleus and
2000 molecules per nucleus, depending on the embryos analyzed.
These ﬁgures, especially the upper end of the range, are broadly
consistent with our estimates for Bicoid. However, this agreement

2674

Fig. 4. Close-up views of two embryos. (A) Embryo ba3, showing spatial
discontinuity in expression of even-skipped, which is fully off in some
nuclei and fully on in some adjacent nuclei. (B) Embryo FEScc34, showing
signiﬁcant variability of expression of even-skipped, even within a single
stripe.

must be viewed with a grain of salt, as both studies are based on data
from the same laboratory, and thus may fall prey to similar biases
in data collection or processing.

For pair-rule genes, we have no corroborating data and can
compare the binomial and Poisson methods only on the even-skipped
gene. On that gene, the binomial estimator suggests protein copy
numbers six times as large as the Poisson estimator suggests—in
the low thousands of proteins per nucleus at peak expression. We
suspect the binomial estimator is closer to the truth. One reason is
purely mathematical. Both methods are expected to underestimate
true copy numbers, but by different and unknown amounts. If both
are underestimates, then whichever is higher is closer to being right.
Another reason is that the Poisson estimator clearly had difﬁculty
with the spatially ﬁne pair-rule patterns, despite our extra efforts
in ﬁtting these patterns. In some parts of the embryos, expression
does not vary smoothly as a function of position. For example,
Figure 4A shows a close up of an embryo in which nuclei with
near-maximal expression of even-skipped are adjacent to nuclei
with near-minimal expression of the same. That said, in some
cases the Poisson estimator was responding to genuinely greater
variability in expression than is seen for the maternal or gap genes.
For example, Figure 4B shows a close up of part of an embryo
in which expression within the ﬁrst even-skipped stripe is quite
irregular.

One motivation for the Poisson estimator is that it is the simplest
identiﬁable model consistent with our observation that variance in
expression seems to scale with mean expression. Bar-Even et al.
(2006), working in S.cerevisiae, also observed expression variance
scaling with the mean. However,
they ruled out a Poissonian
distribution of protein copy number, because they found variance
to be equal to roughly 1000 times the mean of expression, over a
wide range of conditions. For a Poisson distribution, the variance
is equal to the mean. The same constant of proportionality could
not hold in the Drosophila context. If it did, it would imply that our
estimates of ν are roughly 1000 times too large, and our copy number
estimates are 1000 times too small—that is, true copy numbers in the
nuclei of the embryo are in the hundreds of thousands or millions.
Nevertheless, it is possible that copy numbers are not Poissionian.
Rather they may follow some other distribution for which variance
is proportional to the mean, but with a constant of proportionality

[14:49 17/9/2009 Bioinformatics-btp415.tex]

Page: 2674 2670–2676

A

B

Fig. 5. Empirical distributions of even-skipped ˆνi estimates plotted against
observed intensity for each nucleus-pair (A, binomial estimator) or each
nucleus (B, Poisson estimator). None of the standard noise models are
supported by the empirical distributions.

somewhere between 1 and 1000. Further calibration experiments
could resolve this conundrum.

The models above fail to account for many potential sources
of noise. This includes noise in the biological system, such as
mRNA ﬂuctuations in space or time, diffusion of mRNA or protein,
ﬂuctuations in regulatory factors or ﬂuctuations in ribosomes. The
models also do not account for imaging or image processing noise
(Myasnikova et al., 2009). The net effect of all these sources
of variation is impossible to know. Simple noise models are not
consistent with analysis of our estimators. For example, suppose
intensity observations are subject to additive Gaussian noise. Then
one can show that not only are the binomial and Poisson estimators
of ν biased high, but also the bias increases for higher expressing
nuclei (proof straightforward; omitted). On the other hand, if one
assumes multiplicative Gaussian noise in the observations, then
binomial and Poisson estimators are still biased high, but the bias is
expected to decrease with expression level (proof straightforward;
omitted). It turns out, however, that none of these models is well
supported by the empirical distributions of the ν estimates. Figure 5
displays these distributions for even-skipped, the gene for which we
have the most data. Plotted are the per-nucleus or per-nucleus-pair ν
estimates against the observed intensity. The individual binomial
estimates show little relationship to intensity, though there is a
weak positive correlation. Across genes, the correlation coefﬁcients
between the per-nucleus-pair ˆνi estimates and the intensities of the
siblings ranged from −0.3244 for Krüppel to 0.3944 for bicoid.
Figure 5B shows a bimodal distribution for the ˆνi estimates of
the Poisson estimator, with the estimates being higher at low-
intensity (≈20 units) and high-intensity (≈200 units) nuclei. Several
genes showed such a distribution under the Poisson estimator, while
others displayed a weakly increasing or unimodal proﬁle, similar to
Figure 5A. Across genes, the correlations between ˆνi and Oi were
weaker than under the binomial model, ranging from −0.0609 for
caudal to 0.1769 for giant.

is

The main challenge with the binomial estimator

the
identiﬁcation of nuclei pairs. Although the discriminations are
reasonably clear visually, we found it hard to develop an algorithm
that pairs nuclei with satisfactory reliability. We experimented with
various algorithms based on the distance between nuclei, as well
as the intensity of the image between nuclei. The latter makes
sense because some nuclei pairs that have recently divided remain
connected by visible ﬁlaments. However, the distances between a
correct nucleus pair and an incorrect nucleus pair can be as little as a

Protein copy numbers from ﬂuorescence data

pixel or two. Given uncertainties in the segmentation of nuclei from
the image and determination of the centroids or boundaries, this
margin is too thin to be reliable. Further, in some cases, the correct
partner for a nucleus is not the nearest one, but the second or third
nearest. However, this only becomes clear in the context of the other
nuclei in the area. Perhaps further effort could yield a satisfactory
algorithm, but we leave this as a topic for future research.

A caveat to both techniques is that they attempt to estimate only
the number of ﬂuorescing molecules. If labeling succeeds for only
a fraction of proteins, or in the case of more complicated processes
such as the formation of inclusion bodies (Iafolla et al., 2008), the
number of ﬂuorescing proteins can be signiﬁcantly less than the total
number of proteins present, and either method will underestimate the
true amount of protein present.

6 CONCLUSIONS
We have introduced two estimators of protein copy number that
apply to still ﬂuorescence expression images with clearly identiﬁable
nuclei or cells. Using these approaches, we estimated copy numbers
for 14 genes in the segmentation network of Drosophila. Estimates
ranged from several hundreds of proteins per nucleus up to
thousands. We consider that these estimates lower bounds, as they
assume all variability in expression is due to fundamental stochastic
chemical processes. Other sources of noise in the data, which we
believe to be present but which did not follow any clear patterns,
are expected to drive these estimates lower than true copy numbers.
Calibration experiments could resolve how great this bias is, and
possibly provide a correction that could allow unbiased estimation
of protein copy number in the future.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
L.Z. would like to thank Gregory Butler for encouragement and
advice. T.P. thanks Johannes Jaeger, David McMillen and Peter
Swain for discussions and feedback that improved this work.

Funding: Department of Computer Science at Concordia University
(to L.Z.); Ottawa Hospital Research Institute (to T.P.), McGill
University (to T.P.); Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada (to T.P.).

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Andrews,B.W. and Iglesias,P.A. (2007) An information-theoretic characterization of

the optimal gradient sensing response of cells. PLoS Comput. Biol., 3, e153.

Andrews,B.W. et al. (2006) Optimal noise ﬁltering in the chemotactic response of

Escherichia coli. PLoS Comput. Biol., 2, e154.

Bagh,S. et al. (2008) Plasmid-borne prokaryotic gene expression: sources of variability

and quantitative system characterization. Phys. Rev. E, 77, 021919.

Bar-Even,A. et al. (2006) Noise in protein expression scales with natural protein

abundance. Nat. Genet., 38, 636–643.

Brown,K. and Sethna,J. (2003) Statistical mechanical approaches to models with many

poorly known parameters. Phys. Rev. E, 68, 021904.

Bundschuh,R. et al. (2003) The role of dimerization in noise reduction of simple genetic

networks. J. Theor. Biol., 220, 261–269.

Chen,Y. et al. (1999) The photon counting histogram in ﬂuorescence ﬂuctuation

spectroscopy. Biophys. J., 77, 553–567.

Elson,E.L. and Magde,D. (1974) Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy. i. Conceptual

basis and theory. Biopolymers, 13, 1–27.

Gregor,T. et al. (2007) Probing the limits to positional information. Cell, 130, 153–164.

2675

[14:49 17/9/2009 Bioinformatics-btp415.tex]

Page: 2675 2670–2676

L.Zamparo and T.J.Perkins

Iafolla,M. et al. (2008) Dark proteins: effect of inclusion body formation on
Proteins Struct. Funct. Bioinform., 72,

quantiﬁcation of protein expression.
1233–1242.

Rosenfeld,N. et al. (2006) A ﬂuctuation method to quantify in vivo ﬂuorescence data.

Biophys. J., 91, 759–766.

Scott,M.P. and Carroll,S.B. (1987) The segmentation and homeotic gene network in

Jaeger,J. et al. (2007) Known maternal gradients are not sufﬁcient for the establishment

early Drosophila development. Cell, 51, 689–98.

of gap domains in Drosophila melanogaster. Mech. Dev., 124, 108–128.

Janssens,H. et al. (2005) A high-throughput method for quantifying gene expression

data from early Drosophila embryos. Dev. Genes Evol., 215, 374–381.

Kask,P. et al. (1999) Fluorescence-intensity distribution analysis and its application in
biomolecular detection technology. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 96, 13756–13761.
Kosman,D. et al. (1998) Automated assay of gene expression at cellular resolution. In
Proceedings of the Paciﬁc Symposium on Biocomputing, World Scientiﬁc Publishing
Company, Singapore, pp. 6–17.

Spirov,A. and Holloway,D. (2003) Evolutionary techniques for image processing a large
dataset of early Drosophila gene expression. EURASIP J. Appl. Signal Processing,
8, 824–833.

Spirov,A. et al. (2001) Using of evolutionary computations in image processing for
quantitative atlas of Drosophila genes expression. In Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer, Berlin, pp. 374–383.

Spirov,A. et al. (2002) Reconstruction of the dynamics of Drosophila genes expression

from sets of images sharing a common pattern. Real-Time Imaging, 8, 507–518.

Libby,E. et al. (2007) Noisy information processing through transcriptional regulation.

Surkova,S. et al. (2009) Pipeline for acquisition of quantitative data on segmentation

Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 104, 7151–7156.

Myasnikova,E. et al. (2009) Estimation of errors introduced by confocal imaging
into the data on segmentation gene expression in Drosophila. Bioinformatics, 25,
346–352.

Perkins,T.J. et al. (2006) Reverse engineering the gap gene network of Drosophila

melanogaster. PLoS Comput. Biol., 2, e51.

gene expression from confocal images. Fly, 2, 58–66.

Swain,P. (2004) Efﬁcient attenuation of stochasticity in gene expression through post-

transcriptional control. J. Mol. Biol., 344, 965–976.

Swain,P.S. et al. (2002) Intrinsic and extrinsic contributions to stochasticity in gene

expression. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 99, 12795–12800.

Thattai,M. and van Oudenaarden,A. (2001) Intrinsic noise in gene regulatory networks.

Poustelnikova,E. et al. (2004) A database for management of gene expression data in

Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 8614–8619.

situ. Bioinformatics, 20, 2212–2221.

Tian,T. et al. (2007) Simulated maximum likelihood method for estimating kinetic rates

Raj,A. and van Oudenaarden,A. (2008) Nature, nurture, or chance: stochastic gene

in gene expression. Bioinformatics, 23, 84.

expression and its consequences. Cell, 135, 216–226.

Tkacik,G., Jr. et al. (2008)

Information ﬂow and optimization in transcriptional

Rao,C.V. et al. (2002) Control, exploitation and tolerance of intracellular noise. Nature,

regulation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 105, 12265–12270.

420, 231–237.

Vilar,J.M. et al. (2002) Mechanisms of noise-resistance in genetic oscillators. Proc.

Raser,J.M. and O’Shea,E.K. (2005) Noise in gene expression: origins, consequences,

Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 99, 5988–5992.

and control. Science, 309, 2010–2013.

Wiseman,P. et al. (2000) Two-photon image correlation spectroscopy and image cross-

Rivera-Pomar,R. and Jäckle,H. (1996) From gradients to stripes in Drosophila

correlation spectroscopy. J. Microsc., 200, 14–25.

embryogenesis: ﬁlling in the gaps. Trends Genet., 12, 478–483.

Wu,Y. et al. (2007) Master equation simulation analysis of immunostained Bicoid

Rosenfeld,N. et al. (2005) Gene regulation at the single-cell level. Science, 307,

morphogen gradient. BMC Syst. Biol., 1, 52.

1962–1965.

2676

[14:49 17/9/2009 Bioinformatics-btp415.tex]

Page: 2676 2670–2676

