BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 25 no. 22 2009, pages 3026–3027

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp523

Systems biology
Saint: a lightweight integration environment for model annotation
Allyson L. Lister1,2,∗, Matthew Pocock2, Morgan Taschuk1,2 and Anil Wipat1,2,∗
1Centre for Integrated Systems Biology of Ageing and Nutrition, Newcastle University and
2School of Computing Science, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK
Received on June 8, 2009; revised on August 4, 2009; accepted on August 26, 2009
Advance Access publication September 7, 2009
Associate Editor: Alex Bateman

ABSTRACT
Summary: Saint is a web application which provides a lightweight
annotation integration environment
for quantitative biological
models. The system enables modellers to rapidly mark up models
with biological information derived from a range of data sources.
Availability and Implementation: Saint is freely available for use
on the web at http://www.cisban.ac.uk/saint. The web application
is implemented in Google Web Toolkit and Tomcat, with all major
browsers supported. The Java source code is freely available for
download at http://saint-annotate.sourceforge.net. The Saint web
server requires an installation of libSBML and has been tested on
Linux (32-bit Ubuntu 8.10 and 9.04).
Contact: helpdesk@cisban.ac.uk; a.l.lister@ncl.ac.uk
Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at
Bioinformatics online.

1 INTRODUCTION
Quantitative modelling is at the heart of systems biology. Model
description languages such as the Systems Biology Markup
Language (SBML; Hucka et al., 2003) or CellML (Lloyd et al.,
2008) allow the relationships between biological entities to be
captured and the dynamics of these interactions to be described
mathematically. Currently, however, many dynamic models include
only the mathematical information required to run simulations, and
do not explicitly contain the full biological context.

The efﬁcient exchange, reuse and integration of models is aided
by the presence of biological information in the model. Model
annotations are necessary to describe how the model has been
generated and to deﬁne the meaning of the components that make
up the model in a computationally accessible fashion. If biological
information about a model is added consistently and thoroughly, the
model becomes useful not just for simulation, but also as an input
in other computational tasks and as a reference for researchers.

Without

a biological

context, models

are only easily
understandable by their creators. Interested third parties must
rely on extra documentations such as publications or possibly
incomplete descriptions of species and reactions included in an
SBML element’s name or identiﬁer. Without computationally
amenable biological annotations, it is difﬁcult to create software
tools that determine the biological pathway or reaction being
modelled.

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

The addition of biological annotations to a model is usually a
manual, time-consuming process; there is no single resource that
encompasses all suitable data sources. A modeller usually has to
visit many web sites, applications and interfaces in order to identify
relevant information, and may not be aware of all potentially useful
databases. Because modellers add information manually, it is very
difﬁcult to annotate exhaustively.

Whilst annotations are vital for model sharing and reuse, they
do not contribute to the mathematical content of a model and are
not critical to its successful functioning. The addition of biological
knowledge must be performed quickly and easily in order to make
annotation worthwhile to a modeller. A large number of tools1
are available for the construction, manipulation and simulation of
models, but there is currently a lack of tools to facilitate rapid
and systematic model annotation. While web sites and applications
specializing in integrating disparate data sources exist, such as
BioMart (Smedley et al., 2009) and Pathway Commons,2 none are
designed to put information directly into a model.

In this article, we describe a lightweight SBML model annotation
tool called Saint, speciﬁcally designed to identify and integrate
biological information relevant to computational models. Saint is
an application which supports the addition of basic annotation to
SBML entities and identiﬁes new reactions which may be valuable
for extending a model. Whilst the addition of biological annotation
does not modify the behaviour of the model, the incorporation of
new reactions or species adds new features that can later be built
upon to potentially change the model’s output.

2 IMPLEMENTATION
On the client side, Saint is a web application implemented in
Google Web Toolkit3 and hosted on a Tomcat4 server, with a query
translation service connecting to a number of external web services
running on the server side. New annotation is presented to the user
in a single integrated view after retrieval by the server-side queries.
Reactions and associated species are added directly to the
SBML model, whereas the majority of the remaining biological
annotation is added to Annotation elements according to the
Minimal Information Required in the Annotation of Biochemical
Models
speciﬁcation (Le Novère et al., 2005).

(MIRIAM)

1http://sbml.org/SBML_Software_Guide
2http://www.pathwaycommons.org
3http://code.google.com/webtoolkit/
4http://tomcat.apache.org/

 The Author(s) 2009. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.5/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[09:46 26/10/2009 Bioinformatics-btp523.tex]

Page: 3026 3026–3027

MIRIAM annotations are resource annotations that are added to
SBML in a standardized way which link external resources such
as ontologies and data sources to a model. MIRIAM, among other
things, deﬁnes an annotation scheme accessible via web services
which speciﬁes the format and set of standard data types which
should be used for these URIs (Laibe and Le Novere, 2007). The
use of the MIRIAM format provides a standard structure for explicit
links between the mathematical and biological aspects of an SBML
model.

Saint facilitates the biological annotation of SBML models by
using query translation to present an integrated view of data
sources and suggested ontological terms. Data sources include
UniProtKB (The UniProt Consortium, 2008), STRING (Jensen
et al., 2008) and Pathway Commons. Supported ontologies and
standards include MIRIAM, the Systems Biology Ontology (SBO;
Le Novère, 2006) and Gene Ontology (GO; Ashburner et al., 2000).
Query translation within Saint occurs when the query for each
species is translated into a set of queries over these resources’
web services. Data are matched to a species through syntactic
equivalence between the query term and the external data source.
The combined query results are then displayed in the web browser.
If a model is valid, Saint displays the parts of the model available
for annotation. The display is organized around species, which are
the main target of annotation. Saint makes use of the Google Web
Toolkit to provide both asynchronous calls to external resources
and cross-browser compatibility. New annotation can be viewed by
the modeller, even if the other species are not annotated yet. The
modeller can select or delete annotations as it suits their model,
or hide entire species from consideration. When the modeller is
satisﬁed with the new state of the model, it can be converted back to
SBML and saved. Parsing and validation of the models are handled
with libSBML (Bornstein et al., 2008).

As an example, a Saccharomyces cerevisiae model containing a
species with a single, simple identiﬁer of ‘cdc13’is loaded into Saint.
Saint suggests the SBO term ‘macromolecule’ (SBO:0000245),
which is added as an sboTerm attribute of that species element,
as the best SBO match to a protein. This term was suggested both
because ‘cdc13’ was found within UniProtKB and because the
Pathway Commons interaction set identiﬁed the species as a protein.
Saint also suggests the UniProtKB accession P32797, and GO
terms including ‘nuclear telomere cap complex’ (GO:0000783) and
‘single-stranded telomeric DNA binding’(GO:0043047) as retrieved
from UniProtKB. This information is stored within the model via
MIRIAM annotations. Extensions to the model are also suggested.
For each species, new reactions and their associated species and
species references are retrieved from both Pathway Commons and
STRING. More examples and comparisons are available in the
Supplementary Material.

3 DISCUSSION
To date, there are few tools available for automating the retrieval and
integration of data for the annotation of SBML models. The Saint
application was developed as an interactive web tool to annotate

Saint

models with new MIRIAM resources and reactions, keeping track of
data provenance so that the modeller can make an informed decision
about the quality of the suggested annotation. The system makes
it easy for modellers to add explicit biological knowledge to their
models, increasing a model’s usefulness both as a reference for other
researchers and as an input for further computational analysis.

A small number of similar tools are available. SemanticSBML5
provides MIRIAM annotations via a combination of data
warehousing and query translation via web services as part
of a larger application. The Java library libAnnotationSBML
(Swainston and Mendes, 2009) uses query translation to provide
annotation functionality with a minimal user interface. Unlike
libAnnotationSBML, Saint is accessible through an easy-to-use web
interface and unlike both tools is unique in its ability to add new
reactions and associated species.

Saint is under active development. Future enhancements will
include the addition of new data sources and ontologies, annotation
of elements other than species and reactions and support for other
modelling formalisms such as CellML.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We acknowledge the support of Newcastle University Systems
Biology Resource Centre (SBRC) and Newcastle University
Bioinformatics Support Unit.

Funding: BBSRC/EPSRC funding for CISBAN (BB/C008200/1 to
A.L.L., M.T. and A.W.); BBSRC ONDEX project (BB/F006063/1
to M.P).

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Ashburner,M. et al. (2000) Gene ontology: tool for the uniﬁcation of biology. The Gene

Ontology Consortium. Nat. Genet., 25, 25–29.

Bornstein,B.J. et al. (2008) LibSBML: an API Library for SBML. Bioinformatics, 24,

880–881.

Hucka,M. et al. (2003) The systems biology markup language (SBML): a medium for
representation and exchange of biochemical network models. Bioinformatics, 19,
524–531.

Jensen,L.J. et al. (2008) STRING 8–a global view on proteins and their functional

interactions in 630 organisms. Nucleic Acids Res., 37, D412–D416.

Laibe,C. and Le Novere,N. (2007) MIRIAM Resources: tools to generate and resolve

robust cross-references in Systems Biology. BMC Syst. Biol., 1, 58.

Le Novère,N. et al. (2005) Minimum information requested in the annotation of

biochemical models (MIRIAM). Nat. Biotechnol., 23, 1509–1515.

Le Novère,N. (2006) Model storage, exchange and integration. BMC Neurosci.,

7(Suppl. 1), S11.

Lloyd,C.M.M. et al. (2008) The CellML Model Repository. Bioinformatics, 24,

2122–2123.

Smedley,D. et al. (2009) Biomart–biological queries made easy. BMC Genomics, 10,

22.

Swainston,N. and Mendes,P. (2009) libAnnotationSBML: a library for exploiting SBML

annotations. Bioinformatics, 25, 2292–2293.

The UniProt Consortium (2008) The universal protein resource (UniProt). Nucleic Acids

Res., 36 (Database issue), D190–D195.

5http://sysbio.molgen.mpg.de/semanticsbml/

3027

[09:46 26/10/2009 Bioinformatics-btp523.tex]

Page: 3027 3026–3027

