BIOINFORMATICS DISCOVERY NOTE Vol. 25 no. 22 2009, pages 2891–2896

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp538

Systems biology
Phenotypic categorization of genetic skin diseases reveals new
relations between phenotypes, genes and pathways
Ruslan I. Sadreyev1, Jamison D. Feramisco2, Hensin Tsao3,∗ and Nick V. Grishin1,4,∗
1Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas,
TX 75390-9050, 2Department of Dermatology, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94115,
3Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit St,
Boston, MA 02114, and 4Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry
Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390-9050, USA
Received on May 11, 2009; revised on August 10, 2009; accepted on September 7, 2009
Advance Access publication September 10, 2009
Associate Editor: Jonathan Wren

ABSTRACT
Motivation: Systematic analysis of connection between proteins,
their cellular function and phenotypic manifestations in disease is
a central problem of biological and clinical research. The solution to
this problem requires the development of new approaches to link the
rapidly growing dataset of gene–disease associations with the many
complex and overlapping phenotypes of human disease.
Results: We analyze genetic skin disorders and suggest a manually
designed set of elementary phenotypes whose combinations deﬁne
diseases as points in a multidimensional space, providing a
basis for phenotypic disease clustering. Placing the known gene–
disease associations in the context of
this space reveals new
patterns that suggest previously unknown functional links between
proteins, signaling pathways and disease phenotypes. For example,
analysis of telangiectasias (spider vein diseases) reveals a previously
unrecognized interplay between the TGF-β signaling pathway and
pentose phosphate pathway. This interaction may mediate glucose-
dependent regulation of TGF-β signaling, providing a clue to the
known association between angiopathies and diabetes and implying
new gene candidates for mutational analysis and drug targeting.
Contact: grishin@chop.swmed.edu
Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at
Bioinformatics online.

1 INTRODUCTION
Rigorous quantitative analysis of disease phenotypes is a key
problem on our way to understanding systemic effects of human
gene mutations. Such understanding would enable statistical
prediction of clinical manifestations for genome abnormalities,
inference of causative genes from complex disease phenotypes,
as well as deeper
into molecular mechanisms of
pathophysiology. This tremendous task requires the development of
new approaches to link the rapidly growing dataset of gene–disease
associations with the many complex and overlapping phenotypes of
human disease.

insights

Previously reported approaches to this problem ranged from
considering diseases as individual entities connected through shared
∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

causative genes (Goh et al., 2007) or co-occurrence in the same
patient (Rzhetsky et al., 2007), to more detailed classiﬁcations
involving the comparison of disease phenotypes, usually based
on ontologies of phenotypic terms derived from natural-language
phenotype descriptions through automated or semi-automated text
analysis (Robinson et al., 2008; van Driel et al., 2006). These
analyses may include additional high-throughput data on protein
associations (Lage et al., 2007; Wu et al., 2008),
improving
prediction of new connections between diseases and proteins
involved. Here we suggest a different approach to quantitative
gene-phenotype analysis. By focusing on the set of genetic skin
disorders, we are able to manually analyze the corresponding
descriptions of phenotypic manifestations and design a set of
elementary phenotypic features whose combinations deﬁne any
given disease as a point in a multidimensional space. Placing the
known gene–disease associations in the context of this space reveals
new patterns that suggest previously unknown functional links
between disease phenotypes, proteins and signaling pathways. In
particular, analysis of telangiectasias (spider vein diseases), reveals
a previously unrecognized interplay between the TGF-β signaling
cascade and pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), which may mediate
glucose-dependent regulation of TGF-β signaling in diabetes.

2 METHODS
The database of 560 genodermatoses, with their phenotypic representations,
affected organ systems and associated genes (see Supplementary Material)
was previously compiled by expert analysis of OMIM database (Feramisco
et al. 2009). The elementary phenotypic features were manually selected
as general clinical manifestations that can occur independently in different
diseases and, when combined, can cover phenotype of any included
genodermatosis (Feramisco et al., 2009).

Correlation matrix R of elementary phenotypes is calculated based on the

set of genodermatoses represented as vectors in the phenotype space:

Rij = corr(Pi,Pj),

where P = XT is the matrix composed of phenotype vectors Pi
that
corresponds to the transposed matrix X of disease vectors Xi = {xk}, k = 1,N
(N is the dimension of phenotype space). corr(Pi, Pj) is Pearson’s correlation
coefﬁcient of two vectors.

Principal components of the set of disease points in the phenotype space
are derived as eigenvectors of covariance matrix C = XXT, with largest

 The Author(s) 2009. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.5/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[12:28 22/10/2009 Bioinformatics-btp538.tex]

Page: 2891 2891–2896

R.I.Sadreyev et al.

eigenvalues corresponding to the dimensions of strongest correlations within
the data set X (Jolliffe, 2002).

Statistical signiﬁcance of gene–phenotype associations is estimated from
the observed counts of co-occurrence of a given phenotype with mutations in
a given gene (Supplementary Tables S1–S5). Fisher’s exact test is used as a
more appropriate alternative to chi square association test in the cases where
counts in some cells of contingency tables are low (<5). The signiﬁcance
level is adjusted for the multiple testing of all gene–phenotype associations
using Bonferroni correction: α= α0/n = 1.2×10
−6, where α0 = 0.05 and
n= n(genes) n(phenotypes).

Phenotypic clustering is performed using UPGMA agglomerative method.

3 RESULTS
Using the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM)
compendium of human mendelian inheritance (Amberger et al.,
2009), we previously compiled a database of genetic skin diseases,
their phenotypic representations, affected organ systems and
associated genes (Feramisco et al., 2009). This database (see
Supplementary Material) includes 560 diseases associated with 501
protein-coding genes, with ∼16% of diseases linked to two or more
mutated genes and 18% of genes linked to two or more disease
entities.

3.1 Phenotypic categorization of genodermatoses
Based on the manual analysis of disease phenotypes, we deﬁne a
minimal set of elementary phenotypic features whose combinations
cover all included genodermatoses, so that phenotypic manifestation
of each skin disease can be represented as a combination of several
elementary features. This set includes 42 elementary dermatologic
features forming 18 groups: corniﬁcation phenotypes, pigmentation
phenotypes, etc. and 29 elementary systemic phenotypes forming
17 groups (Feramisco et al., 2009) (see Supplementary Material).
For example, the group of pigmentation features includes hyper- and
hypo-pigmentation, café au lait, poikiloderma and nevi (birthmarks
and moles). Most of the genodermatoses are characterized by more
than one elementary phenotype, with the average number of assigned
elementary phenotypes being ∼2.4 per disease (Feramisco et al.,
2009). Distributions of the numbers of dermatologic and systemic
phenotypes per disease and the numbers of diseases sharing an
elementary phenotype are shown in Supplementary Figure S1.

As a combination of elementary features, each disease can be
represented by a point in multi-dimensional space deﬁned by 71
basis vectors corresponding to the features (Fig. 1). To check for
the independence of these features in the phenotype space, we
calculate their correlation matrix based on the set of all disease
points (see ‘Methods’ section for details). This matrix (Fig. 2,
see also Supplementary Material) does not show major correlation
patterns in the incidences of different features in composite disease
phenotypes. The highest non-diagonal correlation coefﬁcient is
0.605 for poikiloderma versus alopecia/hypotrichosis phenotypes;
the second highest is 0.505. When the distribution of disease points
is analyzed in the plane (Supplementary Fig. S4A) or 3D-space
(Supplementary Fig. S4B) of highest-correlated phenotypes, every
possible combination of these phenotypes is found in a signiﬁcant
number of diseases.

In addition, we perform principal component analysis (PCA)
of the disease set and visualize the distribution of points along
principal components. Elongated or skewed distribution of points’

2892

Fig. 1. Representation of diseases as points in the phenotype space. As an
example, a 3D space of elementary phenotypic features Ph1–Ph3 is shown,
with two diseases (D1, D2) deﬁned by the combinations of these features.
The similarity between these composite disease phenotypes is determined
by the distance between points D1 and D2.

projections onto the subspace of ﬁrst
two or three principal
components, which correspond to the largest correlations within
the dataset, would indicate a major correlation in the occurrence
of phenotypic features. Neither the projection on the plane of top
two components (Fig. 2B) nor the projection in the space of top
three components (Supplementary Fig. S2) reveal such correlations.
The corresponding projections for the separate dermatologic and
systemic phenotype sets, along with phenotype correlation matrices
are shown in Supplementary Figure S3. These results suggest that
our set of phenotypic features is largely independent.

In phenotypic space, the similarity between two diseases can
be determined by the distance between the corresponding points
(Fig. 1). We use these distances to group diseases by phenotypes.
Several
tested distance metrics (Manhattan block, Euclidean
distance, etc.) produce similar results, thus we further use Euclidean
distances for simplicity. The distances range from zero for disorders
with the same sets of phenotypic features to 3.9 for the most distant
disorders that have 15 elementary phenotype differences.

Based on this disease representation, we analyze (i) phenotypes
shared among diseases associated with a protein or a group of
proteins (Fig. 3A); and (ii) functional
links between proteins
associated with phenotypically similar diseases (Fig. 3B). This
analysis can provide signiﬁcant insights into molecular mechanisms
of pathogenesis. First, associations between proteins and disease
phenotypes can be dissected in a statistically rigorous manner
and previously unknown links can be revealed. Second, similarity
in phenotypic manifestation may suggest common mechanisms
of action for different proteins or signaling systems, and point
to potential functional interactions. Finally, inferred phenotypic
association of a protein group or pathway provides a set of new
protein candidates that may cause similar diseases of yet unknown
molecular mechanism (Fig. 1).

Our approach is different from previously reported approaches
to the representation of disease phenotypes (Lage et al., 2007;
Robinson et al., 2008; van Driel et al., 2006) in two essential
points. First, we base our analysis on the data of high quality, with
the phenotype descriptions being manually curated by an expert.
Second, as opposed to building ontology of all phenotypic terms

[12:28 22/10/2009 Bioinformatics-btp538.tex]

Page: 2892 2891–2896

Phenotypic categorization of genetic skin diseases

Fig. 2. Selected elementary phenotypic features are largely independent. (A) Correlation matrix of phenotypic features, based on the whole dataset of 560
disease phenotypes. The matrix is shown as a grayscale grid, with each square representing the absolute value of Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient between
two phenotypic features (see Methods). The values are in the range between 0.0 (white) and 1.0 (black). The matrix is symmetric, with ones on the diagonal.
(B) Projection of the disease set on the plane of ﬁrst two principal components in phenotypic space does not show any general correlations in the occurrence
of elementary phenotypes among the diseases.

Fig. 3. (A) Inference of protein–phenotype associations. Decomposing disease phenotypes into elementary features allows for statistical analysis of co-
occurrence between mutations in speciﬁc proteins and resulting elementary phenotypes. Signiﬁcant correlations between defects of a protein (ﬁlled circle)
and a manifested phenotypic feature (ﬁlled square) may suggest causation. (B) Inference of protein and pathway associations. Diseases are clustered by
phenotypic presentation (upper plane) and corresponding groups of disease-associated proteins are considered (lower plane). Left, when a cluster of diseases
corresponds to mutations in functionally related proteins (e.g. proteins from the same signaling cascade), other proteins of this functional group (open circles)
may be suggested as new potential candidates for the association with the same class of diseases. Right, new relations between different protein groups may
be inferred from their mapping to the same phenotypic cluster of related diseases.

and automatically tracing their relationships through shared parents,
we are able to decompose complex phenotypes into elementary
unrelated features that can be combined in an independent fashion.

3.2 Protein–phenotype associations
Decomposition of disease phenotypes into elementary features
often reveals that an individual protein or a group of proteins
is predominantly associated with a certain phenotypic feature
(Fig. 3A). The statistical signiﬁcance of such associations can be
estimated from the frequencies of co-occurrence of mutations in a
speciﬁc protein with an elementary phenotype. Our results conﬁrm
many previously known associations. For example, mutations in
keratin I and collagens I and VII are signiﬁcantly associated with

disease phenotypes of hyperkeratosis (Supplementary Table S1,
−6), atrophy/aplasia/fragile
Fisher’s exact test P-value: P = 1.1× 10
−8) and bullous
skin (Supplementary Table S2, P = 9.2× 10
epidermal cohesion (blistering phenotype, Supplementary Table
−9), respectively. In addition, our results suggest
S3, P = 1.5× 10
previously unknown associations. For example, the link between
mutations in the subunits of laminin 5(332) and mucosal phenotype
−7), has been detected.
group (Supplementary Table S4, P = 7.2× 10
As a major component of the basement membrane, laminin 5(332) is
an essential structural component of the dermal–epidermal junction
and is involved in cell adhesion and signal transduction. Our analysis
suggests that various defects in laminin 5(332) consistently affect the
integrity of mucous membranes. Extending our analysis to groups
of functionally related proteins, we ﬁnd statistically signiﬁcant

2893

[12:28 22/10/2009 Bioinformatics-btp538.tex]

Page: 2893 2891–2896

R.I.Sadreyev et al.

the disease (1–17) with the name of

Fig. 4. Phenotypic clustering of diseases sharing the phenotype of
telangiectasia (‘spider veins’) corresponds to a clear functional grouping
of associated proteins and suggests the relation between TGF-β signaling
cascade and pentose phosphate metabolic pathway. The cladogram of
agglomerate hierarchical clustering is shown,
the nodes marked by
the numerical code of
the
associated protein in parentheses. Filled circles, proteins associated
with PPP. Filled squares, proteins involved in TGF-β pathway. Open
triangles, proteins involved in DNA excision repair. Open circles,
other proteins. The following diseases are shown: 1: arterial tortuosity
syndrome; 2: transaldolase deﬁciency; 3: Osler-Rendu-Weber syndrome
2; 4: telangiectasia, hereditary hemorrhagic, of Rendu, Osler and Weber;
5:
juvenile polyposis/hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia syndrome;
6: UV-sensitive syndrome; 7: xeroderma pigmentosum with normal
DNA repair rates; 8: xeroderma pigmentosum, complementation group
E; 9: xeroderma pigmentosum, complementation group D; 10: De
Sanctis-Cacchione syndrome; 11: osteogenesis imperfecta, type IV; 12:
hypotrichosis-lymphedema-telangiectasia syndrome; 13: Kindler syndrome;
14: ataxia-telangiectasia; 15: Bloom syndrome; 16: congenital disorder of
glycosylation, type Ie; 17: Rothmund-Thomson syndrome.

−9).

associations for gap junction proteins, connexins, which show
a highly signiﬁcant connection to hyperkeratosis (Supplementary
Table S5, P = 1.7× 10
Unsurprisingly, most of the elementary phenotypic features are
associated with a wide range of protein functions. However, some
features are associated with more functionally uniform groups of
proteins. For example, bullous (blistering) phenotype is mainly
caused by mutations in structural proteins (collagens, keratins),
ﬁlament-associated proteins, or cell adhesion molecules.

3.3 Functional associations between proteins through

their phenotypic representation

Similarity of disease phenotypes caused by mutations of different
proteins may point to functional relationship between these proteins.
In addition to many known protein relations, our dataset allows for
the inference of previously unknown functional links.

As an example, Figure 4 shows phenotypic clustering of
telangiectasias (spider vein diseases) that suggests an association
between the TGF-β cascade and the PPP. The cladogram based

2894

on phenotypic composition reveals two major groups of similar,
tightly clustered diseases. The ﬁrst group is associated exclusively
with the proteins of DNA excision repair (ERCC2, ERCC6, DDB2,
POLH), whereas the second group is associated with proteins that are
connected to two distinct systems: TGF-β cascade (SMAD4, ENG,
ACVR1) and PPP (transaldolase TALDO1 and glucose transporter
GLUT10). Involvement of TGF-β in vascular anomalies has been
reported for several diseases (Coucke et al., 2006; Loeys et al.,
2005; Tille and Pepper, 2004). The detected phenotypical similarity
to the PPP-associated disorders suggests that PPP is implicated
in angiogenesis through the same pathophysiologic mechanism.
In particular, we hypothesize a cross-talk between PPP and TGF-
β cascade, which may mediate the connection between glucose
metabolism and abnormal vascular development in angiopathies.
Among other implications, this hypothesis provides a potential
explanation of the known link between diabetes and angiopathies
(Miles et al., 2007; Simo et al., 2006), as well as suggests new
potential angiopathy-linked proteins.

4 DISCUSSION
The role of proteins and their interactions in the living organism
is a central
focus of molecular and cellular biology, with
both fundamental and clinical implications. In this respect, the
catalogued links between protein mutations and their phenotypic
manifestations in disease are, in a sense, the results of a grand
mutagenesis ‘experiment’ that may prove useful for ﬁnding new
associations and generating new hypotheses. Here, we present an
analysis of phenotypes expressed in genetic skin disorders and the
corresponding causative genes.

Although our method involved initial manual curation of
elementary phenotypes, it can be readily generalized to other disease
sets with available phenotype descriptions. The construction of the
set of elementary phenotypes can start from all phenotypic terms
derived from textual annotations of diseases of interest, further
ﬁltered by manual expert analysis and/or numerical selection of
the maximal subset of independent phenotypic features, based, for
example, on the analysis of correlation matrix (Fig. 2A) or on PCA.
However, we believe that the set of phenotypes manually curated
by an expert provides a more informative categorization, since it
(i) involves additional knowledge not reﬂected in the brief disease
annotations; and (ii) is based on well-deﬁned clinical terms and thus
is more accessible and relevant for clinical research community.
As an example, analysis of such a dataset can link genes to
speciﬁc clinical manifestations (Fig. 3A) that are easily recognized
by medical practitioners, which facilitates data accumulation and
hypothesis testing.

Involvement of a protein in the development of a speciﬁc disease
phenotype is an important piece of functional information, which
may lead to (i) better understanding of protein’s function and
molecular mechanism of disease; (ii) hypotheses about phenotypic
effects of mutations in functionally related proteins; and (iii)
phenotype-based prediction of potential proteins involved in similar
diseases with unknown genetic causation.

The presented protein–phenotype associations, inferred from a
relatively restricted statistical sample of OMIM, can be validated
on larger datasets. This validation may be performed in at least
two directions. First, phenotypic effects of mutations in a speciﬁc
gene can be analyzed on a wider scale: most directly, in larger

[12:28 22/10/2009 Bioinformatics-btp538.tex]

Page: 2894 2891–2896

clinical studies or in animal models. Second, for a considerable set of
characterized skin diseases, causative genes are still unknown. With
many of these diseases included in OMIM, an interesting further
direction would be to test the patients for the mutations in the genes
that have statistical associations with the manifested phenotypes.

Similarity in phenotypic effects of different proteins may lead
to hypotheses about previously unknown functional associations
(Fig. 3B). We present a potentially interesting example of such
an association, the interaction between PPP and TGF-β pathway
suggested by phenotypic clustering of telangiectasias (Fig. 4).

Utilizing glucose-6-phosphate as the substrate, PPP produces
the major fraction of cell’s NADPH, which plays a central role
in maintaining intracellular redox potential by serving as a co-
factor in the reduction of glutathione (Berg et al., 2001). As an
example, PPP enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase is shown
to play an important role in oxidative stress (Leopold et al., 2003;
Park et al., 2006), which is thought to be the main mechanism
of its involvement in cardiovascular disease (Matsui et al., 2005;
Rajasekaran et al., 2007; Wiesenfeld et al., 1970). Changing the
concentration of reduced glutathione alters redox state and affects,
among other systems, TGF-β pathway (Maulik and Das, 2002; Shan
et al., 1994). Altered redox state and the resulting oxidative stress
are known to stimulate angiogenic response (Maulik and Das, 2002;
Ushio-Fukai, 2006), and are shown to be involved in at least one
disorder with telangiectasia phenotype (Nicotera et al., 1989). In
addition, the effect of GLUT10 deﬁciency on TGF-β signaling in
the arterial wall is shown in arterial tortuosity syndrome (Coucke
et al., 2006).

We hypothesize that (i) defects in PPP may cause abnormal
vascular development by altering intracellular redox state; and (ii)
this effect may be mediated by TGF-β signaling cascade. This
hypothesis has several important implications. First, the reported
effects of glucose concentration on TGF-β cascade (Hua et al.,
2003; Isono et al., 2000; Zhu et al., 2007) may be mediated by PPP.
Furthermore, our hypothesis may explain the observed connection
between microangiopathies and diabetes (Miles et al., 2007; Simo
et al., 2006), suggesting that abnormal angiogenesis may be caused
by changes in PPP activity due to the disruption of intracellular
glucose homeostasis. Finally, our hypothesis suggests that other
proteins of PPP, as well as of TGF-β pathway, may be associated
with angiopathies, providing a new set of potential candidates for
mutational analysis and drug targeting.

This hypothesis can be readily tested in various experiments,
including (i) analysis of redox-state and TGF-beta responses
to different
levels of glucose concentration in the patients
with telangiectasia phenotype carrying TALDO1 and GLUT10
mutations, or in corresponding animal models; (ii) analysis of
these responses, as well as general phenotypic effects caused by
mutations in other PPP proteins (in animal models or clinical
studies); (iii) analysis of TGF-β response to expression changes or
up- and down-regulation of PPP proteins in vivo and in culture;
(iv) sequencing genes of PPP and TGF-β pathway in patients with
telangiectasias of unknown genetic background; and (v) further
experimental
investigation of the role of PPP activity in the
association between angiopathies and diabetes, in diabetes patients
and animal models.

In conclusion, our manually curated decomposition of disease
phenotypes is based on the set of elementary phenotypic features
that serve as basis vectors in a multidimensional space, as opposed

Phenotypic categorization of genetic skin diseases

to previously reported automated (Lage et al., 2007; van Driel
et al., 2006) or semi-automated (Robinson et al., 2008) ontologies
of phenotypic terms. The potential value of this approach is
shown by conﬁrming known and revealing previously unknown
gene–phenotype, gene–gene and pathway–pathway associations.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the Texas Advanced Computing Center
(TACC) at The University of Texas at Austin for providing high-
performance computing resources.

Funding: National Institutes of Health (GM67165 to N.V.G.); Welch
Foundation (I1505 to N.V.G.); American Cancer Society (to H.T.).

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Amberger,J. et al. (2009) McKusick’s Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM).

Nucleic Acids Res., 37, D793–D796.

Berg,J. et al. (2001) Biochemistry. W.H. Freeman & Co, New York.
Coucke,P.J. et al. (2006) Mutations in the facilitative glucose transporter GLUT10 alter

angiogenesis and cause arterial tortuosity syndrome. Nat. Genet., 38, 452–457.

Feramisco,J.D. et al. (2009) Phenotypic and genotypic analyses of genetic skin disease
through the online Mendelian inheritance in man (OMIM) database. J. Invest.
Dermatol., [Epub ahead of print, doi: 10.1038/jid.2009.108]

Goh,K.I. et al. (2007) The human disease network. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 104,

8685–8690.

Hua,H. et al. (2003) High glucose-suppressed endothelin-1 Ca2+ signaling via NADPH
oxidase and diacylglycerol-sensitive protein kinase C isozymes in mesangial cells.
J. Biol. Chem., 278, 33951–33962.

Isono,M. et al. (2000) Stimulation of TGF-beta type II receptor by high glucose in
mouse mesangial cells and in diabetic kidney. Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol., 278,
F830–F838.

Jolliffe,I.T. (2002) Principal Component Analysis. Springer, New York.
Lage,K. et al. (2007) A human phenome-interactome network of protein complexes

implicated in genetic disorders. Nat. Biotechnol., 25, 309–316.

Leopold,J.A. et al.

(2003) Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase overexpression
decreases endothelial cell oxidant stress and increases bioavailable nitric oxide.
Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol., 23, 411–417.

Loeys,B.L. et al.

(2005) A syndrome of altered cardiovascular, craniofacial,
neurocognitive and skeletal development caused by mutations in TGFBR1 or
TGFBR2. Nat. Genet., 37, 275–281.

Matsui,R. et al. (2005) Glucose-6 phosphate dehydrogenase deﬁciency decreases the

vascular response to angiotensin II. Circulation, 112, 257–263.

Maulik,N. and Das,D.K. (2002) Redox signaling in vascular angiogenesis. Free Radic.

Biol. Med., 33, 1047–1060.

Miles,P.D. et al. (2007) Impaired insulin secretion in a mouse model of ataxia

telangiectasia. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 293, E70–E74.

Nicotera,T.M. et al. (1989) Elevated superoxide dismutase in Bloom’s syndrome: a

genetic condition of oxidative stress. Cancer Res., 49, 5239–5243.

Park,J. et al. (2006) Increase in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in adipocytes

stimulates oxidative stress and inﬂammatory signals. Diabetes, 55, 2939–2949.

Rajasekaran,N.S. et al. (2007) Human alpha B-crystallin mutation causes oxido-
reductive stress and protein aggregation cardiomyopathy in mice. Cell, 130,
427–439.

Robinson,P.N. et al. (2008) The Human Phenotype Ontology: a tool for annotating and

analyzing human hereditary disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet., 83, 610–615.

Rzhetsky,A. et al. (2007) Probing genetic overlap among complex human phenotypes.

Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 104, 11694–11699.

Shan,Z. et al. (1994) Intracellular glutathione inﬂuences collagen generation by

mesangial cells, Kidney Int, 46, 388–395.

Simo,R. et al. (2006) Angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors in proliferative diabetic

retinopathy. Curr. Diabetes Rev., 2, 71–98.

Tille,J.C. and Pepper,M.S. (2004) Hereditary vascular anomalies: new insights into their

pathogenesis. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol., 24, 1578–1590.

Ushio-Fukai,M. (2006) Redox signaling in angiogenesis: role of NADPH oxidase.

Cardiovasc Res., 71, 226–235.

2895

[12:28 22/10/2009 Bioinformatics-btp538.tex]

Page: 2895 2891–2896

R.I.Sadreyev et al.

van Driel,M.A. et al. (2006) A text-mining analysis of the human phenome. Eur. J.

Wu,X. et al. (2008) Network-based global inference of human disease genes. Mol. Syst.

Hum. Genet., 14, 535–542.

Biol., 4, 189.

Wiesenfeld,S.L. et al. (1970) Elevated blood pressure, pulse rate and serum creatinine
in Negro males deﬁcient in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. N. Engl. J. Med.,
282, 1001–1002.

Zhu,Y. et al. (2007) Regulation of transforming growth factor beta in diabetic

nephropathy: implications for treatment. Semin. Nephrol., 27, 153–160.

2896

[12:28 22/10/2009 Bioinformatics-btp538.tex]

Page: 2896 2891–2896

