BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 25 no. 23 2009, pages 3187–3188

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp566

Structural bioinformatics
VDNA: The virtual DNA plug-in for VMD
Thomas C. Bishop
Center for Computational Science, Tulane University, Lindy Boggs Center Suite 500, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA
Received on July 3, 2009; revised on August 18, 2009; accepted on September 10, 2009
Advance Access publication September 29, 2009
Associate Editor: Anna Tramontano

ABSTRACT
Summary: The DNA inter base pair step parameters (Tilt, Roll, Twist,
Shift, Slide, Rise) are a standard internal coordinate representation
of DNA. In the absence of bend and shear, it is relatively easy to
mentally visualize how Twist and Rise generate the familiar double
helix. More complex structures do not readily yield to such intuition.
For this reason, we developed a plug-in for VMD that accepts a
set of mathematical expressions as input and generates a coarse-
grained model of DNA as output. This feature of VDNA appears to
provide a unique approach to DNA modeling. Predeﬁned expressions
include: linear, sheared, bent and circular DNA, and models of the
nucleosome superhelix, chromatin, thermal motion and nucleosome
unwrapping.
Availability: VDNA is pre-installed in VMD, http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/
Research/vmd. Updates are at http://dna.ccs.tulane.edu.
Contact: bishop@tulane.edu

1 INTRODUCTION
The DNA inter base pair step helical parameters (Tilt, Roll, Twist,
Shift, Slide, Rise) are widely employed to model the structure,
energetics and dynamics of DNA. These parameters describe the
relative rotations and translations along a length of DNA needed to
move from one base pair to the next. The parameters are well deﬁned
(Dickerson, 1989), and there are a number of programs for extracting
these parameters from a Cartesian coordinate representation of DNA
or for assembling a model of DNA given a set of helical parameters
(El Hassan and Calladine, 1995; Lavery and Sklenar, 1988; Lu
and Olson, 2003; Macke and Case, 1998; Tung and Carter, 1994;
Vlahovicek and Pongor, 2000). However, none of these enable
the user to specify a set of mathematical functions for the helical
parameters and rapidly visualize the corresponding 3D model. This
is a major obstacle in development of an understanding of the
complex relations between local and global structure. Only for the
most trivial distributions of DNA helical parameters is it easy to
mentally visualize the global structure of DNA. For this purpose,
we have developed a plug-in for VMD (Humphrey et al., 1996) that
allows users to generate models of dsDNA using arbitrarily complex
mathematical expressions.

2 METHODS
The inter base pair step parameters are a local or internal coordinate
representation of DNA that specify how a set of directors attached to the

i-th base pair and denoted ( ˆd1, ˆd2, ˆd3) are rotated (Tilt, Roll, Twist) and

translated (Shift, Slide, Rise) to achieve the set of directors associated with

(cid:1)

Roll2 + Tilt2) and local shear
the (i+ 1)-th base pair. The local bend is (
(cid:1)
Shift2 + Slide2). In Cartesian coordinates, DNA is a space curve with
is (
centerline (cid:1)r(si) and directors ˆdk(si) that results from the accumulation of
bend, shear, Twist and Rise as a function of si. We emphasize that the helical
parameter description is suitable for any ﬁber-like molecule for which a set of
local directors can be embedded in the ﬁber. Thus, while VDNA is intended
to represent DNA it is actually much more widely applicable. The complete
set of helical parameters includes intra base pair parameters (Shear, Stretch,
Stagger, Buckle, Propeller-Twist, Opening), which describe deformations of
the base pairs. VDNA does not utilize these descriptors.

Here, let (cid:1)=(Tilt, Roll, Twist) and (cid:1)=(Shift, Slide, Rise) represent the
DNA helical parameters. In general (cid:1) and (cid:1) are functions of s and t where s

represents the continuum limit of position measured in base pair steps along
the DNA and t represents time. To obtain a 3D representation of DNA as a

as a function of s at time t. VDNA simply provides an interface for deﬁning

space curve (cid:1)r with local directors ˆdk requires integration of (cid:1)(s,t) and (cid:1)(s,t)
(cid:1)(s,t) and (cid:1)(s,t), integrating the expressions and displaying results. In case
(cid:1) and (cid:1) are time dependent, VDNA automatically integrates (cid:1) and (cid:1) from
s= 0 to s= maxS for each instance t = 0 to maxT with a time step of 1. The
result is maxT + 1 structures corresponding to t = 0,1,2, ... ,maxT.

For the purposes of numerical integration VDNA utilizes El Hassan’s
algorithm (El Hassan and Calladine, 1995). This algorithm has proven to
be extremely fast and robust and ensures invariance to the direction of
integration, i.e. integration from s= 0 to maxS or s= maxS to 0 gives the
same result. Note the sign of Shift and Tilt must be changed during a ‘reverse’
integration.

3 USAGE
The main VDNA panel, Figure 1,
is generated by selecting
‘Extensions → Visualization → Virtual DNA Viewer’ from the
VMD pull-down menus. This panel provides text boxes for inputing
mathematical expressions for the helical parameters. These strings
are used to create the new procedures omega and gamma which are
deﬁned as functions of the variables s and t. As the structure at time
t is created the variable s varies from 0 to maxS. In case maxT > 0,
VDNA will generate a total of maxT + 1 structures. In all cases,
the angular deformations are deﬁned in degrees per base pair step,
and the translations are given in ˙angström per base pair step. Any
string that forms a valid argument to the tcl command ‘expr’ can be
utilized in deﬁning the helical parameter statements. (Consult the
examples or a tcl language reference source for more details.) VDNA
recognizes several deﬁned variables: V1, V2, Nuc and Lk ($Pi is
predeﬁned as π to single precision). The procedures omega and/or
gamma utilize whatever text is entered for these variables. Such
variable substitution provides a convenient means of introducing
arbitrarily complex expressions into more than one helical parameter
statement simultaneously. The text box ‘Cores’deﬁnes the procedure

 The Author(s) 2009. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.5/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[20:29 3/11/2009 Bioinformatics-btp566.tex]

Page: 3187 3187–3188

T.C.Bishop

Fig. 2. Examples: VDNA includes predeﬁned mathematical expressions
for local untwisting of DNA, circular DNA, Torsion Helix, Shear Helix,
chromatin with and without an explicitly bent linker, thermal motion (shown
as a 4-point per base pair molecule without and with RMSD ﬁtting) and
nucleosome unwrapping.

We have introduced a general purpose tool for creating ﬁber-
like models, four-atom-per-base-pair models and all atom models
of DNA from mathematical expressions. Predeﬁned expressions are
provided as building blocks to investigate structural, thermal and
dynamical properties including: shear (Shift or Slide); non-uniform
Twist; a Torsion Helix and a Shear Helix (Bishop, 2008); linker
DNA in simple models of chromatin; thermal variations; and time
evolutions. VDNA is written entirely in tcl so it can be readily
modiﬁed by users with limited programming experience.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
John Stone assisted in development of this plug in.

Funding: National Institutes of Health (R01GM076356 to T.C.B.).

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Bishop,T.C. (2008) Geometry of the nucleosomal DNA superhelix. Biophys J., 95,

1007–1017.
Dickerson,R.E.

(1989) Deﬁnitions and nomenclature of nucleic acid structure

components. Nucleic Acids Res., 17, 1797–1803.

El Hassan,M.A. and Calladine,C.R. (1995) The assessment of the geometry of
dinucleotide steps in double-helical DNA; a new local calculation scheme. J. Mol.
Biol., 251, 648–664.

Humphrey,W. et al. (1996) VMD: visual molecular dynamics. J. Mol. Graph., 14, 33–38,

27–28.

Lavery,R. and Sklenar,H. (1988) The deﬁnition of generalized helicoidal parameters
and of axis curvature for irregular nucleic acids. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn., 6, 63–91.
Lavery,R. et al. (2009) A systematic molecular dynamics study of nearest-neighbor
effects on base pair and base pair step conformations and ﬂuctuations in B-DNA.
Nucleic Acids Res., [Epub ahead of print, doi:10.1093/nar/gkp834, October 22,
2009].

Lu,X.-J. and Olson,W.K. (2003) 3DNA: a software package for the analysis, rebuilding
and visualization of three-dimensional nucleic acid structures. Nucleic Acids Res.,
31, 5108–5121.

Macke,T. and Case,D.A (1998) Modeling unusual nucleic acid structures.

In
Leontes,N.B. and SantaLucia,J. Jr., eds. Molecular Modeling of Nucleic Acids,
American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, pp. 379–393.

Tung,C S. and Carter,E.S. (1994) Nucleic acid modeling tool (NAMOT): an interactive
graphic tool for modeling nucleic acid structures. Comput. Appl. Biosci., 10,
427–433.

Vlahovicek,K. and Pongor,S. (2000) Model.it: building three dimensional DNA models

from sequence data. Bioinformatics, 16, 1044–1045.

Fig. 1. The main panel in VDNA, left, provides text boxes for inputing
mathematical expressions. The default model, right, is a parameterization of
the Shear Helix that mimics the nucleosome core particle with free linker
DNA. It is a torsion-free model so all superhelical pitch arises only from
shear. Users can also select from predeﬁned expressions, draw coarse-grained
models, plot the helical parameters, save the parameters in a format suitable
for input to 3DNA or make a 4-point per base pair molecule. A 4-point model
is automatically loaded into VMD as a molecule with maxT + 1 frames by the
‘Make Molec’ button, while the ‘Draw It’ button loads a graphics object into
VMD in which all maxT + 1 structures are superimposed. In all the cases,
the base pair at s= 0 is aligned with the origin. Molecular representations can
be further manipulated, e.g. ﬁt, as was done for thermal model in Figure 2.

IsNuc which is called during the main integration loop with the
argument s. When IsNuc= 1, VDNA maintains a running average
of (cid:1)r(s). When IsNuc switches to zero, VDNA draws a sphere at the
accumulated position and resets the average. This function is useful
for indicating proteins docked to the DNA, e.g. the nucleosome’s
histone core.

Finally, VDNA includes a number of predeﬁned examples from
which to choose, see Figure 2. Some examples are intended
to demonstrate geometric relations and to assist in developing
intuition rather than model biologic entities. These models are not
pictured, but include: straight, bent, sheared, polygonal, circular
and superhelical structures. Others are designed to be building
blocks for modeling biologically relevant structures, Figure 2, but
are not parameterized to represent speciﬁc biophysical entities. The
default model, Figure 1, demonstrates how to combine the generic,
predeﬁned Shear Helix and Thermal models to accurately represent
a speciﬁc biological entity: a Shear Helix model of nucleosome
core particle (Bishop, 2008) with DNA linkers that exhibit average
B-DNA conformation and ﬂuctuation properties (Lavery et al.,
2009).

4 FUTURE PLANS AND CONCLUSION
Features to be included in future versions of VDNA include
sequence-dependent values for the helical parameters, greater
support for conversion between all atom models and helical
parameter models using either 3DNA or Curves and the reading of
helical parameters from ﬁle. Presently, the parameter ﬁle produced
by VDNA can be used to create an all atom model with 3DNA.

3188

[20:29 3/11/2009 Bioinformatics-btp566.tex]

Page: 3188 3187–3188

