BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 25 no. 22 2009, pages 3038–3039

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp529

Data and text mining
Identifying related journals through log analysis
Zhiyong Lu∗, Natalie Xie and W. John Wilbur

National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20852, USA
Received on June 16, 2009; revised on August 12, 2009; accepted on August 31, 2009
Advance Access publication September 3, 2009
Associate Editor: Alfonso Valencia

ABSTRACT
Motivation: With the explosion of biomedical
literature and the
evolution of online and open access, scientists are reading more
articles from a wider variety of journals. Thus, the list of core journals
relevant to their research may be less obvious and may often change
over time. To help researchers quickly identify appropriate journals
to read and publish in, we developed a web application for ﬁnding
related journals based on the analysis of PubMed log data.
Availability: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/IRET/Journals
Contact: luzh@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at
Bioinformatics online.

1 INTRODUCTION
As a common practice, most of the scientists maintain familiarity
with a small number of core journals to keep pace with the state
of the art. Such a list is typically developed through years of
personal experience and is highly dependent on an individual’s
research interests. In addition, the content of such a list may change
over time. A previous study has shown that scientists are reading
more articles on average per year from a wider variety of journals:
increasing from 13 journals in 1977 to 33 individual journals by
2005 (Tenopir, 2008). This is no surprise because similar types of
articles are now published in a broader range of journals and journals
are covering a wider variety of topics and publishing more articles
beyond their deﬁned scope. Not only does this make it difﬁcult for
researchers to select journals for reading, it also makes for increasing
difﬁculty deciding in which journal(s) to publish their own work
(Schuemie and Kors, 2008). Thus, our objective is to suggest for
users a list of current important journals related to journals they
already know, so that researchers—especially scholars who are not
yet deeply familiar with an area of research (e.g. junior graduate
students)—may improve scholarly productivity.

To the best of our knowledge, very few systems/studies attempt
to help scientists ﬁnd relevant journals. The National Library of
Medicine’s (NLM’s) Journals database provides a functionality that
allows users to browse journals by discipline via Subject Terms:
(cid:1)
a set of MeSH
journals by subject (e.g. biochemistry). However, Journal Subject
Terms are frequently inadequate to ﬁnd relevant journals across
discipline boundaries, thus it may fail to meet individual needs.
For instance, although Bioinformatics and Nucleic Acids Research

headings designated for indexing MEDLINE

(cid:1)

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

are two closely related journals, they are indexed by completely
different Journal Subject Terms.

JANE (Journal/Author Name Estimator)

is a web server
previously developed to help (i) authors ﬁnd appropriate journals
and (ii) editors ﬁnd potential reviewers (Schuemie and Kors, 2008).
However, by design JANE ﬁnds related journals through the set of
MEDLINE citations that share a similar context with the input text,
thus a short textual input such as a journal title often cannot yield
optimized results (e.g. several top returned journals are not closely
related to Bioinformatics when the word is used as input). Similar
ideas for ﬁnding related journals can be seen in eTBLAST (Errami
et al., 2007).

This work is also related to the use of clickthrough data to
mine associations between items using techniques like collaborative
ﬁltering (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin, 2005). In particular, this is
similar to the research on developing recommendation systems for
large-scale digital libraries (Smeaton and Callan, 2001).

2 FINDING JOURNALS OF INTEREST
2.1 Browsing through Journal Subject Terms
At our web server, users can search for journals by browsing the
same set of Journal Subject Terms. The distinction lies in how the
resulting journals are sorted once a speciﬁc Subject Term is clicked.
In addition to displaying journals alphabetically—the default order
in the NLM’s Journals database—we also list them by popularity, a
measure determined by a journal’s past usage.

2.2 Finding related journals
Alternatively, users can enter a query in the search box. Currently,
the user can search a journal by its name, abbreviation or ISSN. The
web server will return the bibliographic information of the requested
journal such as its Publisher. Furthermore, there is a hyperlink called
Related Journals. When clicked, it will display the 20 most related
journals found by our approach (see below).

3 IMPLEMENTATION
We collected one month’s (March, 2008) worth of the PubMed logs,
which include a total of 8 million user sessions (after removing robot
sessions) and 51 million citation retrievals. A citation retrieval is a
speciﬁc MEDLINE record being clicked to display its corresponding
bibliographic information and abstract text.

For each of the retrieval, we replaced it with its corresponding
journal title in the dataset. A total of 15 827 journals (more journals

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the US Government 2009.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.5/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[17:45 30/10/2009 Bioinformatics-btp529.tex]

Page: 3038 3038–3039

than what is currently indexed in the Journals database) were
found in the 8 million user sessions. The usage (number of times
a particular journal was accessed) differs signiﬁcantly between
journals: some 1010 journals were heavily retrieved (over 10 000
times), while over 8000 journals were rarely viewed (less than 100
times).
Our calculation of related journals is based on the existence of a
set of user sessions {si}N
i=1 where each user session si consists of a
}ni
set {di
j=1 of citation retrievals in the form of MEDLINE records
that were examined by the user during that session. If A represents a
journal, we will denote by tA(si) the number of click through events
that represent articles from journal A. We set

j

TA= N(cid:1)

i=1

tA (si )

We may then estimate the probability of transitioning from an article
in journal A to an article in journal B as
ni−1
ni

p (B|A )= N(cid:1)

tB (si )
ni−1

tA (si )tB (si )

(cid:3)(cid:2)

(cid:3)(cid:2)

tA (si )

TAni

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

TA

= N(cid:1)
i=1

i=1

ni

Here the factor tA(si)
represents the probability that a user looking
tA
at a document from journal A is actually looking at a document
tB(si)
(ni−1) represents the probability that the
in session si. The factor
next document (among the ni − 1 other documents represented in the
session) that the user looks at will be a document from journal B.
Finally, the factor ni−1
represents the probability that the current
record from journal A is not the last click through in the session. In
this computation, we have assumed a random order to the clicked
records making up the session, as we do not believe the order itself
is important. In support of this assumption we remind the reader
that the PubMed search engine retrieves documents in reverse time
order of their entry into the database and there is a strong tendency
for a user to click on them in that same order. Also note that in this
computation, in addition to journal popularity, we have also taken its
topicality (the relation of a journal to a user need) into consideration.

4 USER STUDY AND EVALUTION
To gain an understanding of how users respond to the new ranking
of journals listed under the same Journal Subject Term (Section 2.1)
and how accurately our approach can identify a customized list of
related journals (Section 2.2), we conducted a user study by asking
users to answer speciﬁc questions with regard to journals and their
research interests (details in the Supplementary Material).

A total of 29 participants were recruited via email and personal
contacts. They are comprised of graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows or faculty members from a wide variety of biomedical
subﬁelds (e.g. genetics). They were ﬁrst asked to identify their
research ﬁeld(s) and one or more journals they access the most. Next,
they were asked to compare two different sorting strategies on the
journal list indexed by Journal Subject Terms. One is based on usage
(popularity), whereas the other is based on the alphabetic order.
Finally, we asked them to evaluate the quality and usefulness of our
computed journal list based on the journal they access the most.
Speciﬁcally, participants were asked to identify irrelevant journals

Identifying related journals through log analysis

as well as other relevant journals missing from our suggestion list.
As a result, both recall and precision can be computed for our journal
suggestion lists.

Survey results are: ﬁrst, for the list retrieved by a Subject Term,
all users favored results ranked by usage over the alphabetic order,
suggesting that popularity is an important factor in users’ choice
of favorite journals. Second, for the list retrieved by relatedness,
the recall and precision are 0.893 (±0.102) and 0.910 (±0.086),
respectively, suggesting that our computed journal list is closely
related to a user’s information needs. Third, all except one user
favored our computed list over the list indexed by Subject Terms.
Finally, with regard to the usefulness of such a list of related journals,
>40% of our users (12/29) reported that they found at least one
journal from the suggestion list to be important to their research
but absent from their current checklist. All except two participants
agreed that such a list is helpful, especially for scholars who are not
yet deeply familiar with an area of science.

5 CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
We provide a web application for ﬁnding appropriate journals for
researchers to read and publish in. Its unique feature of accurately
identifying related journals is beyond the functionality of the NLM’s
Journals database and is complementary to other text mining tools
such as JANE and eTBLAST.

Despite high recall and precision, our system failed to satisfy
some researchers in the reported user study. No list of 20 journals
could be guaranteed to include all important journals in an area. We
also observed that some journals like Nature were repeatedly present
in our results because of their popularity, but they were not always
favored (because of their diverse content).

The web site is freely accessible and will be regularly updated.
Part of our system has become available in the NLM’s Journals
database. The clickthrough data used in this research will be made
available upon request after data anonymization, aggregation and
transformation in accordance with proper user privacy protection.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank all the participants for their contribution to
the user survey.

Funding: Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of
Health, National Library of Medicine.

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Adomavicius,G. and Tuzhilin,A. (2005) Toward the next generation of recommender
systems: a survey of the state-of-the-art and possible extensions. IEEE Trans. Knowl.
Data Eng., 17, 2005.

Errami,M. et al. (2007) eTBLAST: a web server to identify expert reviewers, appropriate

journals and similar publications. Nucleic Acids Res., 35, 2007.

Schuemie,M.J. and Kors,J.A. (2008) Jane: suggesting journals, ﬁnding experts.

Bioinformatics, 24, 727.

Smeaton,A. and Callan,J. (2001) Joint DELOS-NSF workshop on personalisation and

recommender systems in digital libraries. ACM SIGIR Forum, 35, 7–11.

Tenopir,C. (2008) Online Databases: Are E-Journals Good for Sciences. Available
(last accessed date

at http://www.libraryjournal.com/article/CA6606485.html
September 15, 2009).

3039

[17:45 30/10/2009 Bioinformatics-btp529.tex]

Page: 3039 3038–3039

