BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol. 26 no. 4 2010, pages 486–492

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp685

Gene expression
Mixture-model based estimation of gene expression variance
from public database improves identiﬁcation of differentially
expressed genes in small sized microarray data
Mingoo Kim1,2,†, Sung Bum Cho1,2,† and Ju Han Kim1,2,∗
1Seoul National University Biomedical Informatics (SNUBI) and 2Division of Biomedical Informatics, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea
Received on June 10, 2009; revised on December 3, 2009; accepted on December 9, 2009
Advance Access publication December 16, 2009
Associate Editor: John Quackenbush

ABSTRACT
Motivation: The small number of samples in many microarray
experiments is a challenge for the correct identiﬁcation of dif-
ferentially expressed gens (DEGs) by conventional statistical means.
Information from public microarray databases can help more efﬁcient
identiﬁcation of DEGs. To model various experimental conditions of
a public microarray database, we applied Gaussian mixture model
and extracted bi- or tri-modal distributions of gene expression. Prior
variance of Baldi’s Bayesian framework was estimate for the analysis
of the small sample-sized datasets.
Results: First, we estimated the prior variance of a gene expression
by pooling variances obtained from mixture modeling of
large
samples in the public microarray database. Then, using the prior
variance, we identiﬁed DEGs in small sample-sized test datasets
using the Baldi’s framework. For benchmark study, we generated
test datasets having several samples from relatively large datasets.
Our proposed method outperformed other benchmark methods in
terms of detecting gold-standard DEGs from the test datasets. The
results may be a challenging evidence for usage of public microarray
databases in microarray data analysis.
Availability: Supplementary data are available at http://www.snubi
.org/publication/MixBayes
Contact: juhan@snu.ac.kr

1 INTRODUCTION
Differential expression analysis of large-scale microarray studies
requires more than ﬁve replicates in each comparison group for
stable results (Hwang et al., 2002; Pavlidis et al., 2003). Many
microarray studies, however, are performed with fewer than ﬁve
samples in each group due to high-cost limitation or scarcity of
biological source materials. In the analysis of the small sample-
sized microarray data, it is difﬁcult to correctly identify differentially
expressed genes using standard group-comparison statistics because
estimation of gene-speciﬁc variances, with which to determine the
statistical signiﬁcance of observed changes in gene expression,
becomes unstable with a small number of replicates.

∗
To whom correspondence should be addressed.
†The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the ﬁrst two authors
should be regarded as joint First authors.

Many methods have been introduced to address this variance
estimation problem. A popular approach has been certain type of
regularization of t-test. In the signiﬁcance analysis of microarrays
(SAM) (Tusher et al., 2001), a non-speciﬁc small constant is added
to all variance estimates so that they are not to be too small. In
Cyber-T (Baldi and Long, 2001), a posterior variance in Bayesian
framework is used for the variance estimation of a gene combining
a prior variance from neighboring genes and a data variance of the
gene. Empirical Bayes methods compensate for the small number
of replicates by combining information across arrays (Efron and
Raftery, 2001; Kendziorski et al., 2003; Maureen et al., 2006).
The Bayesian approaches have tried to improve the identiﬁcation
of differentially expressed genes by using information across other
genes having similar expression.

On the other hand, a very different approach was suggested by
Kim and Park (2004) to estimate the ‘natural’ variance of individual
genes using a large number of experiments performed previously.
This became possible with large public databases of microarray
experiments such as the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (Edgar
et al., 2002) and ArrayExpress (Brazma et al., 2003). This approach
has a natural strength over the Bayesian methods in that gene-
speciﬁc variance is estimated not from the expression of other genes
but from the prior values of expression of the same gene.

However, the GEO-adjusted method used the information in
GEO database without considering any information in experimental
data for estimating gene-speciﬁc variances. Moreover, the variance
estimate is non-speciﬁc to the experimental dataset. Expression
variance is not only gene-speciﬁc but also condition-speciﬁc. While
one may want to obtain an estimation of gene-speciﬁc variance
under certain condition that is comparable to that of the experimental
dataset, direct computation over the whole GEO database returns the
global variance rather than the variance within the desired condition.
Because GEO database is an aggregate of many experiments
across many different conditions, we cannot assume that a gene has a
single distribution across the whole GEO database. As demonstrated
in Figure 1, the distribution of expression of a gene in GEO database
may be composed of multiple distributions. Therefore, it makes more
sense to assume that a gene expression has a multi-distributional
structure in GEO database, instead of single compositional structure.
In the present study, we performed comparative study about
estimating the gene-speciﬁc and condition-adjusted variances of

 The Author(s) 2009. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[11:03 25/1/2010 Bioinformatics-btp685.tex]

Page: 486 486–492

Identiﬁcation of differentially expressed genes in small sized microarray data

Fig. 1. Examples about distributions of GEO-wide gene expression. Expression density plots were obtained from ∼1400 microarrays present in GEO database.
While the probe 1799_at seems to show uni-modal distribution, the probes 1737_s_at and 195_s_at seem to show bi- and tri-modal distributions, respectively.
Without application of the Gaussian mixture model, the density R function generated these bi- and tri-modal distribution plots. It may not be sensible to estimate
gene-speciﬁc variance assuming that a gene has a single expression distribution across GEO database. Using Gaussian mixture model, we decomposed the
distributions of 1737_s_at and 195_s_at into two and three Gaussian distributions, respectively. In the Affymetrix U95A platform, using Gaussian mixture
model, 6173 (48.9%) and 4384 (34.7%) among the 12 625 probes are modeled to have bi- and tri-modal distributions, respectively.

gene expression for two group comparisons in microarray data
having less than ﬁve samples in each group.

The Bayesian framework improves the previous GEO-adjusted
method (Kim and Park, 2004) using both reference and experiment
information. We found that GMixBayes outperforms the regularized
t-test and the GEO-adjusted methods in the identiﬁcation of
estimating prior variances from GEO database using Gaussian
mixture model, and then integrates the priors with the data variances
from differentially expression genes (DEGs) in gene expression
microarray studies. We propose GEO-MixtureBayesian method
(GMixBayes in short), the experimental data into posterior variances.
The Gaussian mixture model improves the prior variance estimation
from GEO database in terms of performance exploiting the multi-
distributional structure in GEO database.

2 METHODS
2.1 Datasets
We used two kinds of datasets, i.e. test and reference datasets. Test datasets
are used to compare various benchmark methods. The test datasets should
have two groups for comparison and enough number of replicates for each
group such that we can reliably make a ‘gold-standard’ DEG list and have
enough number of repeats for repeated microarray sampling.

Reference datasets are used to estimate gene-speciﬁc prior variances. They
are expected to have large quantity across various conditions such that we
can stably estimate the condition-adjuested variability of each gene.

In the present study, we used four test (Table 1) and 33 reference datasets
(see Supplementary Table 1). The test datasets includes the prostate and
Duchenne muscular dystrophy datasets (Haslett et al., 2002; Singh et al.,
2002) used in the study of Kim and Park (2004), and two more datasets
(Strunnikova et al., 2005; Stearman et al., 2005) having large number of
replicates for both comparison groups and with CEL ﬁles available. We
chose to analyze Affymetrix HG-U95A chip datasets such that we can
make more stable comparison and avoid the complexity of between-platform
comparisons. We chose reference datasets that have more than 10 replicates
and CEL ﬁles available throughout GEO database. In total, we obtained
33 datasets containing 1327 microarrays, which is three times as large as
that of 471 microarrays in the reference datasets of the study of Kim and
Park (2004). We normalized all datasets into a single matrix using the RMA
package (Bolstad et al., 2003).

Table 1. Summary of test datasets

Dataset

GEO ID

Replicatesa

Duchenne muscular dystrophy (Haslett

et al., 2002)

Macular degeneration and dermal ﬁbroblast

response to sublethal oxidative stress
(Strunnikova et al., 2005)

Pulmonary adenocarcinoma (Stearman

et al., 2005)

Prostate cancer (Singh et al., 2002)

GSE1004
GDS563
GSE1719
GDS963

GSE2514
GDS1650
NA/NAb

21 (10/11)

36 (18/18)

39 (19/20)

102 (50/52)

aNumbers of total (normal/disease) samples.
bData is not available in GEO and downloaded from author’s website.

2.2 Benchmark outline
For the purpose of comparison, we used ‘repeated sampling procedure’which
was used both by Pavlidis et al. (2003) and Kim and Park (2004). First, a
gold-standard DEG list was determined for each dataset by standard t-test
comparing all samples in the dataset and sorted the resultant DEGs in a
descending order by the absolute value of T-statistic. Second, a small number
of microarrays (n = 2–5) were sampled from each comparison group to obtain
DEGs by applying benchmark methods. For brevity, we use the same notation
‘NvN’ to denote a two-group comparison with N arrays versus N arrays
following Kim and Park (2004). The list of DEGs was compared to the gold-
standard list. We measured the performance of various methods as the number
of top K genes from the gold-standard list that were correctly returned by
the methods. This testing on sampled microarrays and comparison to gold-
standard lists was repeated. For reliable conclusion, the performances are
averaged over 500 repeats. In the present study, the sampling number ranged
from two to ﬁve.

2.3 Test statistics for differential expression
Test statistics appear in this study can be categorized into four groups. The
ﬁrst group consists of standard methods which have been conventionally
used in microarray study and do not consider reference datasets. This
group contains mean-fold, standard t-test and regularized t-test. The second
group consists of GEO-adjusted methods which replace the data variance
with the gene-speciﬁc variance estimated from GEO database. This group
contains previously proposed GEO-global test and -pooled test, and the

487

[11:03 25/1/2010 Bioinformatics-btp685.tex]

Page: 487 486–492

M.Kim et al.

newly proposed GEO-mixture test. The third are Bayesian methods which
use the posterior variance combining the data variance and the prior variance
from reference datasets. The fourth are hybrid methods which re-rank genes
based on the merged rank of two different methods. This scheme was
proposed by Kim and Park (2004) and claimed to have superior performance
when GEO-based methods are merged with regularized t-test. Note that the
hybrid methods are different from others in that they just vote and do not
calculate any actual statistics. In the followings, we list the formulas of the
six basic statistics. These cover all the basic forms and other statistics are
simple variants from these.

• Mean-fold (FMean)

µi1−µi2

(1)
where µi1 and µi2 are means for groups 1 and 2, respectively, for the
i-th gene. In log scale, this is equal to fold ratio which is often preferred
by biologists.

• Standard t-test (TStan)

µi1−µi2
(cid:1)
+ σ2
i2
n2

σ2
i1
n1

,

(2)

where n1 and n2 are the sample sizes in the groups 1 and 2, and σ2
i1
and σ2
i2 are the variance estimates in the groups 1 and 2, respectively,
for the i-th gene.

• Regularized t-test (TReg)

µi1−µi2
(cid:1)
+ σ2
σ+
i2
n2

σ2
i1
n1

r

(3)

σ2
r is the ﬁfth percentile of all variances of the other genes (Kim and
Park, 2004).

• GEO-global test (GGlobal)

µi1−µi2

(cid:2)

σGlobal,i

1
n1

+ 1
n2

• GEO-pooled test (GPooled)

µi1−µi2

(cid:2)

σPooled,i

1
n1

+ 1
n2

(4)

(5)

,

Global,i and σ2

where σ2
Pooled,i are the gene-speciﬁc variances for the i-th
gene, estimated by the global and pooled methods, respectively, from
GEO database (see Section 2.4 for details).

• GEO-mixtureBayesian test (GMixBayes)
µi1−µi2
+ σ2

σ2
MixPos,i1

(cid:1)

n1

MixPos,i2

n2

(6)

⎧⎪⎨
⎪⎩

(cid:3)
y∈M

σ2
Mixture

= 1|M|

(cid:7)

(cid:13)
k∈My

xyk−¯xy
ny−1

(cid:8)

⎫⎪⎬
⎪⎭,

(9)

Global and σ2

where σ2
Pooled are the estimates proposed by Kim and Park for
gene-speciﬁc variances derived from GEO database. In Equations (7) and
(8), D and j indicates the reference datasets and the number of the reference
datasets. Xjk is a gene expression value of the k-th gene. ¯x is the mean of the
k-th gene of the whole microarray samples of the reference datasets. ¯xj is the
mean of k-th gene of the j-th reference dataset. σ2
Mixture is the estimate newly
proposed in the present study, estimating variances from the microarray
samples re-grouped by Gaussian mixture model. In Equation (9), M and
y is the mixture distribution and the number of distributional components
in the mixture distribution, respectively. σ2
Mixture is a pooled variance of
the each compositional distribution of the mixture model. In our revised
Bayesian framework, these variance estimates are used as prior variance.
The information we need is not only the gene-speciﬁc global variance but
also how much the expression of a gene varies within the replicates under
certain condition, i.e. within-condition variance. Since the GEO database is
an aggregate of heterogeneous experiments under different conditions, what
σ2
Global measures is not condition-adjusted but the total variance, that is, the
sum of within and between condition variances. σ2
Pooled, which averages the
variances of datasets, also has the risk of measuring the variability between
conditions, but in a lesser degree because the heterogeneity of a dataset is
expected to be smaller than that of whole GEO database.

On the other hand, we decomposed the distribution of a gene in GEO
database into a number of Gaussian distributions, representing conditions
of the gene. Then we calculated σ2
Mixture by averaging the variances
of the Gaussian distributions. We found that σ2
Mixture was much smaller
than σ2
Mixture effectively excluded between-
condition variance. For the computation of Gaussian mixture model, we used
Mclust, an R package which uses the EM algorithm for mixture modeling and
the BIC criteria for model count determination (Fraley and Raftery, 1999).

Global, indirectly verifying that σ2

2.5 Bayesian framework for variance integration
Bayesian framework has been used for differential expression analysis of
microarray study (Baldi and Long, 2001; Gottardo et al., 2003). Previously,
the prior variance was estimated from the neighboring genes or ﬁxed to a non-
speciﬁc value. The GEO database, however, can provide natural estimates
of prior. We can estimate the prior of a gene using the prior GEO expression
values of the same gene instead of the expression values of other genes.
For Bayesian integration of the prior variance and the data variance, we use
the fomula by Baldi and Long (2001) that models log-expression values by
normal distributions, parameterized by corresponding means and variances
with hierarchical prior distributions.
= νPriorσ2

+(n−1)σ2

Prior

Data

.

(10)

σ2
Posterior

νPrior+n−2

Mixture,i and the data variance σ2
i

σ2
MixPos,i is the posteior variance for the i-th gene, calculated from
the prior variance σ2
in the Bayesian
framework. Please notice that while σ2
MixPos can adjusts to different
data, σ2
Pooled are non-speciﬁc to experimental data (see
Section 2.4 for the prior estimation and Section 2.5 for the Bayesian
integration).

Global and σ2

In essence, the posterior variance is represented as a weighted average of
prior variance and data variance. The parameter, κ = νPrior+n, determines
the degree of conﬁdence in the prior variance σ2
Prior versus the data variance
σ2
Data. Different posterior variances are derived from the same data variance
depending on the prior variances. In case of GMixBayes, σ2
MixPos is derived
when σ2

Mixture is used for prior.

2.4 Estimation of prior variances from reference

(cid:7)

⎧⎨
(cid:3)
(cid:3)
= 1
⎩
n−1
(cid:7)
(cid:13)
j∈D
k∈Dj
⎧⎪⎨
(cid:3)
k∈Dj
⎪⎩
j∈D

= 1|D|

⎫⎬
(cid:8)
xjk−¯x
⎭,
(cid:8)
⎫⎪⎬
xjk−¯xj
⎪⎭,
nj−1

datasets

σ2
Global

σ2
Pooled

488

3 RESULTS
3.1 Performance comparison
For the four test datasets, our proposed method, GMixBayes is
compared to the standard methods, FMean, TStan and TReg, and the
previous GEO-adjusted methods, GGlobal and GPooled. Sample sizes
were chosen from two to ﬁve, under which standard methods were
known to be ineffective (Pavlidis et al., 2003). This range was also
used by Kim and Park (2004).

(7)

(8)

[11:03 25/1/2010 Bioinformatics-btp685.tex]

Page: 488 486–492

Identiﬁcation of differentially expressed genes in small sized microarray data

Fig. 2. Performance comparison in four test datasets. Each graph shows the performances of the six methods for each test dataset. The x-axis represents ‘the
number of samples in comparison’. The y-axis represents ‘the number of gold-standard top 50 genes present in the testing top 50 genes’. Test methods are
denoted with single letters: FMean, F; TStan, S; TReg, R; GGlobal, G; GPooled, P; GMixBayes, B. Values are averaged over 500 replications.

Figure 2 demonstrates the
3.1.1 Comparison of each dataset
performance of the six test statistics for the four datasets. The
methods show relatively high performance for the Haslette’s dataset
and relatively low performance for the Singh’s dataset. This
variation is an expected one since the performance is dependent
not only on the test statistics but also on the characteristics of
the dataset such as the number of samples and the degrees of
within-group homogeneity and between-group separation. Despite
the variations, common tendencies in the performance curves are
well demonstrated with the different datasets. First, GMixBayes
shows the best performance in most of the comparisons (13 out
of 16 comparisons). Second, regularized t-test shows improved
performance than standard t-test. This conﬁrms the previous studies
of variance regularization. Third, the performance of the statistics
estimating variances from test datasets, TStan, TReg and GMixBayes
increases as the number of samples is increased. But the performance
of the statistics ignoring test dataset variances, FMean, GGlobal and
GPooled dose not increase as much as the increment of sample
size. Note that GMixBayes is the only method that uses both test
and reference datasets for gene-speciﬁc variance estimation, while
GGlobal and GPooled utilizes reference datasets only.

Figure 3 exhibits the summary of
3.1.2 Comparison summary
the performances in Figure 2. GMixBayes was the best performer
across all sample range, returning 17 and 37% more of top genes
than the second best FMean in 2v2 and 3v3 tests, respectively, and
13 and 3% more of top genes than the second best TReg in 4v4
and 5v5 tests, respectively. GGlobal and GPooled were better than
TStan and TReg in 2v2 test but their improvement in 2v2 was not
as large as to be comparable to TStan in 5v5 and TReg in 3v3, as
claimed in the Kim and Park’s study. In each dataset, the Kim and
Park’s GEO methods outperformed only in Stearman’s dataset where
the performances of GGlobal and GPooled in 2v2 were comparable
to TStan in 5v5 and TReg in 4v4. The detailed information about
the magnitude of improvement of GMixBayes is available in the
supplementary web site.

3.1.3 Reproducibility of the results There can be many possible
reasons why some of the performance improvements of Kim and
Park are not observed in our study. First of all, the results of Kim
and Park are only based on single test dataset, Singh’s dataset. As
can be seen in Figure 2, there are variations in performance among
test datasets. Thus it is probable that the result of Kim and Park

Fig. 3. Performance summary. The performances in Figure 2 are averaged.
Test methods are denoted with single letters: FMean, F; TStan, S; TReg, R;
GGlobal, G; GPooled, P; GMixBayes, B.

are dependent on the speciﬁc dataset. Second, the conﬁguration of
reference datasets, GEO database speciﬁcally, has changed. Kim and
Park used ∼500 microarrays from GEO for reference, while we used
∼1400 microarrays. This difference in reference datasets may affect
the performance of the test statistics, especially more for GPooled and
GGlobal which depend on reference datasets only. This may explain
the reason why we failed to replicate the reported performance
improvement of GPooled and GGlobal in Singh’s test dataset. The
list of the speciﬁc 500 datasets used as reference datasets in the
study of Kim and Park were not able to be reconstructed from
the current 1400 arrays simply because the information was not
available (personal communication with the authors). Although
TReg outperforms the Kim and Park’s GEO methods in general,
the opposite results were observed in 2v2 comparison. In 3v3
comparison, TReg was not superior to the Kim and Park’s GEO
methods with the Haslett dataset. We observed similar results with
increasing number of DEGs in the test datasets (see Supplementary
Material). These results indicated that the Kim and Park’s method
may outperform with small number of samples (n < 4).

489

[11:03 25/1/2010 Bioinformatics-btp685.tex]

Page: 489 486–492

M.Kim et al.

Fig. 4. Sources of improvement. Performance curves of test methods in four test datasets are shown. Dotted lines represent methods after Bayesian integration
and closed lines un-integrated versions. The x-axis represents the number of samples in each comparison group and y-axis represents the number of matched
top 50 genes to the gold-standard DEG list. Values are averaged over 500 replications. Test methods are denoted as: GGlobal, G; GPooled, P; GMixBayes in dotted
lines and GMixture in closed lines, M.

3.1.4 Comparison in hybrid method with regularized t-test
Another advantage of previous GEO-adjusted methods, GPooled and
GGlobal, is that they perform well when combined with TReg at
gene rank level. The hybrid method averaged 75% of the value of
the lower rank and 25% of the value of the higher rank to merge
ranks in TReg and the corresponding GEO-adjusted methods. This
75%/25% ratio was highly tuned empirically for better results in
the previous study (Kim and Park, 2004). In the present study using
the proposed 75%/25% ratio, GPooled and GGlobal could ﬁnd 52 and
75% more of the top genes, respectively, in hybrid use with TReg than
in single use (the percentages are averages over the four datasets).
The performance of GMixBayes, however, is little improved with
hybrid use with TReg. Speciﬁcally, its performance was improved by
13% in Haslette’s, 1% in Strunnikova’s, 2% in Stearmin’s and 1% in
Singh’s test datasets. This limited improvement in the hybrid scheme
with GMixBayes is possibly because GMixBayes already incorporates
the beneﬁt of TReg in the level of statistical calculation through the
Bayesian integration of test- and reference-dataset variances. There
might have been less room for improvement by adding information
from TReg at the level of gene ranks. Although their substantial
improvements by hybrid method, GGlobal and GPooled outperform
GMixBayes only in Stearmin’s test dataset (t-test, P < 0.05). In the
rest, GMixBayes outperformed signiﬁcantly (t-test, P < 0.05).

3.2 Sources of improvement
Here, higher performance of GMixBayes over GPooled and GGlobal
was well demonstrated in the four test datasets. GMixBayes is
modiﬁed from earlier GEO-adjusted methods in two aspects:
estimation of prior variance using Gaussian mixture model and
Bayesian integration of both testing and reference dataset variances.
To assess the individual contributions of the two modiﬁcations
for the performance improvement, we performed two additional
comparisons:

(1) Comparing GPooled and GGlobal to GMixture, an un-integrated

version of GMixBayes

(2) Comparing GMixBayes to the Bayesian version of GPooled and

GGlobal

In the above comparison, GMixture used the pooled variance of
mixture distributions of the reference datasets without using the
experimental dataset. The Bayesian version GPooled and GGlobal

490

was computed by substituting prior variance of equation (10) with
the σ2

Pooled and σ2

Global.

As demonstrated in Figure 4, both of our modiﬁcations improved
the performance. Bayesian integration improved the performance
of all methods in all test datasets. It improved more as increasing
number of samples were in test datasets, resulting steep performance
curves. This is because the more stable variance estimation of
test datasets was used for Bayesian integration. We also found
performance improvements when the mixture prior estimation is
used alone. In the three methods using the prior variance only,
GMixture outperforms GPooled and GGlobal in three out of four
test datasets. The improvements were constant across all sample
sizes because the sample size only affected the variance estimates
of test datasets which were not used for these prior-only methods.
The improving effects were additive when Bayesian integration and
mixture prior estimation were used together. This may be because
they incorporated different information in the steps of variance
calculation. The maximum performance was achieved when both
Bayesian integration and mixture prior were used.

3.3 The effect of other parameters
There are a number of parameters that may affect the results of the
present analysis. We evaluated the performance of the benchmark
statistics with the following different parameter set.

3.3.1 GEO change The change of reference datasets in GEO
database may affect the estimation. This may be in part the reason
why GGlobal and GPooled did not perform as well in the present
study as claimed in the previous one. To test whether our ﬁndings are
only speciﬁc to current state of GEO, we compared the performance
of GMixBayes, GGlobal and GPooled across various states of GEO
database (Fig. 5). By means of random-sampling from GEO, we
compared the methods using reference datasets with 500–1200
arrays. For reliability, we repeated the computation 100 times for
each sample size. Five hundred is the same size to the study of Kim
and Park, though the composition is not identical. The maximum
size that we could produce enough replications from the total of
1400 microarrays was 1200. Across all conditions, we found that
GMixBayes consistently outperformed both GGlobal and GPooled.
Therefore, we believe that the ﬁndings are not limited to the speciﬁc
state of reference datasets that GMixBayes may outperform in the
future composition of GEO.

[11:03 25/1/2010 Bioinformatics-btp685.tex]

Page: 490 486–492

Identiﬁcation of differentially expressed genes in small sized microarray data

Fig. 5. GEO change. Graph shows the performances of the three GEO-adjusted methods: GGlobal, GPooled, GMixBayes, across different numbers of microarrays
(the x-axis) in the reference datasets and different number of samples for estimating gene-speciﬁc variances. GMixture consistently outperformed the other two
methods. Black box denotes GMixBayes, grey box GPooled and white box GGlobal. The x-axis represents the number of microarrays in the reference dataset and
y-axis represents the number of matched top 50 genes to the gold-standard DEG list.

In this study, the performance of test method is
3.3.2 Top K genes
measured as the number of genes common between top 50 in gold-
standard DEG list and the test DEG list. Depending on the number
of top K genes, the performance can change. We reproduced the
results under other top K genes and found that our results are not
signiﬁcantly affected by K (see Supplementary Material).

the prior
3.3.3 Prior conﬁdence
conﬁdence parameter should be determined by user. We used κ = 6
in this study. Similar results were obtained in other κ values ranging
from 6 to 15 (see Supplementary Material).

In Bayesian integration,

4 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this analysis, we improved identiﬁcation of differentially
expressed genes in datasets having a small number of samples by
obtaining prior variance from mixture modeling of microrarray data
in the public database.

The success of our methods seemed to come from estimation
of prior variances using mixture modeling. The Baldi’s Bayesian
framework performs well in the microarray data having small
samples. This is re-validated in our analysis (Fig. 4). Instead
of estimating prior variance based on uni-modal distribution, we
selected prior variance from the multi-modal mixture model. As
shown in Figure 1, a large number of genes had bi- or tri-modal
distributions in their expression values. Simple pooled variances of
such genes are likely to be larger than that of a single density of the
mixture model because the pooled variance is equivalent to the sum
of the variances from each component of the mixture model. This
is especially the case with the Kim and Park’s method. Therefore,
the prior variances were tended to be small and it inﬂuenced the
posterior variances to be small in the Bayesian estimation. This
might contribute to the better performance of our approach because
test statistics will increase as the variance decreases with a same
mean difference obtained from the experimental data. This may be
the same reason for outperforming the regularized t-test.

The number of data is still increasing in public microarray data
repositories. With the success of the microarray application in
genomic research, more investigators are willing to use microarray
experiment. However, the number of samples and cost are the main
obstacles to the application of microarray. This research provided a

candidate solution for the analysis of small sample-sized data using
public repositories.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was supported by a grant from the Ministry of Education,
Science and Technology, Republic of Korea (M20706000020-
07M0600-02010) and in part by a grant of the Korea Health 21 R&D
Project, Ministry of Health, Welfare and Family Affairs, Republic
of Korea (0405-BC02-0604-0004). S.B.C’s educational training was
supported by a grant from the Ministry of Education, Science and
Technology, Republic of Korea (M10729070001-07N2907-00110).

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Baldi,P. and Long,A.D. (2001) A Bayesian framework for the analysis of microarray
expression data: regularized t -test and statistical inferences of gene changes.
Bioinformatics, 17, 509–519.

Bolstad,B.M. et al. (2003) A comparison of normalization methods for high density
oligonucleotide array data based on bias and variance. Bioinformatics, 19, 185–193.
Brazma,A. et al. (2003) ArrayExpress–a public repository for microarray gene

expression data at the EBI. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 68–71.

Edgar,R. et al. (2002) Gene Expression Omnibus: NCBI gene expression and

hybridization array data repository. Nucleic Acids Res., 30, 207–210.

Efron,B. and Tibshirani,R. (2002) Empirical bayes methods and false discovery rates

for microarrays. Genet. Epidemiol., 23, 70–86.

Fraley,C. and Raftery.A E. (1999) MCLUST: software for model-based cluster analysis.

J. Classif., 16, 297–306

Gottardo,R. et al. (2003) Statistical analysis of microarray data a Bayesian approach.

Biostatistics, 4, 577–620.

Haslett,J.N. et al. (2002) Gene expression comparison of biopsies from Duchenne
muscular dystrophy (DMD) and normal skeletal muscle. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
99, 15000–15005.

Hwang,D. et al. (2002) Determination of minimum sample size and discriminatory

expression patterns in microarray data. Bioinformatics, 18, 1184–1193.

Kendziorski,C.M. et al. (2003) On parametric empirical Bayes methods for comparing
multiple groups using replicated gene expression proﬁles. Stat. Med., 22,
3899–3914.

Kim,R.D. and Park,P.J. (2004) Improving identiﬁcation of differentially expressed genes
in microarray studies using information from public databases. Genome Biol., 5,
R70.

Maureen,A.S. et al. (2006) Intensity-based hierarchical Bayes method improves testing
for differentially expressed genes in microarray experiments. BMC bioinformatics,
19, 538.

491

[11:03 25/1/2010 Bioinformatics-btp685.tex]

Page: 491 486–492

M.Kim et al.

Pavlidis,P. et al. (2003) The effect of replication on gene expression microarray

experiments. Bioinformatics, 19, 1620–1627.

Singh,D. et al. (2002) Gene expression correlates of clinical prostate cancer behavior.

Cancer Cell, 1, 203–209.

Stearman,R.S. et al. (2005) Analysis of orthologous gene expression between human
pulmonary adenocarcinoma and a carcinogen-induced murine model. Am. J. Pathol.,
167, 1763–1775.

Strunnikova,N. et al. (2005) Differences in gene expression proﬁles in dermal ﬁbroblasts
from control and patients with age-related macular degeneration elicited by
oxidative injury. Free Radic. Biol. Med., 39, 781–796.

Tusher,V.G. et al. (2001) Signiﬁcance analysis of microarrays applied to the ionizing

radiation response. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 5116–5121.

492

[11:03 25/1/2010 Bioinformatics-btp685.tex]

Page: 492 486–492

