BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 26 no. 4 2010, pages 578–579

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp678

Genetics and population analysis
Visualizing SNP statistics in the context of linkage disequilibrium
using LD-Plus
William S. Bush, Scott M. Dudek and Marylyn D. Ritchie∗

Departments of Molecular Physiology & Biophysics and Biomedical Informatics, Center for Human Genetics
Research, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA
Received on July 30, 2009; revised on November 28, 2009; accepted on December 7, 2009

Associate Editor: Jeffrey Barrett

ABSTRACT
Summary: Often in human genetic analysis, multiple tables of single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) statistics are shown alongside a
Haploview style correlation plot. Readers are then asked to make
inferences that incorporate knowledge across these multiple sets of
results. To better facilitate a collective understanding of all available
data, we developed a Ruby-based web application, LD-Plus, to
generate ﬁgures that simultaneously display physical
location of
SNPs, binary SNP attributes (such as coding/non-coding or presence
on genotyping platforms), common haplotypes and their frequencies
and continuously scaled values (such as Fst, minor allele frequency,
genotyping efﬁciency or P-values), all in the context of the D(cid:2) and r2
linkage disequilibrium structures. Combining these results into one
comprehensive ﬁgure reduces dereferencing between ﬁgures and
tables, and can provide unique insights into genetic features that are
not clearly seen when results are partitioned across multiple ﬁgures
and tables.
Availability:
LD-Plus is freely available for non-commercial
research institutions. For full details see http://chgr.mc.vanderbilt
.edu/ritchielab/ldplus.
Contact:

ritchie@chgr.mc.vanderbilt.edu

1 INTRODUCTION
After completing the ﬁrst phase of the International HapMap Project,
triangular correlation plots implemented in Haploview software
(Barrett et al., 2005) have become a ubiquitous component of
population-based genetic analysis reports. These plots provide a
nice visualization of how single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
travel together in human subpopulations and samples due to linkage
disequilibrium (LD). Often, haplotype block structure and haplotype
frequency information can be helpful in interpreting other statistical
results, such as Hardy–Weinberg statistics, Wright’s Fst, population-
speciﬁc allele frequency differences or association P-values. The
need for a visualization tool that can simultaneously display all
these types of data can be readily seen in various human genetics
publications.

When characterizing population-based genetic differences in
genes of phenotypic interest, a bevy of analyses are often conducted
to explore potential differences in allele frequency and haplotype
structure (and associated ancestral recombination events), and

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

examine evidence of population divergence. These statistics are
often reported separately, indexed by reference SNP (RS) number, as
seen in (Sile et al., 2008). Determining if signiﬁcant allele frequency
differences occur within a haplotype block, or due to haplotype block
structure, requires visually dereferencing SNPs by RS number, and
ﬁnding the haplotype structure on a separate ﬁgure.

Genome-wide association studies and ﬁne-mapping studies
following linkage analysis also often display regional association
statistics in the context of LD. In some cases, this is achieved by
aligning two disjoint ﬁgures (see Fig. 1 from Gudmundsson et al.,
2009), or by displaying data in terms of physical position, which does
not always allow easy interpretation. Also, association P-values are
rarely presented in the context of other quality control data, such
as Hardy–Weinberg statistics, genotyping efﬁciency, minor allele
frequency, quality scores and other relevant data that can aid the
interpretation of association test statistics.

To address these issues, we developed LD-Plus as a simple
visualization tool for displaying and relating discrete and continuous
SNP attributes to haplotype blocks, haplotypes and genomic features
simultaneously.

2 DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
LD-Plus requires a minimum of two ﬁles: a Haploview formatted
PED ﬁle and the marker information ﬁle (or map ﬁle). Running LD-
Plus with this minimal set of input ﬁles will generate a Haploview
style correlation plot. This LD plot contains numerous tracks as
described below. These additional annotation ﬁles can be readily
created using a spreadsheet application or basic text editor.

(1) Physical genome track. SNPs identiﬁed by RS number or
other identiﬁer are shown in relative physical distance.
Regions of the genome, such as exons or functional elements,
can be annotated and highlighted in physical distance.
Features are simply input as a text ﬁle with feature labels
and base-pair ranges.

(2) SNP attributes track. Binary SNP (yes/no) attributes are
highlighted, such as inclusion on a genotyping platform or
non-synonymous SNPs. SNP attributes are input as a text ﬁle
with 0/1 values for each attribute column.

(3) Haplotypes track. Within each speciﬁed haplotype block,
haplotype frequencies are shown as horizontal bar graphs,
overlaid with the alleles that constitute the haplotype.

 The Author(s) 2010. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[11:10 4/2/2010 Bioinformatics-btp678.tex]

Page: 578 578–579

Visualizing SNP statistics

ﬁle with SNP ID and continuous values for each statistic. Axis
ranges are speciﬁed in the table header.

(5) LD track. Haploview style LD plots showing both D

and r2
are shown with deﬁned haplotype blocks. SNPs within the
same LD block are shaded in gray throughout the plot to
provide the context of LD for other tracks.

(cid:2)

Documentation on how to properly format
is
available at the web address. LD-Plus was developed using the
Ruby programming language and the RMagick Ruby Vector
Graphics library, and uses Haploview procedures to generate LD
statistics.

input ﬁles

3 CONCLUSION
LD-Plus complements the common Haploview style plot by
providing additional statistical context to LD statistics. Multiple
dimensions of genomic data are displayed in a manner allowing easy
comparison and evaluation of SNP relationships. Haplotype block
boundaries are carried throughout the ﬁgure, providing haplotype
context to other SNP statistics. This ﬁgure design can effectively
represent nearly all of the information contained in the 10 ﬁgures
and tables in (Sile et al., 2008) using only four ﬁgures (one for each
ethnicity).

LD-Plus nicely complements other visualization tools such as the
UCSC browser (Karolchik et al., 2008) and SNAP (Johnson et al.,
2008) that relate LD statistics to physical distance. Displaying LD
and SNP-based statistics in terms of physical position can at times be
difﬁcult, as the close proximity of some SNPs may require zooming
to resolve statistical tracks. LD-Plus provides an equidistant display
of SNP statistics and LD values and overlays haplotype block and
frequency information.

Using LD-Plus, an investigator could recognize that a strongly
associated SNP occurs in an LD block with haplotypes that contain
a common coding variant or that a signiﬁcant SNP is in an LD
block that spans a regulatory element. The comprehensive ﬁgures
generated by LD-Plus provide a unique perspective for multiple SNP
statistics often collected in numerous genetic studies, and help to
condense the wealth of data generated into a familiar, interpretable
format.

Funding: National Institutes of Health (HL65962 and LM010040).

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Barrett,J.C. et al. (2005) Haploview: analysis and visualization of LD and haplotype

maps. Bioinformatics, 21, 263–265.

Bush,W. et al. (2009) Genetic variation in the rhythmonome: ethnic variation and
haplotype structure in candidate genes for arrhythmias. Pharmacogenomics, 10,
1043–1053.

Gudmundsson,J. et al. (2009) Common variants on 9q22.33 and 14q13.3 predispose to

thyroid cancer in European populations. Nat. Genet., 41, 460–464.

Johnson,A.D. et al. (2008) SNAP: a web-based tool for identiﬁcation and annotation

of proxy SNPs using HapMap. Bioinformatics, 24, 2938–2939.

Karolchik,D. et al. (2008) The UCSC Genome Browser Database: 2008 update. Nucleic

Acids Res., 36, D773–D779.

Sile,S. et al. (2008) Haplotype diversity in four genes (CLCNKA, CLCNKB, BSND,

NEDD4L) involved in renal salt reabsorption. Hum. Hered., 65, 33–46.

579

Fig. 1. LD-Plus ﬁgure of SNPs in KCNH2 of an African–American sample.
Physical position of SNPs in the genome is displayed (1). Annotation of
binary SNP characteristics is shown (in this example, inclusion in HapMap
data and various genotyping platforms) (2). Haplotypes and haplotype
frequencies are shown (3) for each deﬁned haplotype block, and block
boundaries are shaded throughout
the ﬁgure to allow easy reference.
Continuous SNP characteristics such as Fst, exact test statistics, genotyping
efﬁciency, etc. are shown as line graphs (4). Haploview style LD plots in
and r2 are shown, with deﬁned haplotype blocks outlined in black
both D
(5). These data are based on 98 Coriell DNA samples, genotyped at 18 SNPs
across the KCNH2 gene region (Bush et al., 2009).

(cid:2)

Haplotypes are input with the starting SNP ID, haplotype
base-pairs and frequency.

(4) Statistics track. Continuously scaled variables, such as log
P-values, minor allele frequencies, or genotyping efﬁciency
are plotted as line graphs. SNP statistics are input as a text

[11:10 4/2/2010 Bioinformatics-btp678.tex]

Page: 579 578–579

