BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 26 no. 24 2010, pages 3125–3126

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq588

Genome analysis
Interactive microbial genome visualization with GView
Aaron Petkau1,2, Matthew Stuart-Edwards1,2, Paul Stothard3
and Gary Van Domselaar1,2,∗
1National Microbiology Laboratory – Public Health Agency of Canada, 1015 Arlington Street, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
R3E 3R2, Canada, 2Department of Computer Science, University of Manitoba, R3T 2N2, Canada and 3Department
of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2C8
Associate Editor: Alfonso Valencia

Advance Access publication October 17, 2010

ABSTRACT
Summary: GView is a Java application for viewing and examining
prokaryotic genomes in a circular or linear context.
It accepts
standard sequence ﬁle formats and an optional style speciﬁcation
ﬁle to generate customizable, publication quality genome maps in
bitmap and scalable vector graphics formats. GView features an
interactive pan-and-zoom interface, a command-line interface for
incorporation in genome analysis pipelines, and a public Application
Programming Interface for incorporation in other Java applications.
Availability: GView is a freely available application licensed under the
GNU Public License. The application, source code, documentation,
ﬁle speciﬁcations, tutorials and image galleries are available at
http://gview.ca
Contact: gary.van.domselaar@phac-aspc.gc.ca

Received on July 26, 2010; revised on September 28, 2010; accepted
on October 13, 2010

it

that

1 INTRODUCTION
The commercial
introduction of next-generation sequencing
technology has reduced the time and expense of genome sequencing
to such an extent
is now possible for virtually any
microbiology lab to generate genome sequences for the microor-
ganisms that they study. Visualizing the genomic features contained
in these sequences is important to aid biologists in understanding
the genetic basis of microbial traits, and to convey this information
to others. A number of software packages already exist for this
purpose (Supplementary Table 1). Early software packages like
GenomePlot (Gibson and Smith, 2003) and GenoMap (Sato and
Ehira, 2003) generate circular genome maps in bitmap (PNG,
JPG) formats, but do not support standard sequence ﬁle formats
and have limited customizability. CGView (Stothard and Wishart,
2005) and Circos (Krzywinski et al., 2009) can generate very
high quality, highly customizable circular maps in bitmap and
scalable vector graphics (SVG) formats, and can be incorporated in
pipelines, but have limited interactivity, and like their predecessors,
require custom input formats. DNAPlotter (Carver et al., 2009)
generates interactive, high quality, customizable circular and linear
maps, but does not support SVG image output, and cannot save
the customizations applied to a genome map for later use. The
motivation behind GView is to provide in a single application the

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

best features of all these microbial genome viewing packages: ease-
of-use; customizability; interactivity; ability to generate circular
and linear maps; ability to read standard sequence ﬁle formats;
ready incorporation in pipelines and third-party applications; and the
ability to generate aesthetically pleasing, publication quality image
output.

2 IMPLEMENTATION
GView is a complete rewrite of the CGView Java package that
preserves the best features of the original application. Genome
features and feature labels are displayed in tracks above and below
the genome backbone. Graphs can be generated to display feature-
level properties (e.g. BLAST atlases) or sequence-level properties
(e.g. GC content, GC skew). Optional feature legends can be
displayed inline with the map image or as a separate image. Maps
can be output in bitmap (PNG, JPG) or vector (SVG) formats for
use in web pages and publications, or for additional customization
in image editing programs (Fig. 1).

GView maintains support for pipelining applications via a
command-line interface with options to deﬁne image dimensions,
zoom level and a subregion of the map on which to centre the display.
The Application Programming Interface (API) has been substantially
reworked to make incorporation in third party Java programs simpler
and more straightforward. The new API includes additional support
for making selections to the features, tracks and regions of the map.
GView also contains substantial new functionality relative to the
original CGView. Genome maps can now be generated with circular
or linear layouts. A ‘wrapped’ linear layout, similar to that available
in DNAPlotter, is planned for a future release. Dynamic panning and
zooming allows direct interaction with the map via familiar keyboard
and mouse controls, and is useful to quickly navigate to biologically
interesting subregions of the map for detailed exploration. To aid in
navigating maps at high zoom levels, an optional ‘bird’s eye view’
is available that displays and adjusts the current view in the context
of the entire genome map. A new feature label placing algorithm
keeps label positions stable while zooming in and out of the map
(Been, 2006).

File compatibility has been improved considerably compared to
CGView. GView incorporates the BioJava libraries (Holland et al.,
2008) to read common genome sequence ﬁle formats (EMBL,
GFF, Genbank). Backwards compatibility is maintained with the
original CGView XML to customize the appearance of the genome
map. In addition, GView introduces a new style speciﬁcation ﬁle
format—termed ‘Genome Style Sheet’ (GSS)—designed to make

 The Author(s) 2010. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[12:41 18/11/2010 Bioinformatics-btq588.tex]

Page: 3125 3125–3126

A.Petkau et al.

A

B

Fig. 1. (A) A circular genome plot for Roseobacter dentriﬁcans with tracks showing genes on forward and reverse strands, COG categories, GC skew and
automatically generated labels. (B) A linear view of a subregion from (A).

genome map customization easier for biologists without computer
programming backgrounds and less cumbersome than most GUI-
based style customization interfaces. Based on the Cascading Style
Sheet speciﬁcation already in widespread use for applying style
information to HTML documents, the GSS speciﬁcation provides
a clean separation of content and style, thus a single GSS ﬁle can
be used to apply a common style to a set of genome sequences
and associated graphs. The GSS format supports the arbitrary
grouping of the various map elements into sets, and styles can
be quickly applied to that set. By combining this grouping ability
with the ability to operate on the feature keys, speciﬁers, and
genome coordinates contained in the genome sequence ﬁle (and
graph data ﬁles), the GSS format provides a highly compact, intuitive
and powerful style application ability while retaining the high
customizability of the original CGView XML.

Funding: Canada’s National Microbiology Laboratory.

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Been,K. (2006) Dynamic map labeling. IEEE Trans. Visual. Comp. Graph., 12, 773–780.
Carver,T. et al. (2009) DNAPlotter: circular and linear interactive genome visualization.

Bioinformatics, 25, 119–120.

Gibson,R. and Smith,D.R. (2003) Genome visualization made fast and simple.

Bioinformatics, 19, 1449–1450.

Holland,R.C. et al. (2008) BioJava: an open-source framework for bioinformatics.

Bioinformatics, 24, 2096–2097.

Krzywinski,M. et al. (2009) Circos: an information aesthetic for comparative genomics.

Genome Res., 19, 1639–1645.

Sato,N. and Ehira,S. (2003) GenoMap, a circular genome data viewer. Bioinformatics,

19, 1583–1584.

Stothard,P. and Wishart,D.S. (2005) Circular genome visualization and exploration

using CGView. Bioinformatics, 21, 537–539.

3126

[12:41 18/11/2010 Bioinformatics-btq588.tex]

Page: 3126 3125–3126

