BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 27 no. 1 2011, pages 130–131

doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq614

Sequence analysis
SAMStat: monitoring biases in next generation sequencing data
Timo Lassmann∗, Yoshihide Hayashizaki and Carsten O. Daub

Advance Access publication November 18, 2010

Omics Science Center, Riken Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan
Associate Editor: Martin Bishop

(SAM)

ABSTRACT
Motivation: The sequence alignment/map format
is a
commonly used format to store the alignments between millions
of short reads and a reference genome. Often certain positions
within the reads are inherently more likely to contain errors due
to the protocols used to prepare the samples. Such biases can
have adverse effects on both mapping rate and accuracy. To
understand the relationship between potential protocol biases and
poor mapping we wrote SAMstat, a simple C program plotting
nucleotide overrepresentation and other statistics in mapped and
unmapped reads in a concise html page. Collecting such statistics
also makes it easy to highlight problems in the data processing and
enables non-experts to track data quality over time.
Results: We demonstrate that studying sequence features in
mapped data can be used to identify biases particular to one
sequencing protocol. Once identiﬁed, such biases can be considered
in the downstream analysis or even be removed by read trimming or
ﬁltering techniques.
Availability: SAMStat is open source and freely available as a C
program running on all Unix-compatible platforms. The source code
is available from http://samstat.sourceforge.net.
Contact: timolassmann@gmail.com

Received on June 20, 2010; revised on October 28, 2010; accepted
on October 29, 2010

1 INTRODUCTION
Next generation sequencing is being applied to understand
individual variation,
the RNA output of a cell and epigenetic
regulation. Not surprisingly, the mapping of short reads to the
genome has received a lot of attention with over 30 programs
published to date [see Trapnell and Salzberg (2009) for a review
of the most commonly used approaches]. Nevertheless, commonly
a noticeable fraction of reads remains unmatched to the reference
genome in each experiment. One possibility is that these reads
simply represent the fraction of reads containing more sequencing
errors in the form of mismatches, insertions or deletions than the
programs can handle. Alternatively, it is conceivable that these reads
contain contaminants and therefore do not map to the expected
reference sequence. Finally, the unmapped reads may represent
novel splice junctions or genomic regions absent from the reference
assembly. Understanding the reason behind obtaining unmapped
reads is clearly of interest.

Mapping programs like MAQ (Li et al., 2008) and BWA
(Li and Durbin, 2009) report mapping qualities allowing for
further investigation. We wrote SAMstat to contrast properties

∗

To whom correspondence should be addressed.

Table 1. Overview of SAMstat output

Reported statistics

Mapping ratea
Read length distribution
Nucleotide composition
Mean base quality at each read position
Overrepresented 10mers
Overrepresented dinucleotides along read
Mismatch, insertion and deletion proﬁlea

aOnly reported for SAM ﬁles.

of unmapped, poorly mapped and accurately mapped reads to
understand whether particular properties of the reads inﬂuence the
mapping accuracy. As the name suggests, our program is designed
to work mainly with SAM/BAM ﬁles (Li et al., 2009) but also not
only can be used to visualize nucleotide composition and other basic
statistics of fasta and fastq (Cock et al., 2009) ﬁles.

2 METHODS
SAMStat automatically recognizes the input ﬁles as either fasta, fastq, SAM
or BAM and reports several basic properties of the sequences as listed
in Table 1. Multiple input ﬁles can be given for batch processing. For
each dataset, the output consists of a single html5 page containing several
plots allowing non-specialists to visually inspect the results. Naturally, the
html5 pages can be viewed both on- and off-line and easily be stored
for future reference. All properties are plotted separately for different
mapping quality intervals if those are present in the input ﬁle. For example,
mismatch proﬁles are given for high-and low-quality alignments allowing
users to verify whether poorly mapped reads contain a speciﬁc collection
of mismatches. The latter may represent untrimmed linkers in a subset of
reads. Dinucleotide overrepresentation is calculated as described by Frith
et al. (2008). Overrepresented 10mers are calculated by comparing the
frequency of 10mer within a mapping quality interval compared with the
overall frequency of the 10mer.

3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
To demonstrate how SAMStat can be used to visualize mapping
properties of a next generation datasets, we used data from a
recently published transcriptome study (Plessy et al., 2010); (DDBJ
(cid:2)
short read archive: DRA000169). We mapped all 24 million 5
reads to the human genome (GRCh37/hg19 assembly) using BWA
(Li and Durbin, 2009) with default parameters. SAMStat parsed the
alignment information in ∼3 min which is comparable to the 2 min
it takes to copy the SAM ﬁle from one directory to another. The
majority of reads can be mapped with very high conﬁdence (Fig. 1a).
When inspecting the mismatch error proﬁles, we noticed that there

 The Author(s) 2010. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

[11:38 2/12/2010 Bioinformatics-btq614.tex]

Page: 130 130–131

SAMStat: monitoring biases in next generation sequencing data

(cid:2)
5
added G’s which in turn pose a problem to the mapping. For
example, at the lowest mapping quality (Fig. 1e), there are frequent
mismatches involving G’s at positions one, two and to a lesser extent
until position ﬁve while in high-quality alignments the mismatches
are conﬁned to the ﬁrst position of the reads (Fig. 1b).

Alongside the mismatch proﬁles SAMstat gives a table listing the
percentages of each dinucleotide at each position of the reads split
up by mapping quality intervals (Fig. 1f). For the present dataset,
60.4% of unmapped reads start with ‘GG’ and 10.1 percent contain a
‘GG’ at position 4. Evidently, 5
G residues are added during library
preparation and the start positions of mappings should be adjusted
accordingly.

(cid:2)

SAMStat is ideally suited to deal with the ever increasing amounts
of data from second-and third-generation sequencing projects.
Speciﬁc applications include the veriﬁcation and quality control
of processing pipelines, the tracking of data quality over time and
the visualization of data properties derived from new protocols and
approaches which in turn often leads to novel insights.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank the reviewers for constructive suggestions.

Funding: Research Grant for the RIKEN Omics Science Center from
the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology
of the Japanese Government (MEXT) to Y.H.

Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES
Carninci,C. et al. (2006) Genome-wide analysis of mammalian promoter architecture

and evolution. Nat. Genet., 38, 626–635.

Cock,P.J. et al. (2009) The Sanger FASTQ ﬁle format for sequences with quality scores,

and the Solexa/Illumina FASTQ variants. Nucleic Acids Res., 38, 1767–1771.

Frith,M.C. et al. (2008) A code for transcription initiation in mammalian genomes.

Genome Res., 18, 1–12.

Li,H. and Durbin,R. (2009) Fast and Accurate Short Read Alignment with Burrows-

Wheeler Transform. Bioinformatics, 25, 1754–1760.

Li,H. et al. (2008) Mapping short DNA sequencing reads and calling variants using

mapping quality scores. Genome Res., 18, 1851–1858.

Li,H. et al. (2009) The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. Bioinformatics,

25, 2078–2079.

Plessy,C. et al. (2010) Linking promoters to functional transcripts in small samples with

nanoCAGE and CAGEscan. Nat. Methods, 7, 528–534.

Trapnell,C. and Salzberg,S.L. (2009) How to map billions of short reads onto genomes.

Nat. Biotechnol., 27, 455–457.

Fig. 1. A selection of SAMStat’s html output. (a) Mapping statistics. More
than half of the reads are mapped with a high mapping accuracy (red) while
9.9% of the reads remain unmapped (black). (b) Barcharts showing the
distribution of mismatches and insertions along the read for alignments with
the highest mapping accuracy [shown in red in (a)]. The colors indicate
the mismatched nucleotides found in the read or the nucleotides inserted
into the read. (c,d and e) Frequency of mismatches at the start of reads
−2≤ P <0.5 and 0.5≤ P <1,
with mapping accuracies 1e
respectively (shown in orange, yellow and blue in panel a). The fraction of
mismatches involving G’s at position 2–5 increases. (f) Percentage of ‘GG’
dinucleotides at positions 1–5 in reads split up by mapping quality intervals.
The background color highlights large percentages. The ﬁrst and last row for
nucleotides ‘GT’ and ‘GC’ are shown for comparison.

−3≤ P <1e

−2, 1e

are many mismatches involving a guanine residue at the very start
of many reads (yellow bars in Fig. 1b–e). These 5
added guanine
residues are known to originate from the reverse transcriptase step
in preparing the cDNAs (Carninci et al., 2006). When comparing
the mismatch proﬁles for high (Fig. 1b) to low-quality alignments
(Fig. 1e), it is clear that a proportion of reads contain multiple

(cid:2)

[11:38 2/12/2010 Bioinformatics-btq614.tex]

Page: 131 130–131

131

