BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER

Vol. 29 no. 23 2013, pages 3007–3013
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt517

Sequence analysis

Advance Access publication August 31, 2013

Adjusting scoring matrices to correct overextended alignments
Lauren J. Mills1 and William R. Pearson2,*
1Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology and 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA
Associate Editor: John Hancock

ABSTRACT
Motivation: Sequence similarity searches performed with BLAST,
SSEARCH and FASTA achieve high sensitivity by using scoring matri-
ces (e.g. BLOSUM62) that target low identity (533%) alignments.
Although such scoring matrices can effectively identify distant homo-
logs, they can also produce local alignments that extend beyond the
homologous regions.
Results: We measured local alignment start/stop boundary accuracy
using a set of queries where the correct alignment boundaries were
known, and found that 7% of BLASTP and 8% of SSEARCH alignment
boundaries were overextended. Overextended alignments include
non-homologous sequences; they occur most frequently between se-
quences that are more closely related (433% identity). Adjusting the
scoring matrix to reflect the identity of the homologous sequence can
correct higher identity overextended alignment boundaries. In add-
ition, the scoring matrix that produced a correct alignment could be
reliably predicted based on the sequence identity seen in the original
BLOSUM62 alignment. Realigning with the predicted scoring matrix
corrected 37% of all overextended alignments, resulting in more
correct alignments than using BLOSUM62 alone.
Availability: RefProtDom2 (RPD2) sequences and the FASTA software
are available from http://faculty.virginia.edu/wrpearson/fasta.
Contact: wrp@virginia.edu

Received on July 12, 2013; revised on August 28, 2013; accepted on
August 29, 2013

1 INTRODUCTION

Sequence similarity search algorithms are used to identify evolu-
tionary homologs and to generate hypotheses for the function of
unknown proteins. These algorithms assign homology between
sequences achieving statistically significant similarity scores with
high fidelity, even between highly divergent sequences sharing
low similarity (Brenner et al., 1998; Pearson, 1995; Pearson
and Sierk, 2005). However, the same methodology that provides
for the sensitive identification of homology at low identity can
also lead to alignments that include non-homologous sequence
adjacent to, or between, higher identity homologous sequences
(Gonzalez and Pearson, 2010a).

Homologous overextension was first identified as a source of
error during iterative similarity searches (Gonzalez and Pearson,
2010a). Overextension occurs when alignments extend past
the boundaries of the homologous region in the library, query
or both sequences, leading to the inclusion of non-homologous
sequence
inclusion of

in an alignment

(Fig. 1). The

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.

non-homologous sequence has been identified in alignments
between highly identical DNA sequences (Chao et al., 1993)
and has been termed the ‘mosaic effect’ (Arslan et al., 2001).

Overextension occurs because local sequence alignment bound-
aries depend on the scoring matrix. The popular BLASTP
(Altschul et al., 1997) tool, along with other sequence alignment
tools (e.g. SSEARCH and FASTA; Pearson, 2000), creates local
alignments between similar sequences using scoring matrices.
Scoring matrices assign a similarity score to each pair of aligned
amino acids based on the probability that the amino acid tran-
sition has occurred more often through evolution than by chance.
Amino acid replacements that are common through evolution
are assigned high similarity scores, whereas rare replacements
are assigned negative scores. Scoring matrices have an implicit
evolutionary model, which allows different matrices to target dif-
ferent evolutionary distances (Altschul, 1991; Dayhoff et al.,
1978; Henikoff and Henikoff, 1992; Muller et al., 2002). Scoring
matrices that target long evolutionary times (deep scoring matri-
ces) allow more amino acid substitutions and gaps, whereas shal-
lower matrices favor higher sequence identity and have higher
gap penalties. The scoring matrix dictates the local alignment
boundaries; increasing or decreasing the length of the optimal
local alignment reduces the total alignment score. Likewise, chan-
ging the scoring matrix can result in a different alignment.

Ideally, a local alignment of homologous domains in different
sequence contexts will align every residue in the homologous
region, and no residues outside the domain boundaries, so that
the alignment boundaries reflect the domain boundaries. Overex-
tended alignments include additional sequence from outside the
homologous domain boundaries. For example, in Figure 1 arti-
ficial, randomly shuffled, sequence from the query appears to be
homologous to a real protein.

In this article, we show that scoring matrices have pre-
ferred alignment identities and alignment lengths, and that
BLOSUM62 can produce overextended alignments, most often
between sequences with433% identity. We also show that using
the correct scoring matrix can produce more accurate alignment
boundaries. Finally, we show that we can produce more accurate
alignment boundaries, even without true domain boundary
knowledge, by using the initial BLOSUM62 alignment identity
to specify a more appropriate scoring matrix.

2 METHODS

2.1 Construction of the RefProtDom 2 (RPD2) dataset

2.1.1 Selecting families for RPD2 For this study, we built an
updated version of the RPD protein database (Gonzalez and Pearson,

ß The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits
non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com

L.J.Mills and W.R.Pearson

Fig. 1. Homologous overextension. BLASTP with BLOSUM62 was used
to create an alignment between a RPD2 query and a homologous se-
quence from the RPD2 library. The raw BLASTP output and a sche-
matic of the sequences are shown. Homologous domains in the query
(top) and subject (bottom) sequence are represented by black boxes. Light
gray boxes in the library sequence indicate other domains. The embedded
domain in this query is from B0TE74_HELMI and the sequence in the
query outside of the embedded domain is shuffled. Black numbers show
the homologous domain boundaries in both the schematic and raw
BLASTP output (in boxes); gray numbers indicate the boundaries of
the neighboring domain. The boundaries of the alignment are given by
the open box, whereas the correct alignment is represented by the dark
gray box in the schematic

2010b) initially used to characterize alignment overextension with PSI-
BLAST, using protein domains and sequences annotated in Pfam version
26 (Punta et al., 2012). From 13 672 initial Pfam version 26 families, 136
families were selected that met the following criteria: (i) model length
(4200 residues); (ii) available structure; (iii) family size (4100 members);
and (iv) taxonomic diversity (presence in two of three kingdoms of life
with the second most abundant kingdom having at least 15% as many the
members as the most abundant). Although most Pfam domain families
can be represented by a single hidden Markov model (HMM), some
diverse families require multiple HMMs. When this occurs, the related
domain families are grouped into Pfam clans. Protein domains belonging
to the same Pfam family or Pfam clan are homologous to each other.
Only a single family from any one clan was included and then only if the
family model lengths of the HMMs in the clan differed by52-fold. Of the
136 families selected, 56 were members of clans. Four RNA polymerase
families were excluded because they have a complex and inconsistent
domain organization.

2.1.3 Creating query sets for RPD2 For each RPD2 family, 10 non-
viral full-length examples of the domain were randomly selected. These
domain sequences were used as queries against the RPD2 library.
Searches were performed with SSEARCH version 36.3.6. The example
of the domain that was able to find the largest number of the RPD2
library domains with an E()-score  10 3 was selected to be that family’s
query sequence. Each selected domain was embedded in the center of
shuffled sequence with the same length and amino acid composition as
the original domain.

2.2 Database searches and scoring matrices
Searches were performed using BLASTP version 2.2.27þ (Camacho
et al., 2009) or SSEARCH version 36.3.6 (Pearson, 2000).
A
SSEARCH comparison of 136 query sequences against the 282 742 se-
quence RPD2 library took about 2 min on a 48 core machine. Bit scores,
sequence identity, expectation values and alignments were calculated by
the search algorithm. All alignments had an E()-score  10 6 with a
domain originally annotated by Pfam. Two types of scoring matrices
were evaluated: the BLOSUM62 routinely used with BLASTP and the
VTML matrices (VT) described by Muller et al. (2002). For the VT, the
gap penalties described by Reese and Pearson (2002) were adjusted to
produce a smooth mean identity transition. The gap penalties used for
each matrix are shown in Table 1.

2.3 Boundary accuracy
Boundaries for each alignment were known because the query domain
was embedded in shuffled sequence. Alignments that extend outside of
the embedded domains into the shuffled sequence are overextended.
Alignments that fail to extend to the domain boundaries are incomplete.
Alignment boundaries within 10 residues of the embedded domain
boundary are considered correct. The beginning and end of the align-
ments were evaluated independently, and the difference between the
alignment boundaries and the embedded domain boundaries was calcu-
lated in number of residues. Incomplete alignments had negative bound-
ary errors and overextended alignments had positive boundary errors.

2.4 Sub-alignment scoring
SSEARCH from FASTA version 36.3.6 can provide location, identity
and score values for non-overlapping subsections of any alignment. In
this study, we annotated the embedded domain and non-domain regions
in each query, which provided the score and identity for the homologous
correct alignment, even if the alignment was overextended. For overex-
tended alignments, the identity and score of the shuffled sequence that
was included in the alignment was also calculated.

2.5 Scoring matrix adjustment
Alignments with greater than 36% identity were realigned using a series
of VTML matrices. The new matrix was selected based on the
BLOSUM62 identity given in Table 2.

2.1.2 Selecting sequences for the RPD2 library For each of the
RPD2 families, up to 5000 non-viral full-length (480% of Pfam model
length) domains were randomly selected. The unique protein sequences
from which the domains came were then identified and included in the
RPD2 library. Low complexity regions were lowercase masked by pseg
and stored in FASTA format. Because many of these sequences con-
tained domains other than the identifying domain, the final RPD2 library
contains 1837 families ranging in membership from 7063 examples of the
domain to 1. In total, the RPD2 library contains 499 058 domains from
282 742 different protein sequences.

3 RESULTS

3.1 Homologous overextension

Deep scoring matrices can produce inaccurate alignment bound-
aries. Figure 1 shows an example of an overextended alignment
created by BLASTP. The query was constructed using an E1-E2
ATPase (PF00122) domain from B0TE74_HELMI surrounded
by shuffled sequence (dashed lines). This domain is homologous
to the E1-E2 ATPase domain, also labeled PF00122, in the li-
brary sequence. The PF00122 domain extends from position 113

3008

Adjusting scoring matrices

Table 1. Scoring matrices, gap penalties and mean identity, entropy and
alignment length

Matrix

Open

Extend

Identitya

Entropya

Lengtha

BLOSUM50
BLOSUM62
VT160
VT140
VT120
VT100
VT80
VT40
VT20
VT10

 10
 11
 12
 10
 11
 10
 11
 12
 15
 16

 2
 1
 2
 1
 1
 1
 1
 1
 2
 2

26%
30%
25%
31%
34%
40%
41%
65%
85%
93%

0.24
0.45
0.28
0.51
0.63
0.80
0.82
2.0
3.3
3.8

178
95
155
88
67
54
54
20
11
10

aMeans measured from 136 random sequence searches (Fig. 3).

A

B

to 335 in the query. Any alignment that includes sequence from
the query outside of the embedded domain includes shuffled se-
quence that is not homologous to the library sequence. In this
example, the alignment extends from position 84 to 415 in the
query, incorporating 109 residues of shuffled sequence or 33% of
the total alignment length. The library sequence, like many pro-
teins, consists of multiple domains. The alignment between these
two sequences falsely indicates that shuffled sequence in the
query is homologous to a neighboring Hydrolase (PF00702)
domain in the library. BLASTP reports that the aligned se-
quences are 50% identical, but
the homologous region is
64.1% identical, whereas the non-homologous flanking regions
are 23% identical. The homologous region contributes 83% of
the bit score (248.2 bits) and the non-homologous region only
contributes 17%. This imbalance in the contributions of hom-
ologous compared with non-homologous regions to both align-
ment
identity and score is a hallmark of overextended
alignments.

3.2 Overextension occurs more frequently in alignments

with higher sequence identity

To understand how often incorrect alignment boundaries occur,
searches were performed with both BLASTP and SSEARCH,
using BLOSUM62 (BL62) with the RPD2 query set and library.
Each alignment boundary was measured and the results were
divided into seven bins ranging from extremely incomplete
(5 40 residues, i.e. 440 residues missing) to extremely overex-
tended (440 residues added; Fig. 2A). Although most of the
alignment boundaries were within 10 residues of the embedded
domain boundaries (71% BLASTP, 75% SSEARCH), BLASTP
and SSEARCH also created incorrect alignment boundaries. Of
the boundaries measured, 22% of BLASTP boundaries were in-
complete and 7% were overextended, aligning random sequence
with real protein residues. Seventeen percent of the SSEARCH
boundaries were incomplete and 8% were overextended.
Alignment identity was divided into quartiles. Each identity
quartile shows similar representation within the group of ‘cor-
rect’ alignment boundaries (within 10 residues of the embedded
domain). In contrast, incomplete alignment boundaries are more

Fig. 2. Boundary accuracy and sequence identity. Using the RPD2
embedded domain queries and sequence library, pairwise protein se-
quence alignments were calculated with BLASTP (B) and SSEARCH
(S) using BLOSUM62. Boundary accuracy was measured for both the
beginning and end of alignments between known homologs with E()-
score  10 6 as detailed in Methods. Alignment inaccuracy of less
than  10 residues indicates an incomplete alignment; 410 residues is
considered overextension. In panel (A), alignment identities were divided
into quartiles. The data from the searches were binned by boundary ac-
curacy (top) and sequence identity (color). In panel (B), incorrect align-
ment boundaries were isolated and alignments were divided into six
identity bins. The boundary accuracy is given by the color of the bar.
Identity bins are inclusive at the maximum

common in low identity alignments, whereas overextended align-
ment boundaries are more common in high identity alignments.
Most incomplete alignment boundaries (73% for BLASTP, 76%
for SSEARCH) were from alignments in the lowest two identity
quartiles. The opposite is true for overextended alignments,
where most had identities in the top two quartiles (52% for
BLASTP, 54% for SSEARCH). When incorrect alignments
are examined independently, the percentage of the boundaries
that is overextended increases with identity (Fig. 2B).

Figure 2 reports incomplete and overextended alignment
boundaries for the 397 123 homologs that were identified by
BLASTP and SSEARCH. Because RPD2 was built from diverse
domain families, most of these homologs are distant, with a
median identity of 33%. In practice, one rarely examines every

3009

L.J.Mills and W.R.Pearson

significant match, so we also counted incomplete and overex-
tended boundaries for the top 100 significant hits with each
query. For the top 100 hits, the median alignment identity in-
creases to 52%. In this more closely related set, the percentage of
overextended alignments increases to 8% for BLASTP and 10%
for SSEARCH and incomplete alignment decreases to 8% and
5%, respectively.

comparisons

Incomplete alignments can occur when homologous domains
are evolutionarily distant, so that the alignment captures only the
most conserved regions of the homology. This contrasts with
traditional false negatives, where the homology is missed alto-
gether. In the traditional case, the reduced sensitivity of pairwise
sequence
compared with model-based (PSI-
BLAST, PSI-SEARCH, HMMER) or structure-based methods
is well recognized (Pearson and Sierk, 2005). Incomplete align-
ments are another example of inadequate alignment sensitivity.
Overextension, while recognized in pairwise genomic align-
ments (Chao et al., 1993), had not been systematically measured
in pairwise protein alignments. Missed homologs can be identi-
fied using transitive homology, protein family models or struc-
tures. But strategies for removing non-homologous sequence
from pairwise protein alignments have not been described.

3.3 Scoring matrices, identity and alignment length

Alignment overextension often results from a mismatch between
the evolutionary distance between the homologous sequences
and the target identity of the scoring matrix used in the align-
ment. Unlike global sequence alignments, which use the full
length of each sequence, the scoring matrix determines local
alignment boundaries. To understand how different scoring
matrices produce different alignment boundaries, we used
shuffled sequences as queries against the RPD2 library.

‘Deeper’ scoring matrices (scoring matrices targeted to more
evolutionary change) produce longer less identical alignments by
chance, whereas ‘shallower’ scoring matrices produce shorter
higher identity alignments (Fig. 3). Here, the same 136 shuffled
queries were used with each matrix, so the resulting trends in
identity and alignment length reflect the average properties of
the matrices themselves. The target identities with gaps are
lower, and the alignment lengths longer, than the values esti-
mated from the scoring matrix alone. Remarkably, the entropies
calculated analytically from the scoring matrix alone track clo-
sely between the gapped and ungapped empirical mean entropies.
Including gaps (black boxes) makes scoring matrices ‘deeper’,
thus lowering identity and increasing alignment length compared
with the same matrix without gaps (gray circles). Different scor-
ing matrices can produce different alignment boundaries.

3.4 Selecting the correct scoring matrix gives correct

domain boundaries

To illustrate how ‘correct’ scoring matrices—scoring matrices
with target identities that match the evolutionary distance of
the homologous domains—improve accuracy, we examined
alignment boundary changes with different scoring matrices.
Beginning with 16 640 overextended alignments, we tracked the
boundary accuracy produced by six VT with increasing target
identity (Fig. 4). The alignment with the smallest cumulative
difference between the embedded domain boundaries and the

3010

A

B

C

Fig. 3. Scoring matrix target identity, entropy and alignment length.
Queries were
constructed from 136 shuffled protein domains.
SSEARCH was used to search against the RPD2 library with these
shuffled queries using either the gap penalties given in Table 1 (black
squares) or gap penalties of  1000/ 1000 for open/extend (gray circles),
which effectively creates alignments with no gaps. The identity and align-
ment length from the highest scoring alignment was selected from each
query. The (A) mean identity, (B) mean entropy and (C) mean alignment
length is given by the point, and the standard deviation is indicated by the
error bars for each scoring matrix. The analytical entropy calculated from
the scoring matrix is shown as open triangles in panel (B)

alignment boundaries was identified, and 10 realignments from
each of the VT scoring matrices were randomly selected. The
maximum boundary errors for both the initial BLOSUM62
and final best alignment are shown in Figure 4. All of the realign-
ments corrected the overextended boundary to within 10 resi-
dues of the embedded domain, producing alignments with higher
identities. As the identity of the initial alignment increases,
the target identity of the matrix that produces the corrected
alignment also increases. However, the matrix required did not
correlate with the amount of overextension in the original
BLOSUM62 alignment in this dataset. Nor was there any cor-
relation in alignments that used alternate shuffling strategies for
the embedded domains.

In general,

lower target identity matrices (VT120, VT100,
VT80) correct lower identity alignments (the filled symbols

A

B

Fig. 4. Selecting the scoring matrix that creates the best alignment.
(A) Sequence pairs with 433% identity and overextended alignment
boundaries were selected from the results of the similarity search per-
formed using SSEARCH with BLOSUM62. Each sequence pair was
realigned using VT120, 100, 80, 40, 20 and 10 (Table 1). Boundary ac-
curacy was calculated for each alignment and the alignment with the
smallest cumulative difference between the embedded domain boundaries
and the alignment boundaries was selected. Symbol shape and color
(black, open) indicate the scoring matrix used for the alignment; lines
connect alignments between the same sequence pairs. (B) Maximum
boundary inaccuracy across every scoring matrix for two sequence
pairs in (A) is shown. The rounded dashed line to the left in panel
(A) and the higher line between VT120 and VT80 in panel (B) show a
low identity alignment corrected by VT40; the square dash-dot line to the
right in panel (A) and flat between VT120 and VT10 in panel (B) shows a
high identity alignment corrected by VT120

tend to be on the left of the final distribution) and higher target
identity matrices (VT40, VT20, VT10) correct higher identity
alignments (the open symbols tend to be on the right). But this
is not always the case; sometimes a high identity alignment is
corrected by a distant matrix (dash-dot line) and vice versa
(rounded-dash line).

Anomalous matrices can correct overextension because
alignment boundary correction is robust to matrix selection.
Figure 4B shows
two extreme examples, a deep matrix
(VT120) correcting a high identity alignment (dash-dot line)
and a shallow matrix (VT40) correcting a low identity alignment
(rounded-dash line). In both cases, a wide range of scoring matri-
ces correct the alignment, including a matrix at the predicted

Adjusting scoring matrices

Table 2. Identity required to realign using each
scoring matrix

Matrix

VT120
VT100
VT80
VT40
VT20
VT10

Identity range

36–50%
50–60%
60–70%
70–80%
80–85%
485%

Note: Values are inclusive at the maximum for each matrix.

target identity (for the red low identity alignment, VT120,
VT100 and VT80 produce an alignment that is off by two resi-
dues, whereas VT40 is perfect). The robustness of boundary cor-
rection to scoring matrix choice allows us to approximate the
‘correct’ alignment identity from the initial (possibly overex-
tended) BLOSUM62 identity.

Because high identity alignments tend to be corrected by shal-
low scoring matrices while lower identity alignments can be cor-
rected by less shallow scoring matrices (Fig. 4), we attempted to
correct BLOSUM62 alignments using the scoring matrices and
thresholds shown in Table 2.

Forty-seven percent of overextended boundaries came from
alignments with 436% identity and, therefore, were candidates
for the realignment algorithm. Of the overextended boundaries
that could be realigned, 97% had reduced overextension with
86% of the overextended boundaries moving within 10 residues
of the embedded domain boundaries. Overall, including overex-
tended alignments that were not realigned, the total amount of
overextension was reduced from 8 to 5%.

Although the scoring matrix identity thresholds in Table 2
dramatically decrease overextension errors, they can also pro-
duce incomplete alignments (Fig. 5). In contrast to Figure 4,
where we selected the most accurate alignment, Figure 5 shows
the results of realignment based solely on the identity of the
initial BLOSUM62 alignment
(the thresholds in Table 2).
Looking at all alignments with 436% identity, 16 411 alignment
boundaries changed accuracy bins. Of the alignment boundaries
that changed accuracy bins, 68% moved from being overex-
tended (410 residues, blue colors) to within 10 residues, where-
as 20% moved from being within 10 residues or overextended
to incomplete. Most (73%) of the realigned incomplete align-
into the  20 :  11 bin (orange). The
ment boundaries fall
most overextended alignments (440 residues, Fig. 2) decreased
by 2217 alignment boundaries, whereas the most incomplete
alignments increased by 399 boundaries. The final distribution
of all alignment boundaries had 7863 more boundaries within 10
residues of the embedded domain boundary and 3189 additional
incomplete boundaries, or 2.5 additional boundaries within 10
residues for each additional incomplete boundary.

Alignment boundary correction is much more effective when
applied to the highest scoring alignments. Focusing on the top
100 alignments from each query, 83% of the overextended
boundaries were from alignments with 436% identity of which
90% moved within 10 residues of
the embedded domain

3011

L.J.Mills and W.R.Pearson

Fig. 5. Realignment algorithm results only results from sequence pairs
that were realigned by the algorithm are shown. Gray dashed bars indi-
cate the initial boundary accuracy before realignment; colored bars indi-
cate the final distribution of alignment boundary errors. The colors in the
final distribution bars show the original accuracy before realignment

boundaries reducing the amount of overextension from 10 to
3%. The top 100 alignments produced many fewer incomplete
alignments; 1645 boundaries moved to within 10 residues of the
embedded domain, whereas only 233 boundaries became worse
than less than  10 residues incomplete, a ratio of 7 corrected
boundaries for each additional incomplete boundary.

4 DISCUSSION

Mismatches between the sequence identity of aligned homolo-
gous domains and the target identity of the scoring matrix used
to produce the local sequence alignment can lead to overex-
tended alignments (Figs. 1 and 2). Similarity scoring matrices
have preferred alignment lengths and identity. Deep scoring
matrices create longer alignments and have lower target identity
compared with shallower matrices (Fig. 3). Alignments created
by BLOSUM62, most often between sequences with higher iden-
tity (433%), can extend past the boundaries of the homologous
domain to include non-homologous sequence (Fig. 2). Using a
shallower scoring matrix that targets the correct sequence iden-
tity can correct overextension (Fig. 4). Predicting the scoring
matrix that will lead to a better alignment, using initial (possibly
overextended) identity given by BLOSUM62, can correct overex-
tended alignments. In our RPD2 database, 37% of overextended
alignments were corrected to within 10 residues, or 86% of the
alignments with high enough identity (436%) to be considered
for realignment. However, realignment has a cost; a fraction of
correctly aligned domains are incompletely realigned.

The observation that ‘deep’ scoring matrices produce overex-
tended alignments between domains that are less evolutionarily
distant (have higher identity) than the scoring matrix target iden-
tity is not surprising, though the relationship between alignment
boundaries (in contrast to internal alignment accuracy) and scor-
ing matrices has not been extensively studied. Traditional in-
ternal alignment accuracy decreases as evolutionary distance

3012

increases; different sequences are difficult to align accurately.
In contrast, alignment overextension occurs most often when
closely related sequences are aligned, and thus becomes more
frequent as sequence databases grow.

As log-odds matrices, every scoring matrix has a target evolu-
tionary distance, or percent identity, which can be approximated
from the homologous replacement frequencies that are the nu-
merator of the log-odds ratio (Altschul, 1991). As evolutionary
distance and the number of replacements increase, the replace-
ment frequencies for identities decrease and the non-identical
replacement frequencies increase, which reduces the target iden-
tity of the matrix when aligning random sequences (Fig. 3).
Overextension occurs when a scoring matrix that models a
longer period of evolution (a deeper scoring matrix) by allowing
more mutations is used to align sequences with less evolutionary
change. A deep scoring matrix produces a less identical align-
ment because it accepts more amino acid replacements. Gap
penalties also modify alignment length and identity; increased
gap penalties produce shorter higher identity alignments, where-
as lower gap penalties produce longer lower identity alignments
(Fig. 3). Lower mismatch penalties and lower gap penalties in
deep matrices allow the local alignment algorithm to add add-
itional identities that are occurring by chance from non-homolo-
gous sequence for the sake of modest increases in score. Thus, in
Figure 1, 83% of the score was produced by 67% of the align-
ment. Overextended alignments are locally optimal, but they are
not biologically correct.

RPD2 was designed to simulate the most common similarity
search—searches against full-length proteins in a comprehensive
sequence database. RPD2 sequences were selected from the set of
sequences annotated by Pfam release 26, which samples both
SwissProt and Trembl protein sequences. The RPD2 library is
large (528 742 sequences) and diverse. Queries were engineered
from long
allowing
BLOSUM62 searches to identify distant homologs. These do-
mains are surrounded by shuffled protein sequence, providing
known alignment boundaries. Alignments that extend into the
flanking random sequence are thus guaranteed to be non-
homologous.

residues) protein domains,

(4200

Our initial searches with 136 independent embedded domain
queries produced both incomplete alignments (22% BLASTP,
17% SSEARCH, both with BLOSUM62) and overextended
alignments (7% BLASTP, 8% SSEARCH). Incomplete align-
ments reflect the reduced sensitivity of pairwise alignment com-
pared with the HMM based methods used to annotate the Pfam
domains in RPD2, and the fact that in the diverse set of hom-
ologous RPD2 domains, half of the detectable homologs share
533% sequence identity.
In characterizing 42 200 000 alignment boundaries in the
136 query domain searches, we consider far more distant align-
ments than would typically be examined during the genome an-
notation process, where sequences sharing at least 40% identity
might be used to transfer annotation. Restricting the analysis to
the top 100 significant hits for each query increases the median
alignment identity to 53%, which in turn decreases incomplete
alignments to 5%, and increases the overextension to 10%.
Restricting the analysis to the top 25 homologs further decreases
incomplete alignment to 2%, whereas increasing overextension
to 11%. When the thresholds in Table 2 are used to correct the

top 100 alignments for each query, overextension is corrected
73% of the time, whereas incomplete alignments are produced
only about 10% of the time. For the top 25, overextension is
corrected 86% of the time, whereas alignments become incom-
plete only 1% of the time.

We believe our estimates of alignment overextension (7–10%
of alignments) are conservative, both because sequence databases
are growing, allowing similarity searches to identify closer homo-
logs, and because many proteins comprise multiple domains. In
this study, we examine alignment overextension from a single
domain. Many proteins contain multiple domains separated by
non-homologous regions; proteins that contain multiple widely
dispersed common domains, like Ankyrin, fn3 or SH3 domains,
will have many more chances to overextend across non-homolo-
gous regions.

Although we understand why high identity alignments might
overextend when aligned with low target–identity scoring matri-
ces like BLOSUM62, matrix/target–identity mismatch only ac-
counts for about half of the overextensions we observed. In our
diverse sequence set, 53% of overextensions occur in alignments
that are536% identical. Unfortunately, we cannot predict which
lower identity alignments will overextend. The amount of overex-
tension does not correlate well with the difference between align-
ment identity and scoring matrix target identity. Likewise,
overextension does not occur significantly more often in domains
that have more identity at their ends. The increased frequency of
overextended boundaries in alignments between high identity se-
quences (Fig. 2B) is the only meaningful trend that we identified.
In contrast to high identity overextension, where the difference
in target–identity between the homologous region and the scor-
ing matrix can explain overextension, low identity overextension
may simply reflect the propensity of deep matrices to produce
long alignments, even between unrelated sequences (Fig. 3). The
long alignments in Figure 3 are not statistically significant, but
when they occur by chance near a (low identity) homologous
domain, they can contribute to overextension. Overextension
occurs more frequently in higher identity alignments because of
target–identity mismatch, but the majority of overextension we
measured occurs by chance in low identity alignments, because
most of our alignments are low identity.

In this study, we have focused on overextension in pairwise
alignments because pairwise similarity searches are widely used
to annotate newly sequenced genomes. Alignment overextension
also occurs with model-based searches like PSI-BLAST; we ini-
tially identified overextension as the major cause of model con-
tamination with PSI-BLAST (Gonzalez and Pearson, 2010a).
Our strategy for reducing overextension—re-alignment with a
more correct scoring matrix—is most easily applied to pairwise
alignment because a traditional non–position-specific scoring
matrix like BLOSUM62 or VT120 has an easily characterized
target identity and the alignment between two sequences has a
natural evolutionary distance. It is more difficult to interpret the
‘distance’ between a sequence and a position-specific scoring
matrix or HMM, and it is unclear how such models might be
scaled to reduce overextension.

Adjusting scoring matrices

The expansion of modern protein databases has led to an in-
crease in the identification of higher identity homologs. Accurate
function prediction requires a higher level of sequence identity
and an accurate alignment, two factors that are at odds with
deep scoring matrices. With modern comprehensive databases,
it is common to identify many homologs that are 440% identi-
cal. In our diverse RPD2 protein set, the median sequence iden-
tity for the top 100 homologs was 53%, much higher than the
target identity range for BLOSUM62. With more high identity
homologs and increased sequence and structural annotation,
pairwise alignments can provide essential insights to the function
of novel proteins, but only if the alignment boundaries are
accurate.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors thank R. Clark and F. Elliot for technical support,
and A. J. Mackey for useful discussions. They also thank a
reviewer
for
low identity
overextension.

suggesting an explanation for

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES

Altschul,S.F. (1991) Amino acid substitution matrices from an information theor-

etic perspective. J. Mol. Biol., 219, 555–565.

Altschul,S.F. et al. (1997) Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of

protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res., 25, 3389–3402.

Arslan,A.N. et al. (2001) A new approach to sequence comparison: normalized

sequence alignment. Bioinformatics, 17, 327–337.

Brenner,S.E. et al. (1998) Assessing sequence comparison methods with reliable
structurally identified distant evolutionary relationships. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA, 95, 6073–6078.
Camacho,C. et al. (2009) Blastþ: architecture and applications. BMC Bioinform.,

10, 421.

Chao,K.M. et al. (1993) Locating well-conserved regions within a pairwise align-

ment. Comput. Applic. Biosci., 9, 387–396.

Dayhoff,M. et al. (1978) A model of evolutionary change in proteins. In: Atlas of
Protein Sequence and Structure. Vol. 5, National Biomedical Research
Foundation, Washington DC, pp. 345–358.

Gonzalez,M.W. and Pearson,W.R. (2010a) Homologous over-extension: a chal-

lenge for iterative similarity searches. Nucleic Acids Res., 38, 2177–2189.

Gonzalez,M.W. and Pearson,W.R. (2010b) RefProtDom: a protein database with
improved domain boundaries and homology relationships. Bioinformatics, 26,
2361–2361.

Henikoff,S. and Henikoff,J. (1992) Amino-acid substitution matrices from protein

blocks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 89, 10915–10919.

Muller,T. et al. (2002) Estimating amino acid substitution models: A comparison of
dayhoff’s estimator, the resolvent approach and a maximum likelihood method.
Mol. Biol. Evol., 19, 8–13.

Pearson,W.R. (1995) Comparison of methods for searching protein sequence data-

bases. Protein Sci., 4, 1145–1160.

Pearson,W.R. (2000) Flexible sequence similarity searching with the FASTA3 pro-

gram package. Methods Mol. Biol., 132, 185–219.

Pearson,W.R. and Sierk,M.L. (2005) The limits of protein sequence comparison?

Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 15, 254–260.

Punta,M. et al. (2012) The pfam protein families database. Nucleic Acids Res., 40,

D290–D301.

Reese,J.T. and Pearson,W.R. (2002) Empirical determination of effective gap penal-

ties for sequence comparison. Bioinformatics, 18, 1500–1507.

3013

