BIOINFORMATICS

Vol. 30 ISMB 2014, pages i26–i33
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu268

A statistical approach for inferring the 3D structure of the genome
Nelle Varoquaux1,2,3, Ferhat Ay4, William Stafford Noble4,5,* and Jean-Philippe Vert1,2,3,*
1Centre for Computational Biology, Mines ParisTech, Fontainebleau F-77300, 2Institut Curie, 3U900, INSERM, Paris,
F-75248, France, 4Department of Genome Sciences and 5Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University
of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA

ABSTRACT
Motivation: Recent technological advances allow the measurement,
in a single Hi-C experiment, of the frequencies of physical contacts
among pairs of genomic loci at a genome-wide scale. The next chal-
lenge is to infer, from the resulting DNA–DNA contact maps, accurate
3D models of how chromosomes fold and fit into the nucleus. Many
existing inference methods rely on multidimensional scaling (MDS), in
which the pairwise distances of the inferred model are optimized to
resemble pairwise distances derived directly from the contact counts.
These approaches, however, often optimize a heuristic objective func-
tion and require strong assumptions about the biophysics of DNA to
transform interaction frequencies to spatial distance, and thereby may
lead to incorrect structure reconstruction.
Methods: We propose a novel approach to infer a consensus 3D
structure of a genome from Hi-C data. The method incorporates a
statistical model of the contact counts, assuming that the counts be-
tween two loci follow a Poisson distribution whose intensity decreases
with the physical distances between the loci. The method can auto-
matically adjust the transfer function relating the spatial distance to the
Poisson intensity and infer a genome structure that best explains the
observed data.
Results: We compare two variants of our Poisson method, with or
without optimization of the transfer function, to four different MDS-
based algorithms—two metric MDS methods using different stress
functions, a non-metric version of MDS and ChromSDE, a recently
described, advanced MDS method—on a wide range of simulated
datasets. We demonstrate that
the Poisson models reconstruct
better structures than all MDS-based methods, particularly at low
coverage and high resolution, and we highlight the importance of
optimizing the transfer function. On publicly available Hi-C data from
mouse embryonic stem cells, we show that the Poisson methods lead
to more reproducible structures than MDS-based methods when we
use data generated using different restriction enzymes, and when we
reconstruct structures at different resolutions.
Availability and implementation: A Python implementation of the
proposed method is available at http://cbio.ensmp.fr/pastis.
Contact: william-noble@uw.edu or jean-philippe.vert@mines.org

1 INTRODUCTION

Spatial and temporal 3D genome architecture is thought to play
an important role in many genomic functions, but is still poorly
understood (van Steensel and Dekker, 2010). In recent years, the
technique of chromosome conformation capture (3C; Dekker
et al., 2002), which identifies physical contacts between different
genomic loci and yields information about their relative spatial
distance in the nucleus, has paved the way for the systematic

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.

analysis of the 3D structure of DNA. Coupled with high-
throughput sequencing, genome-wide conformation capture
assays, broadly referred to as Hi-C (Lieberman-Aiden et al.,
2009), have emerged as promising techniques to investigate the
global structure of DNA at various resolutions. Hi-C has opened
new avenues to understanding many biological processes includ-
ing gene regulation, DNA replication, somatic copy number
alterations and epigenetic changes (De and Michor, 2011;
Dixon et al., 2012; Ryba et al., 2010; Shen et al., 2012).

A typical Hi-C experiment yields a DNA contact map, that is,
a matrix indicating the frequency of interactions between all
pairs of loci at a given resolution. A fundamental question is
then to reconstruct the 3D structure of the genome from this
contact map. Two general approaches have been proposed for
that purpose: (i) consensus methods that aim at inferring a unique
mean structure representative of the data and (ii) ensemble meth-
ods that yield a population of structures.

Consensus approaches (Bau et al., 2011; Duan et al., 2010;
Tanizawa et al., 2010) model each chromosome by a chain of
beads, convert the contact map frequencies into pairwise dis-
tances (which we refer as wish distances) using various biophys-
ical models of DNA and infer a 3D conformation that best
matches the pairwise distances by solving a multidimensional
scaling (MDS) problem (Kruskal and Wish, 1977). Converting
interaction counts to physical wish distances requires, however,
strong assumptions that are not always met in practice. For
example, this mapping may change from one organism to an-
other (Fudenberg and Mirny, 2012), from one resolution to an-
other (Zhang et al., 2013), from one genomic distance range to
another (Ay et al., 2014a) or from one time point to another
during the cell cycle (Ay et al., 2014b; Le et al., 2013).

To alleviate this problem, Zhang et al. (2013) proposed
ChromSDE, a method that jointly optimizes the 3D structure
and a parameter of the function that maps contact frequencies
to spatial distances, in addition to modifying the objective func-
tion of MDS. Ben-Elazar et al. (2013) proposed an approach
akin to non-metric MDS (NMDS; Kruskal, 1964), where the
3D structure and the wish distances are alternatingly optimized
in an attempt to preserve coherence between the ranking of pair-
wise distances and the ranking of pairwise contact frequencies.
As for the ensemble methods, Hu et al. (2013) and Rousseau
et al. (2011) describe two formal probabilistic models of contact
frequencies and their relationship with physical distances. They
then use a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling pro-
cedure to produce an ensemble of 3D structures consistent with
the observed contact counts. Kalhor et al. (2011) propose an
optimization framework that generates a population of struc-
tures by enforcing each contact to define an active constraint
in only a fraction of the inferred structures, thereby mimicking

ß The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial
re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com

the heterogeneity of contacts coming from each cell in the Hi-C
sample. Applying a similar method to budding yeast, Tjong et al.
(2012) demonstrate that a large population of structures inferred
using known physical constraints of yeast genome architecture
can recapitulate, to a large extent, the consensus contact map
observed from Hi-C experiments.

Both consensus and ensemble models have benefits and limi-
tations. Ensemble approaches are biologically more accurate be-
cause Hi-C data are derived from a population of cells, each with
potentially a unique 3D architecture. An inferred population of
3D structures may therefore better reflect the diversity of struc-
tures than a single consensus structure. In concordance with such
ensemble methods, a recent development in Hi-C technology,
assaying chromatin conformation at a single cell level, demon-
strates that chromatin structure varies highly from cell to cell by
modeling the single-copy X chromosomes of a male mouse cell
line (Nagano et al., 2013).

However, an ensemble approach raises the question of inter-
pretability: one often has to fall back to interpreting a mean
signal from the population structure (Kalhor et al., 2011) or to
selecting a few structures, representative in some way of the di-
versity of the population (Rousseau et al., 2011). Consensus
methods, in contrast, provide a single structure more amenable
to visual inspection and analysis. This structure can be seen as a
useful model to recapitulate the rich information captured in
Hi-C data and to allow easy integration with other sources of
data, such as RNA-seq, which are usually also population based.
In addition, despite the stochasticity of cell-to-cell variations,
certain hallmarks of genome organization observed by consensus
methods, such as chromosome territories or topological domain
organization, are conserved across different cells (Hu et al., 2013;
Nagano et al., 2013). Computationally, ensemble methods are
more demanding than consensus methods because they need to
sample from a large dimensional space of possible structures with
complicated likelihood landscapes. Optimization-based consen-
sus methods are usually faster to converge to a local optimum,
but may miss the global optimum corresponding to the best
structure when the objective function is non-convex.

In this work, we focus on the consensus approach, and we
propose a new method to infer a 3D structure from Hi-C data.
We propose to replace the arbitrary loss function minimized by
existing MDS-based approaches by a better-motivated likelihood
function derived from a statistical model, similar to the one used
by a previous ensemble method (Hu et al., 2013). Specifically,
our proposed method models the interaction frequency between
two loci by a Poisson model (PM), the intensity of which de-
creases with the increasing spatial distance between the pair of
loci. Similar to the problem of inferring the wish distances from
interaction frequencies faced by MDS-based approaches, our
model faces the difficulty of transforming spatial distances into
intensities of the Poisson distribution. To solve this problem, we
propose two variant methods. The first method (PM1) uses a
default transfer function motivated by a biophysical model,
whereas the second method (PM2) uses a parametric family of
transfer functions, the parameters of which are automatically
optimized together with the 3D structure to best explain the
observed data.

We compare both PM variants to four MDS-based methods,
including metric MDS with two stress functions, NMDS and

Inferring the 3D structure of the genome

ChromSDE. We demonstrate on simulated data that the new
models reconstruct more accurate 3D structures than all MDS-
based methods, especially at low coverage and high resolution.
We also assess the negative effect of using an incorrect transfer
function, and we show that PM2 is able to overcome this diffi-
culty. On real data, we show that, compared with MDS-based
methods, PM1 and PM2 generate more similar models when
applied to replicate experiments performed with different restric-
tion enzymes or when applied to the same data at varying reso-
lutions. The results suggest that the PM methods we describe
here provide promising alternatives to current methods for con-
sensus DNA structure inference.

2 APPROACH

We model chromosomes as series of beads in 3D, each bead representing
a genomic window of a given length, and we denote by X=ðx1; . . . ; xnÞ
2 R3n the coordinate matrix of the structure, where n denotes the total
number of beads in the genome (for example, n = 1216 at 10 kb reso-
lution for the yeast genome) and xi 2 R3 represents the 3D coordinate of
the i-th bead. The Hi-C data can be summarized as an n-by-n matrix c in
which each row and column corresponds to a genomic locus, and each
matrix entry cij is a number, called the contact frequency or contact count,
indicating the number of times locus i and j were observed to contact one
another. The matrix is by construction square and symmetric.

2.1 Data normalization

The raw contact count matrix suffers from many biases, some technical
(from the sequencing and mapping) and others biological (inherent to the
physical properties of chromatin) (Imakaev et al., 2012; Yaffe and Tanay,
2011). Therefore, before inferring the 3D structure of the genome, we
normalize each raw contact matrix using iterative correction and eigen-
value decomposition (Imakaev et al., 2012), a method based on the as-
sumption that all loci should interact equally. Due to mappability issues,
some beads have zero contact counts. We remove these beads from the
optimization and only try to infer the positions of beads with non-zero
contact counts.

2.2 MDS-based methods

2.2.1 Metric MDS Metric MDS is a classical method to infer coord-
inates of points given their approximate pairwise Euclidean distances
(Kruskal and Wish, 1977). To use MDS in the context of DNA structure
inference from Hi-C data, we need to assign each pair of beads (i, j) a
physical wish distance ij—i.e. the distance that we aim to capture with
our 3D model—derived from the bead pair’s contact count cij.
Performing this assignment requires us to decide how contact counts
are transformed into physical distances. In Section 2.4 we discuss a com-
monly used transformation of the form ij=c 3
if cij40 motivated by
polymer physics. Metric MDS then places all the beads in 3D space such
that the Euclidean distance dijðXÞ=jjxi   xjjj between the beads i and j is
as close as possible to the wish distance ij. Denoting by D the subset of
indices whose distances we wish to constrain [typically, the set of pairs
(i, j) with non-zero contact counts cij40], metric MDS attempts to min-
imize the following objective function, usually called the raw stress:

ij

X

minimize

X

ði;jÞ2D

ðdijðXÞ   ijÞ2

ð1Þ

In two previous studies that use metric MDS, Duan et al. (2010) and
Tanizawa et al. (2010) infer the 3D structure of DNA from Hi-C data by
solving Equation (1), limiting D to pairs of indices with statistically sig-
nificant contact counts (false discovery rate 0.01%). Both methods use

i27

N.Varoquaux et al.

additional constraints such as minimum and maximum distances between
adjacent beads, minimum pairwise distances between arbitrary beads to
avoid clashes and organism-specific constraints that concern the position-
ing of centromeres, telomeres and ribosomal RNA coding regions. In the
experiments we present here, we simply solve Equation (1) without any
constraints but including all pairs of beads with positive counts in D, and
we call the resulting method MDS1. In general, we have observed that
adding constraints related to minimal and maximal distances between
beads is unnecessary because the structures found by MDS1 typically
fulfill all of these constraints (data not shown).

A drawback of the raw stress of Equation (1) in our context is that the
quadratic form is dominated by large values, corresponding to pairs of
loci with large wish distances (i.e. small contact counts). Because these
counts are less reliable than large contact counts, we propose a variant of
MDS1, which we call MDS2, where we weight the contribution of a pair
(i, j) in the stress by a factor inversely proportional to the square wish
distance between the corresponding beads:

X

minimize

X

ði;jÞ2D

ij ðdijðXÞ   ijÞ2
 2

ð2Þ

While other weighting schemes could be proposed to decrease the
influence of pairs with large wish distances, we found this formulation
to be robust in practice. Notice that MDS2 can be thought of as a quad-
ratic approximation of the raw stress (minimized by MDS1) applied
to log-transformed distances because in the setting dijðXÞ  ij it holds
that

X

 

ði;jÞ2D

log dijðXÞ   log ij

2 =



X
X

ði;jÞ2D



ði;jÞ2D

2

log


dijðXÞ

ij
dijðXÞ
ij



  1

2

Both MDS1 and MDS2 implicitly ignore non-interacting pairs of beads
(i.e. pairs with zero contact counts).

In addition to MDS1 and MDS2, we include in our benchmark
ChromSDE (Zhang et al., 2013), a recently proposed method that also
attempts to minimize a weighted stress function penalized by an add-
itional term to push non-interacting pairs far from each other. In add-
ition, ChromSDE optimizes the exponent of the transfer function that
maps from contact counts to wish distances. However, it does not infer
the relative positions of chromosomes. Accordingly, we compare only the
reconstruction of each individual chromosome produced by each method.
Note that, because intra-chromosomal counts are more reliable than
inter-chromosomal counts, ChromSDE should not be penalized com-
pared with the other methods by only considering intra-chromosomal
counts.

2.2.2 Non-metric MDS The derivation of the transfer function from
contact counts to 3D wish distances, needed by metric MDS-based meth-
ods, relies on strong assumptions about the physics of DNA (Section 2.4).
NMDS (Kruskal, 1964; Shepard, 1962) offers an alternative way to pro-
ceed, which was proposed in the context of DNA structure inference from
Hi-C data by Ben-Elazar et al. (2013). Instead of inferring physical dis-
tances from the contact matrices, NMDS relies on the sole hypothesis
that if two loci i and j are observed to be in contact more often than loci k
and ‘, then i and j should be closer in 3D space than k and ‘. Using this
hypothesis, NMDS attempts to solve the following problem:

PROBLEM 2.1. Given a set of similarities cij (e.g. the contact frequency
between i and j), find X 2 R3n such that

cij  ck‘ , jjxi   xjjj2  jjxk   x‘jj2

ð3Þ

Equation (3) is known as the non-metric constraint, or the ordinal
constraint. This problem was first introduced by Shepard (1962) and

i28

formalized as an optimization problem by Kruskal (1964). It can be
solved by minimizing the cost function:



 

X

minimize

X;

i;j

jjxi   xjjj2   ðcijÞ

ðcijÞ2

2

ð4Þ

with respect to the embedding X and the function , where  is a
decreasing function. Algorithms to solve this optimization problem in-
volve iterating over two steps: (i) fixing  and minimizing the objective
function with respect to X (hence falling back to solve MDS2) and (ii) fit-
ting  to the new configuration X subject to the ordinal constraints. This
second step of the algorithm can be performed using an isotonic regres-
sion method, such as the pool adjacent violator algorithm (Best et al.,
1999).

P
A trivial solution of this problem is to set  equal to 0. In this case, all
points will collapse on the origin. To avoid this collapse, we add add-
i;j jjxi   xjjj2=K for some
itional constraints on X or on , such as
constant value of K.

2.3 Poisson model

Instead of metric or NMDS-based methods, which attempt to minimize a
stress function that measures a discrepancy between the wish distances
and the 3D distances of the structure, we propose to cast the problem of
structure inference as a maximum likelihood problem. For that purpose,
we need to define a probabilistic model of contact counts parametrized by
the 3D structure that we want to infer from contact count observations.
For that purpose, we take a model similar to the one used in the
BACH algorithm (Hu et al., 2013) and model the contact frequencies
ðcijÞði;jÞ2D as independent Poisson random variables, where the Poisson
parameter of cij is a decreasing function of dijðXÞ of the form dijðXÞ, for
some parameters 40 and 50. We can then express the likelihood as

Y
‘ðX; ; Þ=

ðd
ijÞcij
cij!

expð d
ijÞ

By maximizing the log likelihood, a new optimization problem naturally
emerges from this formulation:
LðX; ; Þ=

cijlog dij+cijlog    d

ð5Þ

ij

max
;;X

i;j

X

i5jn

With this new formulation, we can either provide the parameter , using
prior knowledge, and only optimize the structure and  (which depends
on the dataset), or we can use a non-metric approach, by inferring . We
refer to the former as PM1 and to the latter as PM2.
PM2 is solved using a coordinate-descent algorithm: first choose ran-
domly an X configuration, then iterate between maximizing L with re-
spect to  and  and, fixing  and  and maximizing L with respect to X.
In this work, we try to initialize X with a good approximation of the
solution by first evaluating the parameters  and  using some prior
knowledge and initialize X with the inferred structure from the MDS.

All optimization problems (MDS1, MDS2, NMDS, PM1 and PM2)
were solved using IPOPT, an interior point filter algorithm (W€achter and
Biegler, 2006) and the isotonic regression implementation from the
Python toolbox Scikit-Learn for NMDS (Pedregosa et al., 2011).

2.4 Default contact-to-distance transfer function

A prerequisite for both the MDS and the PM1 model (and for good
initialization of the NMDS and PM2 methods) is a function that converts
from contact counts to wish distances. Extensive previous studies of the
behavior of polymers in general and DNA in particular have yielded
proposed relationships between, on the one hand, the genomic distance
s and contact counts c and, on the other hand, genomic distance s
and physical distances d for several classes of polymers (Fudenberg and
Mirny, 2012; Grosberg et al., 1988; Lieberman-Aiden et al., 2009). For a

fractal globule polymer, representative of mammalian DNA, the contact
count is inversely proportional to the genomic distance (c s 1), whereas
the volume scales linearly with the subchain length (d3 s), from which
we deduce a relationship between d and c of the form d c 1=3. For an
equilibrium globule, representative of a smaller genome such as
Saccharomyces cerevisae, the relationships differ: c s 3=2 and d s1/2
up to a maximum distance, corresponding to the size of the nucleus in
which the DNA is confined. Conveniently, coupling those two relation-
ships for either type of polymer yields the same mapping between contact
counts and physical distances:

d c 1=3

ð6Þ

Thus, by default we convert contact counts cij into 3D wish distances ij
using the following relationship:

ij=c

 1=3
ij

ð7Þ

where  defines the scale of the structure. It is important to note that this
relationship holds true for only a subset of the full genomic distance range
and that this range varies for different genomes. In practice, we will not
infer  for the MDS and NMDS problem: the structures can easily be
rescaled after convergence to match biological knowledge of the organism
studied.

2.5 Data

To test various 3D architecture inference methods, we conducted experi-
ments on both simulated datasets and publicly available genome-wide
Hi-C datasets.

For the simulation, we generated 170 datasets using the yeast genome
architecture proposed by Duan et al. (2010). Because the repetitive rDNA
on yeast chromosome XII cannot be observed in practice, we discard all
contacts involving these loci, and we do not infer the position of the
corresponding rDNA. We generate these 170 datasets using the following
model:

cij=Pðd
ijÞ

ð8Þ

where  = 3 (corresponding to the theoretical exponent discussed in
Section 2.4) and  varies between 0.01 and 0.7 (0.01, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03,
0.04, 0.05, 0.06, 0.07, 0.08, 0.09, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7) with
10 different random generator seeds, thus obtaining 10 different datasets
per parameter. The  parameter controls the number of contact counts in
the datasets. A low  will yield a dataset with few counts; hence, the
corresponding wish distance matrix will be less likely to be close to the
true distance matrix. To estimate how noisy the generated data are, we
compute the following measure of signal-to-noise ratio (SNR):

q

X
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
cij
ðd
ij   cijÞ2

SNR=

ð9Þ

The numerator (the signal) corresponds to the number of counts, and the
denominator (the noise) corresponds to the sum of deviation between
each count and its expected value. We use this first ensemble of simulated
datasets to assess the robustness to noise of the different methods. Note
that in actual data, the SNR gets smaller when we sequence fewer reads
or when we infer a structure at a higher resolution.

We simulated another ensemble of datasets to compare non-metric and
metric methods when the parameters provided to the different algorithms
are not the correct ones. We generate 20 datasets according to Equation
(8), with  between 4 and 2 (4, –3.5, 3, 2.5, 2) and  between 0.4 and 0.7
(0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7).

We also applied our methods to publicly available Hi-C data from
mouse embryonic stem cells (Dixon et al., 2012). We started with the
data at 20 kb resolution and considered only chromosomes 1–19, with
both available restriction enzymes (HindIII and NcoI). We then

Inferring the 3D structure of the genome

subsampled the data at resolutions of 100 kb, 200 kb, 500 kb and 1 Mb.
Note that the methods studied here infer a single copy per chromosomes,
thus yielding a consensus model for both homologous chromosomes.

2.6 Structure similarity measures

To assess the ability of a method to reconstruct a known structure from
simulated data, or the stability of the reconstructed structure with respect
to change in resolution or library preparation, we need quantitative meas-
ures of similarity between 3D structures. We use two such measures: the
root mean square deviation (RMSD) and the distance error, which we
now explain.
The RMSD is a standard way to compare two sets of structures
described by their coordinates X; X0 2 R3n, widely used for example to
compare protein 3D structures. It is given by

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
s
X
i Þ2
ðXi   X


n

i=1

RMSD= min
X

where the structure X* is obtained by translating, rotating and rescaling
X0 ðX=sRX0   t, where R 2 R33 is a rotation matrix, t 2 R3 is a trans-
lation vector and s is a scaling factor). Because ChromSDE does not infer
the relative position of chromosomes, the RMSD values we report below
are sums of RMSDs computed independently on each chromosome.

We also directly compare the 3D distance matrices corresponding to

the two structures with the distance error:

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
vuut
X
ðdijðXÞ   di;jðX0ÞÞ2

n

distanceError=

i;j=0

The main difference between the optimization formulated by
ChromSDE and those of the other methods is the penalty assigned to
non-interacting beads. Owing to this penalty, ChromSDE should recover
better long distances than other MDS-based methods. This property is
not well captured by the RMSD measure, and therefore, we also compute
how well the distance matrix is recovered with the distance error, which
assigns most of the weight to long distances. We expect that methods
based on MDS, which optimize an objective function based on the dis-
tance matrix, should perform better on this measure than others.

3 RESULTS

To assess the relative strength of our new PM-based methods,
PM1 and PM2, we compare them to a panel of four MDS-based
methods: MDS1, MDS2, NMDS and ChromSDE on simulated
and real data.

3.1 Simulated Hi-C data

We first tested the six methods on data simulated as explained in
Section 2.5.

3.1.1 Performance as a function of SNR We ran all six meth-
ods—MDS1, MDS2, NMDS, PM1, PM2 and ChromSDE—on
the 170 simulated datasets with varying SNR levels. Our goal
here is to assess how well the different methods manage to re-
construct a known 3D structure from simulated data at different
SNR levels. Remember that SNR estimates how far the empirical
counts differ from their expectations; in real Hi-C data, SNR
typically decreases when we have fewer reads in total, or when
we want to increase the resolution of the structure. In this first
series of experiments, we provide the correct count-to-distance or
distance-to-count transfer functions to the methods that need

i29

N.Varoquaux et al.

A

B

C

Fig. 1. Performance evaluation on simulated data, varying the parameter
. (A) RMSD of each experiment for varying values of the parameter .
ChromSDE failed to yield consistent results for 14 experiments (it re-
ported the wrong number of beads in the results file), and the PM2
algorithm failed to converge at the desired precision for one experiment
(it exceeded the maximum number of iterations). (B) Distance error of
each experiment for varying values of . (C) Average SNR for each .
Higher SNR corresponds to better quality data

them (MDS1, MDS2, PM1). In this setting, for infinite SNR, all
methods should consistently estimate the correct structure.

Figure 1 shows the performance of the different methods in
terms of RMSD (top) and distance error (middle) as a function
of the  parameter, which controls the SNR (bottom). As ex-
pected, all methods perform well when the SNR is high, but
exhibit marked differences in performance for finite SNR. In
the low SNR setting (SNR52), both PM1 and PM2 significantly
outperform all MDS-based methods, in both RMSD and dis-
tance error. Interestingly, we observe no significant difference
between PM1 and PM2, which shows that there is no price to
pay in terms of inferred structure if we do not specify the expo-
nent of the distance-to-count transfer function. In this setting,
PM2 is able to estimate the structure accurately enough to pro-
duce a structure of the same quality as PM1. Among MDS-based
methods, we see that NMDS generally outperforms MDS2,
which itself outperforms MDS1. This observation highlights
that in the non-asymptotic low SNR setting, the choice of

i30

the

function

influences

performance

stress
of MDS.
ChromSDE performs better than other MDS-based methods
on datasets with a low SNR, corresponding to datasets with
low coverage and, consequently, many non-interacting pairs of
beads. This may be due to the way ChromSDE explicitly handles
such pairs. On the other hand, in a more favorable setting
(SNR42), ChromSDE does not perform as well as other
MDS-based methods; we hypothesize that when the coverage
is high enough, taking into account non-interacting pairs of
beads does not add any additional
information. Because
ChromSDE is not better than other MDS-based methods, and
requires much longer to run, we do not report its performance
on the next experiments and instead focus on the differences
between the other MDS-based methods and the PM methods.

3.1.2 Metric versus non-metric methods: robustness to incorrect
parameter estimation Three of the methods tested, which we
collectively refer to as metric methods, require as input a
count-to-distance
function:
MDS1, MDS2 and PM1. In reality, however, the DNA may
not follow the ideal physical laws underlying the default transfer
function discussed in Section 2.4, and the structures inferred
from these methods may diverge from the correct one because
of miss-specification of the transfer function.

distance-to-count

transfer

or

To assess this phenomenon, and evaluate the robustness of the
different methods (including NMDS and PM2, which automat-
ically infer a transfer function), we now study the performance of
the methods on datasets generated with varying  parameters.
We therefore run the MDS1, MDS2, NMDS, PM1 and PM2
methods on the second ensemble of simulated datasets. We pro-
vide the default transfer function to all metric methods, thus
inducing a miss-specification for all simulated datasets with
6¼ 3.

Figure 2 shows the RMSD of each method, averaged over the
datasets with different , as a function of . The performance
curve of PM1, which is the best method when the data are simu-
lated with the correct parameter  = 3, exhibits a characteristic
U-shape centered around  = 3. This curve confirms that PM1
performs better when given the true parameter and performs
worse as  moves away from 3. On the other hand, the perform-
ance curves of the two other metric methods, MDS1 and MDS2,
do not exactly follow this trend: MDS1 and NMDS perform
increasingly better when  decreases, and MDS2 achieves the
best performance when  = 3.5. This phenomenon occurs be-
cause in our simulation, when  decreases, the SNR for a
given  increases, counterbalancing the negative effect of the
transfer function miss-specification. Thus, for MDS-based meth-
ods, it is apparently more important to have more data than to
have a correct  parameter. Finally, we see that, as expected, the
non-metric approaches, NMDS and PM2, are more robust to
transfer function misspecification than the metric approaches
because they automatically estimate it. When the parameter is
wrong, PM2 outperforms the other methods for low SNR,
whereas for high SNR, NMDS performs better.

3.2 Real Hi-C data

We now test the different methods on real Hi-C data. Because in
this case the true consensus structure is unknown, we investigate

the behaviors of the different methods in terms of their ability to
infer consistent structures from different datasets and across
resolutions.

3.2.1 Stability to enzyme replicates The Hi-C assay depends on
a restriction enzyme to cleave the DNA after cross-linking, and
the same sequence library can be analyzed multiple times using
different enzymes. Although the resulting restriction fragments
will differ, we expect a priori that the overall genome architecture
should be the same from such replicate experiments. We there-
fore evaluate each genome architecture inference method with
respect to the similarity of the structures inferred from two rep-
licate Hi-C experiments that differ only in the choice of restric-
tion enzyme. Specifically, we apply each method to two enzyme
replicates, HindIII and NcoI, carried out in mouse embryonic
stem (ES) cells (Dixon et al., 2012) for chromosomes 1–19.

To measure the stability of the methods, we compute (i) the
Spearman correlation between the two pairwise Euclidean dis-
tance matrices of the pairs of predicted structures and (ii) the
RMSD between the rescaled predicted structures. Note that,
before computing our two error measures, we filter out from
the pair of structures any beads for which the inference has

Fig. 2. Performance evaluation for simulated data, varying the parameter
. The figure plots the average RMSD of the inferred structures for a
range of  values. As  increases, the SNR of the dataset also increases

Table 1. Stability across enzyme replicates

Inferring the 3D structure of the genome

not been done on either dataset, i.e. beads that have zero contact
counts in either dataset.

To give a sense of how similar the two replicate datasets are,
we also compute the Spearman correlation directly on the data,
rather than on the inferred structures. As expected (Table 1), the
higher the resolution is, the lower the correlation between the
pairs of datasets is and the more different the inferred structures
are. Across different enzyme replicates, the PM2 method yielded
significantly higher correlation than all of the other methods
(P50.05, signed-rank test adjusted for multiple tests with a
Bonferroni correction).

3.2.2 Stability to resolution Zhang et al. (2012) show that the
mapping from contact counts to physical distance differs from
one resolution to another, underscoring the importance of good
parameter estimation. To study the stability of the structure in-
ference methods to changes in resolution, we compute the
RMSD between pairs of structures inferred at different reso-
lutions. Let ðX; YÞ 2 ðR3n; R3mÞ be a pair of predicted struc-
tures such that n5m (i.e. X is a structure at a lower resolution
than Y). We compute a downsampled structure Y 2 X3n at the
same resolution as X by averaging the coordinates of beads. We
then compute the RMSD between this new structure Y* and X,
as well as a corresponding Spearman correlation of the distance
matrices.

Results are shown in Figure 3 and Table 2. PM2 is signifi-
cantly (P50.05) more stable to resolution changes, both in terms
of RMSD and correlation of distances.

4 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

In this work, we present a novel method for inferring a consensus
genomic 3D structure from Hi-C data. The method maximizes a
likelihood derived from a statistical model of the relationship
between the contact counts and physical distances, and includes
an automatic tuning of the parameters defining the link between
a 3D distance and the Poisson parameter of the corresponding
contact count. We showed in simulations that the new method
outperforms a panel of MDS-based approaches,
including
ChromSDE, which optimize an often ad hoc stress function.
The improvement is particularly important at low SNR, corres-
ponding to more difficult problems where we want to increase
the resolution of the model with a fixed total number of reads;

Resolution

Corr

MDS1

MDS2

NMDS

PM1

PM2

Corr

RMSD

Corr

RMSD

Corr

RMSD

Corr

RMSD

Corr

RMSD

1 Mb
500 kb
200 kb
100 kb

0.981
0.959
0.845
0.605

13.13
10.00
5.64
5.07

0.945
0.942
0.940
0.736

5.54
5.68
3.74
2.53

0.964
0.959
0.945
0.676

5.80
5.67
3.73
2.52

0.965
0.959
0.946
0.666

7.28
7.14
4.01
2.51

0.931
0.913
0.891
0.664

4.92
4.66
3.42
2.76

0.976
0.968
0.958
0.771

Note: For each resolution, the table lists the Spearman correlation the two enzyme replicate datasets, and, for each inference method, the average RMSD and Spearman
correlation between pairs of structures inferred from the two datasets. Boldface values correspond to the best RMSD or correlation values among all five methods. In general,
higher resolution leads to a lower correlation between pairs of inferred structures.

i31

N.Varoquaux et al.

Fig. 3. Predicted structures for chromosome 1 at different resolution Contact counts matrices and predicted structures for the MDS2, NMDS, PM1 and
PM2 methods at 1 Mb (A), 500 kb (B), 200 kb (C) and 100 kb (D)

Table 2. Stability across resolution

Measure

MDS1

MDS2

NMDS

PM1

PM2

RMSD
Correlation

14.86
0.781

12.92
0.754

12.98
0.738

13.03
0.737

11.48
0.807

Note: The table lists the average RMSD and Spearman correlation between pairs of
structures of different resolutions. In bold are the lowest average RMSD and high-
est average Spearman correlation. These values were computed on mouse ESC
HindIII libraries [Dixon et al. (2012)].

this is typically the situation where one expects a correct
maximum likelihood estimator to outperform more ad hoc esti-
mators. We also showed that misspecification in the count-
to-distance transfer function can harm the performance of

metric methods, while our model can adapt to unknown distri-
butions within a parametric family. Finally, we also demon-
strated, on real Hi-C data, the robustness of our methods to
resolution change and enzyme duplicated datasets.

Our probabilistic model of reads is similar to the model pro-
posed by Hu et al. (2013); however, instead of generating a
family of structures by MCMC we use the model for direct max-
imum likelihood estimation of a consensus structure. Although
the consensus structure might not be a definitive structure in vivo,
it provides us with a rich model for further analysis, conserving
hallmarks of genome organization such as the water lily form of
the budding yeast (Duan et al., 2010) or topological domains
(Kalhor et al., 2011).

The PM underlying our approach remains basic and could be
subject to many improvements. For example, physical con-
straints, such as the size of the nucleus, could be incorporated

i32

into the model. Better models for zero entries may be possible
because those can either come either from non-interacting loci or
from measurement errors due to, for example, mappability prob-
lems. Overall, expressing the structure inference problem as a
maximum likelihood problem offers a principled way to improve
the method by improving the probabilistic model of measured
data.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors thank Nicolas Servant for insightful discussions.

Funding: This work was supported by the European Research
Council (SMAC-ERC-280032 to J.-P.V., N.V.); the European
Commission (HEALTH-F5-2012-305626 to J.-P.V., N.V.); the
French National Research Agency (ANR-11-BINF-0001 to
J.-P.V., N.V.) and by National Institutes of Health awards
(R01 AI106775, P41 GM103533 and U41 HG007000).

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES

Inferring the 3D structure of the genome

Grosberg,A.Y. et al. (1988) The role of topological constraints in the kinetics of

collapse of macromolecules. J. Phys., 49, 2095–2100.

Hu,M. et al. (2013) Bayesian inference of spatial organizations of chromosomes.

PLoS Comput. Biol., 9, e1002893.

Imakaev,M. et al. (2012) Iterative correction of Hi-C data reveals hallmarks of

chromosome organization. Nat. Methods, 9, 999–1003.

Kalhor,R. et al. (2011) Genome architectures revealed by tethered chromosome
conformation capture and population-based modeling. Nat. Biotechnol., 30,
90–98.

Kruskal,J. (1964) Multidimensional scaling by optimizing goodness of fit to a non-

metric hypothesis. Psychometrika, 29, 1–27.

Kruskal,J.B. and Wish,M. (1977) Multidimensional Scaling. Sage Publications,

Beverly Hills, CA.

Le,T.B.K. et al. (2013) High-resolution mapping of the spatial organization of a

bacterial chromosome. Science, 342, 731–734.

Lieberman-Aiden,E. et al. (2009) Comprehensive mapping of long-range inter-
actions reveals folding principles of the human genome. Science, 326, 289–293.
Nagano,T. et al. (2013) Single-cell Hi-C reveals cell-to-cell variability in chromo-

some structure. Nature, 502, 59–64.

Pedregosa,F. et al. (2011) Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn.

Res., 12, 2825–2830.

Rousseau,M. et al. (2011) Three-dimensional modeling of chromatin structure from
interaction frequency data using Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling. BMC
Bioinformatics, 12, 414.

Ryba,T. et al. (2010) Evolutionarily conserved replication timing profiles predict
long-range chromatin interactions and distinguish closely related cell types.
Genome Res., 20, 761–770.

Shen,Y. et al. (2012) A map of the cis-regulatory sequences in the mouse genome.

Ay,F. et al. (2014a) Statistical confidence estimation for Hi-C data reveals regula-

Nature, 488, 116–120.

tory chromatin contacts. Genome Res., 113, doi: 10.1101/gr.160374.113.

Shepard,R. (1962) The analysis of proximities: multidimensional scaling with an

Ay,F. et al. (2014b) Three-dimensional modeling of the P. falciparum genome
during the erythrocytic cycle reveals a strong connection between genome archi-
tecture and gene expression. Genome Res., doi: 10.1101/gr.169417.113.

Bau,D. et al. (2011) The three-dimensional folding of the -globin gene domain
reveals formation of chromatin globules. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol., 18, 107–114.
Ben-Elazar,S. et al. (2013) Spatial localization of co-regulated genes exceeds gen-
omic gene clustering in the saccharomyces cerevisiae genome. Nucleic Acids Res.,
41, 2191–2201.

Best,M.J. et al. (1999) Minimizing separable convex functions subject to simple

chain constraints. SIAM J. Optim., 10, 658–672.

De,S. and Michor,F. (2011) DNA replication timing and long-range DNA inter-
actions predict mutational landscapes of cancer genomes. Nat. Biotechnol., 29,
1103–1108.

Dekker,J. et al.

(2002) Capturing chromosome conformation. Science, 295,

1306–1311.

unknown distance function. i. Psychometrika, 27, 125–140.

Tanizawa,H. et al. (2010) Mapping of long-range associations throughout the fis-
sion yeast genome reveals global genome organization linked to transcriptional
regulation. Nucleic Acids Res., 38, 8164–8177.

Tjong,H. et al. (2012) Physical tethering and volume exclusion determine higher-

order genome organization in budding yeast. Genome Res., 22, 1295–1305.

van Steensel,B. and Dekker,J. (2010) Genomics tools for the unraveling of chromo-

some architecture. Nat. Biotechnol., 28, 1089–1095.

W€achter,A. and Biegler,L.T. (2006) On the implementation of an interior-point
filter line-search algorithm for large-scale nonlinear programming. Math
Program, 106, 25–57.

Yaffe,E. and Tanay,A. (2011) Probabilistic modeling of Hi-C contact maps elimin-
ates systematic biases to characterize global chromosomal architecture. Nat.
Genet., 43, 1059–1065.

Zhang,Y. et al. (2012) Spatial organization of the mouse genome and its role in

Dixon,J.R. et al. (2012) Topological domains in mammalian genomes identified by

recurrent chromosomal translocations. Cell, 148, 1–14.

analysis of chromatin interactions. Nature, 485, 376–380.

Duan,Z. et al. (2010) A three-dimensional model of the yeast genome. Nature, 465,

363–367.

Fudenberg,G. and Mirny,L.A. (2012) Higher-order chromatin structure: bridging

physics and biology. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev., 22, 115–124.

Zhang,Z. et al. (2013) Inference of spatial organizations of chromosomes using
semi-definite embedding approach and Hi-C data. Deng,M. et al.
(eds)
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Research in Computational
Molecular Biology, Vol. 7821 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 317–332.

i33

