BIOINFORMATICS

Vol. 30 ECCB 2014, pages i505–i511
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu457

Assessing the local structural quality of transmembrane protein
models using statistical potentials (QMEANBrane)
Gabriel Studer1,2, Marco Biasini1,2 and Torsten Schwede1,2,*
1Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, 4056, Switzerland and 2SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Basel, 4056,
Switzerland

ABSTRACT
Motivation: Membrane proteins are an important class of biological
macromolecules involved in many cellular key processes including
signalling and transport. They account for one third of genes in the
human genome and 450% of current drug targets. Despite their im-
portance, experimental structural data are sparse, resulting in high
expectations for computational modelling tools to help fill this gap.
However, as many empirical methods have been trained on experi-
mental structural data, which is biased towards soluble globular pro-
teins, their accuracy for transmembrane proteins is often limited.
Results: We developed a local model quality estimation method for
membrane proteins (‘QMEANBrane’) by combining statistical poten-
tials trained on membrane protein structures with a per-residue
weighting scheme. The increasing number of available experimental
membrane protein structures allowed us to train membrane-specific
statistical potentials that approach statistical saturation. We show that
reliable local quality estimation of membrane protein models is pos-
sible, thereby extending local quality estimation to these biologically
relevant molecules.
Availability and implementation: Source code and datasets are
available on request.
Contact: torsten.schwede@unibas.ch
Supplementary Information: Supplementary data are available at
Bioinformatics online.

1 INTRODUCTION

Protein modelling plays a key role in exploring sequence struc-
ture relationships when experimental data are missing. Modelling
techniques using evolutionary information,
in particular
homology/comparative modelling, developed into standardized
pipelines over recent years. An indispensable ingredient of such a
pipeline is the accuracy estimation of a protein model, directly
providing the user with information regarding the range of its
possible applications (Baker and Sali, 2001; Schwede, 2013;
Schwede et al., 2009). In this context, global model quality as-
sessment tools are important for selecting the best model among
a set of alternatives, whereas local model estimates assess the
plausibility and likely accuracy of
individual amino acids
(Benkert et al., 2011; Fasnacht et al., 2007). Various techniques
have been developed to address this question, with consensus
methods and knowledge-based approaches showing best results
in blind assessments (Kryshtafovych et al., 2014). Consensus
approaches require an ensemble of models with structural var-
iety, reflecting alternative conformations (Roche et al., 2014;
Skwark and Elofsson, 2013).

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.

In contrast, knowledge-based methods (such as statistical po-
tentials) can be applied to single models but are in general less
accurate than consensus methods and exhibit strong dependency
on the structural data they have been trained on.

The unique physicochemical properties of biological mem-
branes give rise to interactions that are energetically discouraged
in soluble proteins, and vice versa (White, 2009). However, most
scoring functions using knowledge-based methods (Benkert
et al., 2011; Luthy et al., 1992; Ray et al., 2012; Sippl, 1993;
Zhou and Zhou, 2002) have been trained on soluble proteins.
Thus, they perform poorly when applied to models of membrane
proteins. This specific, but highly relevant, important aspect of
protein model quality assessment has received only little atten-
tion in recent years (Heim and Li, 2012; Ray et al., 2010). With
the growing amount of available high resolution membrane pro-
tein structures (Garman, 2014; White, 2004) the template situ-
ation for homology modelling procedures is improving quickly
and, even more important for this work, it is gradually becoming
possible to adapt knowledge-based methods to this class of
models.

As a result of such efforts, we present QMEANBrane, a com-
bination of statistical potentials targeted at local quality estima-
tion of membrane protein models in their naturally occurring
oligomeric state: after identifying the transmembrane region
using an implicit solvation model, specifically trained statistical
potentials get applied on the different regions of a protein model
(Figs 1 and 2). To overcome statistical saturation problems, a
novel approach for deriving statistical potentials from sparse
training data has been devised. We have benchmarked the per-
formance of the approach on a large heterogeneous test set of
models and illustrate the result on the example of alignment
errors in a transmembrane model.

2 METHODS

2.1 Target function
The similarity/difference between a model and a reference structure can
be expressed in the form of distances between corresponding atoms in the
model and its reference structure after performing a global superposition.
However, this global superposition approach fails to give accurate results
in case of domain movements. To overcome such problems, e.g. in the
context of the CASP (Moult et al., 2014) experiments, the structures are
manually split into so-called assessment units and evaluated separately
(Taylor et al., 2014). This manual procedure is time consuming and not
suitable for automate large-scale evaluation, e.g. such as performed by
CAMEO (Haas et al., 2013). Alternatively, similarity/difference between
a model and reference structure can be expressed in the form of super-
position-free measures such as the local Distance Difference Test (lDDT)
score (Mariani et al., 2013) assessing the differences in interatomic

ß The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits
non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com

G.Studer et al.

Fig. 1. Difference between membrane predictions of our algorithm and
the predictions of OPM on the 200 high-resolution structures used to
train membrane-specific statistical potentials

Fig. 2. Local QMEANBrane scores mapped on the best performing
model (mod9jk) regarding RMSD of the GPCR Dock experiment
2008. Reference structure (2.6 A˚ crystal structure of a human A2A ad-
enosine receptor bound to ZM241385, PDB: 3eml) and membrane-defin-
ing planes are shown in white

distances between model and reference structure. In this work, the lDDT
inclusion radius
to ensure local behaviour. See
Supplementary Figure S2 for a comparison of different structural simi-
larity measures
lDDT and CAD score;
Olechnovic et al., 2013).

(C-distance, dRMSD,

to 10A˚

set

is

2.2 Membrane segment definition
The OPM database (Orientations of Proteins in Membranes; Lomize
et al., 2006a) applies minimization of a free energy expression to predict
the transmembrane part of a protein structure. In this work, we use a

i506

i

"G=

X

ÞASAi

wat!bilf zið

similar but simplified approach, still resulting in a robust approximation
of the membrane segment definition. The energy expression is defined as
ð1Þ
with wat!bil representing the transfer energy from water to decadiene for
atom i per A˚ 2 (Lomize et al., 2004), f(zi) the hydrophobicity as a function
of the distance to the membrane centre zi and ASAi the accessible surface
area of atom i in A˚ 2 as calculated with NACCESS (www.bioinf.manches
ter.ac.uk/naccess). Not all surface-facing atoms, as determined by
NACCESS are in contact with the membrane, even if they fall in between
the lipid bilayer, e.g. as is the case for hydrophilic pores. To determine the
subset of surface atoms in direct contact with the lipid bilayer, the protein
structure surface as calculated by MSMS (Sanner et al., 1996) is placed
onto a 3D grid, marking every cube in the grid containing surface ver-
tices. The application of a flood fill algorithm (http://lodev.org/cgtutor/
floodfill.html) on every layer along the z-axis then allows the generation
of a subset of potentially membrane facing atoms.

The parameters describing the membrane (i.e. tilt angle relative to
z-axis, rotation angle around z-axis, membrane width and distance of
membrane centre to origin) first undergo a coarse grained sampling to
identify the 10 best parameter sets for further refinement using a
Levenberg–Marquardt minimizer. This procedure is repeated several
times with different initial orientations of the structure to find the set
of parameters leading to the lowest total free energy.

The bilayer consists of a hydrocarbon core flanked by interface regions
with a large chemical heterogeneity (White et al., 2001). It is known that
the properties of a membrane protein are strongly influenced by the
interaction with the phospholipid bilayer, and a simple split into a mem-
brane and soluble part would not faithfully reflect the variation of mo-
lecular properties along the membrane axis (Bernsel et al., 2008). To catch
these variations along the membrane axis, we split the transmembrane
proteins into three parts, which are treated separately: an interface part
consisting of all residues with their C atom positions within 5A˚ of the
membrane defining planes, a core membrane part consisting of all resi-
dues with their C atom positions in between the two membrane defining
planes not intersecting with the interface residues and finally, a soluble
protein part consisting of all remaining residues.

2.3 Model quality predictors
To assess the membrane protein models quality, we mainly rely on stat-
istical potential terms, combined with the relative solvent accessibility of
each residue as calculated by DSSP (Kabsch and Sander, 1983). The four
statistical potential terms (their exact parameterizations are described in
the Supplementary Material), are the following:

(1) All-atom Interaction Term: Pairwise interactions are considered
between all chemically distinguishable heavy atoms. A sequence
separation threshold has been introduced to allow focusing on
long-range interactions and reduce the influence of local secondary
structure. Interactions originating from atoms of residues closer in
sequence than this threshold are neglected.

(2) C Interaction Term: This term assesses the overall fold by only
considering pairwise interactions between C positions of the 20
standard amino acids. In case of glycine, a representative of the C
position gets constructed using the backbone as anchor. The same
sequence separation as in the all-atom interaction is applied.

(3) Solvation Term: Statistics are created by counting surrounding
atoms around all chemically distinguishable heavy atoms not be-
longing to the assessed residue itself.

(4) Torsion Term: The central /  angles of three consecutive amino
acids are assessed based on the identity of the involved amino acids
using a grouping scheme described by Solis and Rachovsky (Solis
and Rackovsky, 2006).

Assessing the local structural quality of transmembrane protein models

The torsion term trained on soluble structures is applied to the whole
membrane protein model. Conversely, solvation and interaction terms are
specifically trained for and applied to the soluble, membrane and inter-
face segments with different potentials for -helical and -barrel trans-
membrane structures. A residue belonging to one of these parts ‘interacts’
with all atoms in the full model, and a final score is assigned by averaging
all scores originating from interactions associated with this specific resi-
due. For the solvation and torsion terms, we use a formalism closely
related to the statistical potentials of mean force (Sippl, 1990).
However, instead of referring to an energy expression, we rather look
at the problem as a log odds score between the probability of observing a
particular interaction between partner s with conformation c relative to
some reference state:




p cjsð
Þ
Þ=  ln
pðcÞ

S cjsð

ð2Þ

In case of sparse data, p(cjs) cannot be expected to be saturated. Sippl
and co-workers have proposed to use a combination of the extracted
sequence-specific probability density function (pdf) and the reference
state. The influence of the reference state vanishes at a rate determined
by the newly introduced parameter  towards large numbers of inter-
actions (N) with sequence s:

p cjsð

Þ  1

1+N

N

1+N

p cjsð
Þ

pðcÞ+


Using the aforementioned formalism, this leads to

S cjsð

Þ  ln 1+N

ð

Þ   ln 1+N



ð3Þ

ð4Þ

p cjsð
Þ
pðcÞ

Because of the increased abundance of structural information for soluble
protein structures during the last decades, the use of the  parameter has
become largely unnecessary. However, for membrane proteins, data scar-
city is still an issue and needs to be handled accordingly. In the
Supplementary Materials, an analysis of the saturation behaviour of
the different statistical potential terms is provided, suggesting a sufficient
amount of training data for the solvation term, whereas the two inter-
action terms require more data to be fully saturated (Supplementary
Fig. S1). For these cases, we introduced a treatment for sparse data by
assuming that the statistics for soluble proteins are fully saturated. In
other words, if there are no sufficient data available from membrane
structures, we refer to the information we have from all protein structures
to get a hybrid score:
HS cjsð


Þ=  ln
f2
1+N
=lnð1+NÞ   lnðf1+Nf2Þ

1+N

ð5Þ

f1+



N

1

With f1 representing the fraction of the probabilities of sequence-specific
interactions and a reference state, where the pdfs of the specific inter-
actions are saturated, and f2 the fraction between the probabilities of
sequence-specific interactions and a reference state, where the pdfs of
the specific interactions are not necessarily saturated, as it may occur
for membrane- and interface-specific cases.

For regions of the pdf with zero probability as they, for example, occur
at low distances in pairwise interaction terms, we applied a constant cap
value to avoid infinite scores.

2.4 Training datasets for statistical potentials
The pdfs to calculate the statistical potentials for the soluble part are built
using statistics extracted from a non-redundant set of high resolution
X-ray structures. PISCES (Wang and Dunbrack, 2003) has been used
with the following parameters: sequence identity threshold 20%, reso-
lution threshold 2 A˚ and R-factor threshold 0.25. Because only standard
amino acids can be handled by QMEANBrane, a prior curation of the

training structures is necessary. Non-standard amino acids such as phos-
pho-serine or seleno-methionine have therefore been mapped to their
standard parent residues. For the selection of appropriate membrane
protein structures, we rely on the OPM database (Lomize et al.,
2006b). As of October 2013, OPM contained 746 unique PDB IDs of
structures with transmembrane segments. Applying a resolution thresh-
old of 2.5 A˚ , removing all chains with530 membrane-associated residues
and considering only one chain in case of homo-oligomers results in 283
remaining chains from 200 structures. Clustering the chains based on
their SEQRES sequences with kClust (Hauser et al., 2013) using a se-
quence identity threshold of 30% resulted in 187 clusters, 140 of them
from helical transmembrane structures and 47 from -barrel structures.
All entries are used in the calculation of the pdfs, where a chain originat-
ing from a cluster with n members is downweighted and contributes with
a weight of 1/n to the final distributions. These final distributions have
then been extracted by considering the corresponding chains, using the
full protein structure in the oligomeric state as assigned by OPM as
environment.

2.5 Datasets for training linear combinations
A set of 3745 models for soluble proteins was generated by selecting a set
of non-redundant high-resolution reference structures from the PDB
using PISCES (maximum 20% sequence identity, resolution better 2A˚ ,
X-ray only), extracting their amino acid sequences, and building models
using the automated SWISS-MODEL pipeline (Kiefer et al., 2009) by
excluding templates with a sequence identity 490% to the target
(P. Benkert, personal communication). OPM was used to identify refer-
ence structures (resolution53.0 A˚ ) to generate membrane protein models.
Structures with530 membrane-associated residues and hetero-oligomeric
complexes were excluded. In all, 132 unique PDB IDs, which had more
than one suitable template, have been selected as targets for modelling.
Templates identified with HHBlits (Remmert et al., 2012) showing a se-
quence alignment coverage450% served as input for MODELLER (Sali
and Blundell, 1993) and resulted in 3226 models with oligomeric states
equivalent to the template structure. Removal of redundancy, i.e. models
originating from templates with same sequence, and removal of obvious
incorrect oligomeric states upon visual inspection resulted in a set of 557
models, 386 with helical transmembrane parts and 171 -barrels.

2.6 Spherical smoothing for noise reduction
Averaging/smoothing can reduce noise introduced by quality predictors
on a per-residue level, resulting in single residue scores, which more ac-
curately reflect the local model quality. Smoothing in space tends to
outperform sequential smoothing. In the proposed algorithm, every resi-
due gets represented by its C position. The final quality predictor score
for a residue is calculated as a weighted mean of its own value and the
values associated to surrounding residues:

X

si=

wjsj

j

ð6Þ

with si representing the final score at position i, wj the weight of score
at position j and sj the score at position j. The weights are calculated in a
Gaussian-like manner and normalized, so they sum up to one:

 

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p
1
22

1
2

e

Z

2

dij


0

dij53

else

ð7Þ

8>>><
>>>:

wj=

with wj representing the weight of score at position j, dij the distance
from position i to position j,  the standard deviation of the Gaussian-like
formalism to control how fast the influence of a neighbouring score
vanishes as a function of the distance (5 A˚
turned out to be a reasonable
) and Z as normalization factor.

i507

G.Studer et al.

2.7 Per amino acid weighting scheme
QMEANBrane uses a linear model fitted on the per-residue lDDT score
to combine the single quality predictors. To remove amino acid-specific
biases, such a linear model is trained for every standard amino acid:

X

Table 1. Performances of single quality predictors and their combination
on membrane-associated residues in our test set, measured as Pearsons’ r
between predicted score and actual local lDDT

si=

wjsij

j

ð8Þ

Quality predictor

Helical structures

-barrel structures

si is the combined score of residue at position i, wj the weight of quality

predictor j and Sij the score of quality predictor j at position i.

Implementation

2.8
QMEANBrane is designed on a modular basis, implementing computa-
tionally expensive tasks in a C++ layer. All functionality is made fully
accessible from the Python language and can directly be embedded into
the computational structural biology framework OpenStructure (Biasini
et al., 2010, 2013), allowing to assemble custom assessment pipelines to
address more specific requirements.

3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

3.1 Membrane prediction accuracy

To evaluate the performance of our membrane finding algo-
rithm, a comparison with the result obtained by OPM has
been performed on the 200 structures used for training of the
membrane-specific statistical potentials. At this point, OPM is
assumed to be the gold standard, even though it is a calculation
by itself. By further considering the membrane width as the main
feature of accuracy, 95% of the absolute width deviations are
54 A˚ . In terms of translational distances, this corresponds to a
‘misprediction’ of 2–3 residues for helices and about 1–2 residue
for sheets (Fig. 1). Interestingly, using this approach, it is not
only possible to automatically detect transmembrane regions but
also to distinguish between transmembrane and soluble struc-
tures in general (Supplementary Fig. S3).

3.2 Performance on the test dataset

For a first analysis of performance on predicting local scores of
membrane-associated residues
in transmembrane protein
models, we used the previously described model set for training
the linear weights. Clusters have been built by applying kClust
on the target sequences with a sequence identity threshold of
30%. The local scores for the membrane-associated residues of
one cluster have then been predicted using linear models trained
on all residues from models not belonging to that particular
cluster (Table 1; Supplementary Fig. S6).

3.3

Independent performance evaluation on models of the
GPCR Dock experiments

Not many independent compilations of membrane protein
models with known target structures exist. For a performance
evaluation and comparison with other widely used quality assess-
ment tools, we rely on the models generated during the GPCR
Dock experiments 2008/2010 (Kufareva et al., 2011; Michino
et al., 2009) (Fig. 2). A total of 491 models for three different
targets, the human dopamine receptor, the human adenosine
receptor and the human chemokine receptor were available.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis with the local
lDDT as target value has been performed on all membrane-

i508

Exposed
Torsion
C interaction
Solvation
All atom interaction
All predictors combined

0.39
0.43
0.51
0.55
0.63
0.71

0.15
0.47
0.49
0.51
0.58
0.67

Note: Even for single predictors, an amino acid-specific linear model has been
trained to remove amino acid-specific biases.

Fig. 3. ROC analysis of all membrane-associated residues of the models
of the GPCR Dock experiments with local lDDT as target value and a
class cutoff of 0.6

associated residues as defined by OPM, showing a clear super-
iority of QMEANBrane over other methods such as ProQ2 (Ray
et al., 2012), QMEAN (Benkert et al., 2011), ProQM (Ray et al.,
2010), Prosa (Wiederstein and Sippl, 2007), Verify3D (Luthy
et al., 1992) or DFire (Zhou and Zhou, 2002)
(Fig. 3).
Removing all GPCR/Rhodopsin structures from the training
data has only a minor effect. See Supplementary Figure S4 for
a more detailed performance analysis taking other measures of
similarity into account. Because ProQM is the only other method
specifically developed for the particular case of membrane
protein model quality assessment, we also performed a direct
comparison of QMEANBrane and ProQM on the dataset used
to test/train ProQM in Supplementary Figure S5.

3.4 Retrospective analysis of modelling examples

To illustrate the usefulness of QMEANBrane in tackling prob-
lems as they occur in real modelling cases, two targets with
known structures have been selected for a more detailed analysis
using the recently released SWISS-MODEL workspace (Biasini
et al., 2014). The H+ translocating pyrophosphatase from Vigna

Assessing the local structural quality of transmembrane protein models

Fig. 4. Difference of QMEANBrane scores of three dopamine trans-
porter models with modified alignments versus the model built with the
initial HHBlits alignment, represented by the first horizontal bar.
Insertions are marked black, and deletions are marked white. Second
bar: shift of the insertion towards the N-terminus in front of helix 4,
third bar: shift of insertion towards the N-terminus in between helices 4
and 5, fourth bar: shift of the insertion towards the C-terminus

radiata (PDB ID: 4A01) and a dopamine transporter of
Drosophila melanogaster (PDB ID: 4M48). Models based on
different target-template alignments have been compared to
test QMEANBrane’s capability of detecting incorrect align-
ments, particularly alignment shifts in transmembrane helices.
(Alignments are available in the Supplementary Materials.)

close

rather

(sequence

homologue

The pyrophosphatase has, with the sodium translocating
pyrophosphatase from Thermotoga maritima (PDB ID: 4AV3),
identity 440%).
a
Nevertheless, the alignments provided by BLAST (Altschul
et al., 1990) and HHBlits differ significantly. Because the
BLAST alignment has a lower coverage, not including the first
transmembrane helix, only the part covered by both alignments
is considered. Supplementary Figure S7 shows a comparison of
the QMEANBrane scores from the two models built with the
different alignments. Two transmembrane helices contain an
alignment shift of three residues, resulting in a clear local increase
of the QMEANBrane scores of the model built with the HHBlits
alignment relative to the model built with the BLAST alignment.
The higher quality of the HHBlits model gets confirmed by its
global lDDT of 0.63 versus 0.59 of the BLAST model.

For the dopamine transporter example, we chose an amine
transporter from Aquifex aeolicus VF5, identified by HHBlits
with a sequence identity of 24%, as the primary template.
Despite the good coverage, a major problem occurs in transmem-
brane helix 5. The initial HHBlits alignment has an insertion of
three residues enforcing a helix break and an unnatural bulge
within the transmembrane part. To analyse possible modifica-
tions of the initial alignment, we rely on QMEANBrane to
compare the relative differences in the models with alternative
alignments with the initial model (Figs 4 and 5).

Three different alternative alignments were considered: the
first is to shift the helix insertions towards the C-terminus.
Despite the increase of the QMEANBrane score at the location

Fig. 5. Structural effects of the alignment modifications shown in
Figure 4. The model based on the initial HHBlits alignment is coloured
white; the other models are coloured according to the horizontal bar
alignment representation in Figure 4

of the alignment modification, the scores in helix 5 towards the
C-terminus drop significantly, suggesting no improvement of the
overall model quality. As second alternative, the insertion has
been shifted into the loop connecting transmembrane helices 4
and 5. Because of their proximity, a distortion of both involved
helix endings was inevitable, thus unfavourable. The third alter-
native, shift of the insertion towards the N-terminus before helix
4, and introducing an additional deletion in the aforementioned
loop increasing the local sequence identity in helix 4, consistently
increases the QMEANBrane scores in helices 4 and 5, as well as
the helices close in space. These findings are confirmed by the
global lDDT scores of the models built based on those align-
ments (initial alignment: 0.54, shift into middle: 0.54, shift
towards C-terminus: 0.53, shift towards N-terminus: 0.57).

4 CONCLUSION

Investigating function and interactions in membrane proteins is
an active field of research, with modelling techniques as an im-
portant tool to bridge the gap when structural data are missing.
Comparative modelling methods automatically profit
from
the increased number of available experimental membrane struc-
tures, which can be used to build models for membrane
proteins (Forrest et al., 2006). However, most knowledge-based

i509

G.Studer et al.

approaches fail in assigning reliable local quality estimates when
confronted with the unique structural features and interactions
resulting from direct contact with the phospholipid bilayer.

With QMEANBrane, we present a framework that widely
covers the aspects of membrane protein model quality assess-
ment. In a first step, our membrane detection method allows
to reliably locate the transmembrane part of the model. We
introduce an interface region to account for the non-isotropy
of protein properties along the z-axis. Statistical potential
terms were trained specifically for these three regions, introdu-
cing a new hybrid potential formalism to circumvent problems
arising from a lack of sufficient training data. The final local
scores are then calculated using linear models trained for all 20
standard amino acids. We could show a clear improvement in
accuracy over widely used quality assessment methods when con-
sidering alpha-helical transmembrane structures. It is possible to
detect errors introduced in the modelling procedure such as in-
correct alignments, which would facilitate the visual exploration
of alternative alignments, e.g. as
suggested previously in
(Barbato et al., 2012).

Despite similar observed overall performance for -barrel
structures, problems arise with shifted alignments, as they can
occur when aligning sequences from remote homologues. The
low number of pairwise atomic interactions in combination
with the regular hydrophobicity pattern often observed in align-
ment shifts by two residues hamper the reliable detection of such
errors and require further investigation.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank all members of the Torsten Schwede
group at the University of Basel for helpful discussions. We
are grateful to Pascal Benkert for providing the training model
dataset. Special thanks go to J €urgen Haas, Lorenza Bordoli and
Tjaart de Beer for valuable inputs and helping in setting up the
manuscript and Alessandro Barbato for his help in performing
the performance analysis using different quality assessment
methods. The authors gratefully acknowledge the computational
resources provided by the sciCORE/[BC]2 Basel Computational
Biology Center at the University of Basel and the support by the
system administration team.

Funding: This work was supported by SIB Swiss Institute of
Bioinformatics. G.S. has been supported by a PhD fellowship
of the SIB by the ‘Swiss Foundation for Excellence and Talent in
Biomedical Research’.

Conﬂict of interest: none declared.

REFERENCES

Altschul,S.F. et al. (1990) Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol., 215,

403–410.

Baker,D. and Sali,A. (2001) Protein structure prediction and structural genomics.

Science, 294, 93–96.

Biasini,M. et al. (2010) OpenStructure: a flexible software framework for computa-

tional structural biology. Bioinformatics, 26, 2626–2628.

Biasini,M. et al. (2013) OpenStructure: an integrated software framework for
computational structural biology. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr., 69,
701–709.

Biasini,M. et al. (2014) SWISS-MODEL: modelling protein tertiary and quaternary
structure using evolutionary information. Nucleic Acids Res., 42, W252–W258.
Fasnacht,M. et al. (2007) Local quality assessment in homology models using stat-

istical potentials and support vector machines. Protein Sci., 16, 1557–1568.

Forrest,L.R. et al. (2006) On the accuracy of homology modeling and sequence

alignment methods applied to membrane proteins. Biophys. J., 91, 508–517.

Garman,E.F. (2014) Developments in x-ray crystallographic structure determin-

ation of biological macromolecules. Science, 343, 1102–1108.

Haas,J. et al. (2013) The protein model portal—a comprehensive resource for pro-

tein structure and model information. Database (Oxford), 2013, bat031.

Hauser,M. et al. (2013) kClust: fast and sensitive clustering of large protein sequence

databases. BMC Bioinformatics, 14, 248.

Heim,A.J. and Li,Z. (2012) Developing a high-quality scoring function for mem-
brane protein structures based on specific inter-residue interactions. J. Comput.
Aided Mol. Des., 26, 301–309.

Kabsch,W. and Sander,C. (1983) Dictionary of protein secondary structure: pattern
recognition of hydrogen-bonded and geometrical features. Biopolymers, 22,
2577–2637.

Kiefer,F. et al. (2009) The SWISS-MODEL Repository and associated resources.

Nucleic Acids Res., 37, D387–D392.

Kryshtafovych,A. et al. (2014) Assessment of the assessment: evaluation of the

model quality estimates in CASP10. Proteins, 82 (Suppl. 2), 112–126.

Kufareva,I. et al. (2011) Status of GPCR modeling and docking as reflected by

community-wide GPCR Dock 2010 assessment. Structure, 19, 1108–1126.

Lomize,A.L. et al. (2004) Quantification of helix-helix binding affinities in micelles

and lipid bilayers. Protein Sci., 13, 2600–2612.

Lomize,A.L. et al. (2006a) Positioning of proteins in membranes: a computational

approach. Protein Sci., 15, 1318–1333.

Lomize,M.A. et al. (2006b) OPM: Orientations of Proteins in Membranes database.

Bioinformatics, 22, 623–625.

Luthy,R. et al. (1992) Assessment of protein models with three-dimensional profiles.

Nature, 356, 83–85.

Mariani,V. et al. (2013) lDDT: a local superposition-free score for comparing pro-
tein structures and models using distance difference tests. Bioinformatics, 29,
2722–2728.

Michino,M. et al. (2009) Community-wide assessment of GPCR structure modelling

and ligand docking: GPCR Dock 2008. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov., 8, 455–463.

Moult,J. et al. (2014) Critical assessment of methods of protein structure prediction

(CASP)—round x. Proteins, 82 (Suppl. 2), 1–6.

Olechnovic,K. et al. (2013) CAD-score: a new contact area difference-based func-

tion for evaluation of protein structural models. Proteins, 81, 149–162.

Ray,A.

et al.

(2010) Model quality assessment

for membrane proteins.

Bioinformatics, 26, 3067–3074.

Ray,A. et al. (2012) Improved model quality assessment using ProQ2. BMC

Bioinformatics, 13, 224.

Remmert,M. et al. (2012) HHblits: lightning-fast iterative protein sequence search-

ing by HMM-HMM alignment. Nat. Methods, 9, 173–175.

Roche,D.B. et al. (2014) Assessing the quality of modelled 3D protein structures

using the ModFOLD server. Methods Mol. Biol., 1137, 83–103.

Sali,A. and Blundell,T.L. (1993) Comparative protein modelling by satisfaction of

spatial restraints. J. Mol. Biol., 234, 779–815.

Sanner,M.F. et al. (1996) Reduced surface: an efficient way to compute molecular

surfaces. Biopolymers, 38, 305–320.

Schwede,T. (2013) Protein modeling: what happened to the “protein structure gap”?

Structure, 21, 1531–1540.

Schwede,T. et al. (2009) Outcome of a workshop on applications of protein models

in biomedical research. Structure, 17, 151–159.

Sippl,M.J. (1990) Calculation of conformational ensembles from potentials of mean
force. An approach to the knowledge-based prediction of local structures in
globular proteins. J. Mol. Biol., 213, 859–883.

Sippl,M.J. (1993) Recognition of errors in three-dimensional structures of proteins.

Barbato,A. et al. (2012) Improving your target-template alignment with MODalign.

Proteins, 17, 355–362.

Bioinformatics, 28, 1038–1039.

Skwark,M.J. and Elofsson,A. (2013) PconsD: ultra rapid, accurate model quality

Benkert,P. et al. (2011) Toward the estimation of the absolute quality of individual

assessment for protein structure prediction. Bioinformatics, 29, 1817–1818.

protein structure models. Bioinformatics, 27, 343–350.

Bernsel,A. et al. (2008) Prediction of membrane-protein topology from first prin-

ciples. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 105, 7177–7181.

i510

Solis,A.D. and Rackovsky,S.

statistical potentials
and threading score functions using information maximization. Proteins, 62,
892–908.

Improvement of

(2006)

Assessing the local structural quality of transmembrane protein models

Taylor,T.J. et al. (2014) Definition and classification of evaluation units for

White,S.H. et al. (2001) How membranes shape protein structure. J. Biol. Chem.,

CASP10. Proteins, 82 (Suppl. 2), 14–25.

276, 32395–32398.

Wang,G. and Dunbrack,R.L. Jr (2003) PISCES: a protein sequence culling server.

Bioinformatics, 19, 1589–1591.

White,S.H. (2004) The progress of membrane protein structure determination.

Protein Sci., 13, 1948–1949.

White,S.H. (2009) Biophysical dissection of membrane proteins. Nature, 459,

344–346.

Wiederstein,M. and Sippl,M.J. (2007) ProSA-web: interactive web service for the
recognition of errors in three-dimensional structures of proteins. Nucleic Acids
Res., 35, W407–W410.

Zhou,H. and Zhou,Y. (2002) Distance-scaled, finite ideal-gas reference state im-
proves structure-derived potentials of mean force for structure selection and
stability prediction. Protein Sci., 11, 2714–2726.

i511

