BIOINFORMATICS

Vol. 30 ECCB 2014, pages i534–i540
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu461

Point estimates in phylogenetic reconstructions
Philipp Benner1,*, Miroslav Bacˇ ak1 and Pierre-Yves Bourguignon1,2
1Max-Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, 04103 Leipzig, Germany and 2Isthmus SARL, 75002 Paris,
France

ABSTRACT
Motivation: The construction of statistics for summarizing posterior
samples returned by a Bayesian phylogenetic study has so far been
hindered by the poor geometric insights available into the space of
phylogenetic trees, and ad hoc methods such as the derivation of a
consensus tree makeup for the ill-definition of the usual concepts of
posterior mean, while bootstrap methods mitigate the absence of a
sound concept of variance. Yielding satisfactory results with suffi-
ciently concentrated posterior distributions, such methods fall short
of providing a faithful summary of posterior distributions if the data
do not offer compelling evidence for a single topology.
Results: Building upon previous work of Billera et al., summary stat-
istics such as sample mean, median and variance are defined as the
geometric median, Frechet mean and variance, respectively. Their
computation is enabled by recently published works, and embeds
an algorithm for computing shortest paths in the space of trees.
Studying the phylogeny of a set of plants, where several tree topolo-
gies occur in the posterior sample, the posterior mean balances cor-
topologies, where a
rectly the contributions from the different
consensus tree would be biased. Comparisons of
the posterior
mean, median and consensus trees with the ground truth using simu-
lated data also reveals the benefits of a sound averaging method when
reconstructing phylogenetic trees.
Availability and implementation: We provide two independent im-
plementations of the algorithm for computing Frechet means, geomet-
ric medians and variances in the space of phylogenetic trees.
TFBayes: https://github.com/pbenner/tfbayes, TrAP: https://github.
com/bacak/TrAP.
Contact: philipp.benner@mis.mpg.de

1 INTRODUCTION

Phylogenetic trees are central to the study of evolution, so much
that the sketch of a tree of species by Sir Charles Darwin has
become the icon of this theory. Nowadays, trees relating units of
selection (be it functional domains, genes or species) are struc-
tures of primary interest for systematists, but also instrumental
to a wealth of other studies where evolutionary correlations need
to be accounted for [see, for instance, McCue et al. (2001)].
Various statistical models pertaining to diverse types of observ-
ables can be found in the literature, as well as methods, for
estimating their parameters and reconstructing a phylogenetic
tree (Gascuel, 2005). Some estimation methods proceed by max-
imizing a posterior distribution or a likelihood function, and are
amenable to an exact reconstruction of the optimal tree, but
Bayesian phylogenetic analyses generally produce posterior dis-
tributions that are best explored by generating posterior samples.
While a large enough posterior
sample offers a faithful

*To whom correspondence should be addressed

representation of the posterior knowledge, it is of little scientific
interest unless summarized by some statistics (Robert, 2001). A
summary can balance contributions from the different tree topol-
ogies occurring in the sample, resulting in a legit phylogenetic
tree, or combine them within a phylogenetic network. Here we
focus on the former, showing how to build a phylogenetic tree
that faithfully represents the sample in its entirety, despite com-
peting topologies occur.

Provided a unique topology with n edges occurs in the sample,
each tree including its edge lengths can be identified by a point in
the positive orthant of the Euclidean space Rn. Performing an
average of the sample in this linear representation is a straight-
forward operation, which produces a legit posterior mean tree. If
more than one tree topology occurs, the trees are no longer
mapped all to the same linear space, and the posterior mean is
ill-defined. Selecting the a posteriori most probable tree topology
may seem a sound alternative, however, with the unpleasant
consequence of neglecting all the sampled trees of different
topology, and therefore would not provide a satisfactory repre-
sentation of the posterior. The construction of a consensus tree,
using an absolute majority rule (Margush and McMorris, 1981)
to decide which one among competing edges should be retained,
has been widely adopted by the interested community as the
method of choice to summarize posterior samples of phylogen-
etic trees. On the theoretical side, decision-theoretic justifications
of this construction have been proposed (Holder et al., 2003;
Huggins et al., 2011). However, they are built upon loss functions
that neglect edge lengths, focusing only on the tree topology.
Besides, from the authors’ point of view, it is also a rather
conservative approach, as the absence of an absolute majority
among edges results in the inclusion of none of them, thereby
producing unresolved branching points. The extended majority-
rule consensus method (also known as greedy consensus method)
has been introduced to remedy this drawback by adding edges
with 550% support (Bryant, 2003). Despite this improvement,
the consensus methods neglect much of the available information
in a sample by ignoring the context in which an edge occurs (i.e.
the remaining topology of the tree as well as all other edge
lengths). Reporting a posterior mean that balances the contribu-
tions from each topology including edge lengths rather than
isolated edges would therefore be of utmost interest.

Building upon the work published by Billera et al. (2001), who
deciphered the geometric structure of the space of phygenetic
trees and first proposed a construction of the tree space (some-
times also called BHV tree space, where BHV is an acronym of
Billera, Holmes and Vogtmann), the purpose of this article is to
show how the computation of the posterior mean of a sample of
phylogenetic trees can be achieved by simply reaching out for the
appropriate geometry. The BHV space is obtained by gluing
together the positive orthants of the linear space associated to

ß The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits
non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com

each topology, so that a point in this space identifies both a tree
topology and the lengths of the corresponding edges. The adja-
cency structure between any two orthants reflects the edges
shared by the two corresponding topologies and permits the
definition of paths visiting several orthants. Any two trees are
connected by at least one path, and the one with minimal length
is called a geodesic. Therefore, the length of a geodesic qualifies
as a distance function between phylogenetic trees, and offers a
theoretically and practically appealing alternative to existing dis-
tances
distance).
Furthermore, using implicit characterizations of the posterior
mean and median as minimizers of appropriate loss functions,
algorithms developed by Bacˇ ak (2013, 2014); Miller et al. (2012);
Sturm (2003) compute an approximation of these statistics by
walking along geodesics. Here, the determination of the geo-
desics is done in polynomial time, thanks to an algorithm
owing to Owen and Provan (2011).

the Robinson–Foulds

(e.g. NNI

or

This article gathers and combines technical results scattered
across multiple mathematics papers, into a general statistical
framework for analyzing posterior distributions over phylogen-
etic trees easily accessible to the target readership, namely prac-
titioners in Bayesian phylogenetics. Certainly, many other
applications exist where computing an average phylogenetic
tree is of great importance. The methods presented here are
not restricted to Bayesian statistics, yet in this context, they
allow to recover basic statistical concepts such as the posterior
mean and median, as well as a notion of variance to measure the
posterior uncertainty.

After a gentle introduction to the geometry of the tree space in
Section 2.1, the geometric median and Frechet mean over this
space are constructed in Section 2.2. The algorithms computing
those quantities are outlined in Section 2.3, while Section 3 shows
the method in action, and illustrates how it compares with the
majority-rule consensus method.

2 METHODS

Given a generative model and a prior distribution over its parameter
space, a Bayesian analysis of observations carried across species related
by evolution produces a posterior distribution over the space of all pos-
sible phylogenetic trees for this set of species (Gascuel, 2005; Robert and
Casella, 1999). The size of this space grows super-exponentially with the
number of species, and it is often intractable to compute the normaliza-
tion constant of this distribution. In such cases, sampling methods offer a
way to explore the posterior distribution via an arbitrarily large sample
drawn from it without requiring any further knowledge. However, al-
though a posterior sample offers a representation of the full posterior
distribution, it is of little scientific interest in absence of a method to
summarize it. Building upon previous works by Billera et al. (2001),
Miller et al. (2012), Owen and Provan (2011) and Bacˇ ak (2013, 2014),
we propose here to define and compute posterior mean in a sound
manner, an approach so far hindered by the poor geometrical insights
into the space of phylogenetic trees (see also Gascuel, 2005).

2.1 The geometry of the tree space
The elucidation of the geometric structure of the space of phylogenetic
trees is because of Billera, Holmes and Vogtmann (2001). For any integer
n  3; a phylogenetic n-tree is a connected graph without cycle that has
n + 1 terminal vertices called leaves, which are labeled from 0 to n and
associated with the n + 1 species considered in the phylogenetic study.

Point estimates in phylogenetic reconstructions

e1

0

4

e2

e3

1 2

3

5

6

Fig. 1. An example of a 6-tree

The non-terminal vertices of a tree bear no label, as they are seen as sheer
‘branching points’. An example of a 6-tree is shown in Figure 1.

The construction of the tree space relies fundamentally on the identi-
fication of edges of the tree as splits: an edge is uniquely associated to the
partition of the set of leaves L=f0; . . . ; ng into two disjoint and non-
empty subsets L1 [ L2=L that would be disconnected in the graph struc-
ture by its removal. Such a split is denoted by L1jL2: For instance, the
edges labeled e1, e2 and e3 of the tree in Figure 1 correspond to the splits
ð0; 4; 5; 6j1; 2; 3Þ;ð0; 1; 2; 3j4; 5; 6Þ and ð0; 1; 2; 3; 4j5; 6Þ;
respectively.
Conversely, given a set of leaves and splits subjects to certain conditions,
a unique tree is specified. Namely, it is required that any two splits L1jL2
and L1

0 are compatible, that is, one of the sets

0jL2

L1 \ L2

0; L1

0 \ L2; L1 \ L1

0; L2 \ L2

0

must be empty.

+

0jL2

0 =2 SðtÞ.

The topology of a phylogenetic tree t can therefore be uniquely speci-
fied via the associated set of compatible splits, which is denoted by S(t).
Yet, a phylogenetic tree is more than a sheer topology, as its edges also
have (positive) length. Writing jejt for the length of the edge e=L1jL2 of
t, one obtains a canonical mapping of the phylogenetic tree t onto R2n 1
by further setting je0jt=0 whenever e0=L1
While any phylogenetic tree over a given set of species can be repre-
sented in this way in the linear cone R2n 1
+ , the converse is obviously not
true: Assume that e and e0 are two incompatible edges, any coordinates in
the linear cone that have positive entries for e and e0 do not correspond to
any legit phylogenetic tree. In other words, the set of phylogenetic trees
forms a manifold in the linear cone R2n 1
+ . All the phylogenetic trees
t sharing a given topology also exhibit the same split set S, and are
such that jejt=0 whenever e =2 S. The BHV tree space can therefore be
understood as a collection of smaller dimensional positive orthants
embedded jointly in R2n 1, each associated to a particular tree topology.
Among these orthants, those of maximal dimension play a special role: a
tree whose representation lies in their interior is binary, as such trees have
the maximal possible number of edges. Shrinking the length of any edge
down to zero results in the formation of a triple branching-point, so that
the orthants associated to non-binary tree topologies appear as the faces
of larger dimensional orthants.

More interestingly, non-maximal orthants (those associated to non-
binary tree topologies) are faces of several orthants simultaneously. The
simplest instance is a triple-branching point, from which three different
edges can be grown depending on which pair of species diverged first. As
these three edges cannot be compatible, these three departures from the
triple-branching point lie in different orthants, which are therefore all
adjacent. Figure 2 shows a section of T 4, where every tree in the interior
of the orthant is a binary tree. For instance, the point ð0; 1=2Þ may be
reached by taking a tree from the interior and shrinking the length of the
edge e1 to zero. This location corresponds to a non-binary tree that lies at
the face of three maximal orthants.
As an example, take the space T 3, which consists of all trees with only
four leaves. Binary trees in this space have a single inner edge identified as
one of the splits ð0; 1j2; 3Þ; ð0; 2j1; 3Þ or ð0; 3j1; 2Þ. An orthant ½0;1Þ is
associated with each of the splits. The origin 0 is a face of each orthant,

i535

P.Benner et al.

0

1 2 34

(0,1/2)

0

1 2 3 4 (0,0)

(1,1)

0

4

3

1 2

0

1 23 4

(3/4,0)

Fig. 2. 4-trees of a given combinatorial structure. The horizontal direc-
tion shows the length of e1 : ð0; 3; 4j1; 2Þ, whereas the vertical direction
shows e2 : ð0; 4j1; 2; 3Þ

which represents the same non-binary tree. A piece of T 3 is constructed
by gluing all three orthants together at this common point.

The tree space, as a compound of orthants, is not a convex subset of
R2n 1
+ : while one can form a linear interpolation between two trees of
different topologies in the embedding space R2n 1
+ , by simply shrinking
the edges to be removed and simultaneously growing those to be created,
the cooccurrence of incompatible edges along this path places it outside
of the tree space. However, as seen above, the orthants composing the
tree space have a rich adjacency structure, which guarantees at least the
path-connectedness of the space: any two phylogenetic trees can be con-
nected by at least one path that remains in this space, although this path
might not be a straight line as in R2n 1
+ whenever the topologies differ.
Yet, these paths have a length, and one can consider the shortest path
connecting two trees. In geometric terms, such a path is called a geodesic.
Defining a distance over the tree space as the length of the shortest path
connecting any two points equips the space with a metric dð;Þ which, as
an alternative to the NNI or Robinson–Foulds distances, allows to meas-
ure the discrepancy between any two trees, whatever their topologies.
Although the technical details are not important for this article,
it
should be noted that the BHV tree space is a Hadamard space (Billera
et al., 2001), which allows to use tools from this mathematical field.

2.2 Mean, median and variance of a sample of

phylogenetic trees

Let us now exploit the above geometric properties of the tree space to
summarize a sample of phylogenetic trees by a single point. Following the
rationale of decision theory (e.g. Robert, 2001), the construction begins
with the definition of a loss function, which measures how faithful a rep-
resentation of the sample would be achieved by a given point in the tree
space. A loss function is defined as the cost Lðt; t0Þ of choosing a phylo-
genetic tree t0 instead of some other t, and the decision theory literature
advocates strongly to summarize a posterior distribution by choosing ^t as
the minimizer of the expected loss function

Z

^t= arg min

t02T n

T n

Lðt; t0ÞtjXdt ;

ð1Þ

where tjX denotes the posterior distribution over phylogenetic trees
given the data X. Approximating the latter via a posterior sample of
phylogenetic trees t1; . . . ; tK, the above formula becomes

X

K

i=1

^t= arg min

t02T n

1
K

Lðti; t0Þ :

space, it is well-known that the resulting estimates coincide respectively
with the median and mean of the posterior distribution. Although the tree
space is not Euclidean, distances between pairs of trees are well defined,
and a minimizer of (Equation 1) can be sought, respectively yielding the
so-called geometric median and Frechet mean.

In contrast to other approaches that provide a decision-theoretic ar-
gument for point estimates of phylogenetic trees (e.g. Holder et al., 2003;
Huggins et al., 2011), the loss function considered here derives the intrin-
sic metric of the underlying space. In particular, the loss function con-
siders both the topology and the branch lengths of phylogenetic trees, as
opposed to those supporting the consensus method, and thereby con-
siders all available information in a sample. Unfortunately,
in tree
space, a simple gradient search is not a practical method to solve such
optimization problems (see Miller et al., 2012). Therefore, appropriate
algorithms are required and will be presented in Section 2.3.

A side benefit of the method presented here is the sound definition of
the sample variance, also called the Frechet variance, which is simply
given as the value of the minimization problem with the squared distance.
In complement to the point estimate, this quantity provides the modeler
with insight onto the reliability of the point estimate. It is noteworthy that
existing phylogenetic reconstruction methods are not tied to a notion of
variance, and often retort to bootstrapping methods for reporting similar
information.

2.3 Computing the sample mean, median and variance
The question of how to compute medians and means of a given set of trees
will be addressed in the following. It turns out that efficient approxima-
tion methods from optimization theory can be extended into Hadamard
spaces and applied to median and mean computations. For the reader’s
convenience, the simple version for unweighted medians and means is
outlined here (see also Bacˇ ak, 2013).

computing a median of a given set of

2.3.1 Algorithm for computing medians Let us first describe the
algorithm for
trees
t=ft1; . . . ; tKg (i.e. the set of all tree samples).
Set x0 = t1 and suppose that at the i-th iteration, an approximation xi
2 T n of the median of t is available. To find xi+1; a tree tk is selected from
the set of trees t at random and xi+1 is defined as a point on the geodesic
between xi and tk. (In other words, xi+1 is a convex combination of xi and
tk, which will be denoted ð1   Þxi+tk for some  2 ½0; 1.) The position
of xi+1 on this geodesic is determined by a parameter i 2 ½0; 1; which is
computed at each iteration. By this procedure, we obtain a sequence of
trees x1; x2; . . ., which is known to converge to a median of t:
ALGORITHM 2.1 (Computing median). Let x0=t1: At each step i 2 N0;
choose randomly ri 2 f1; . . . ; Kg according to the uniform distribution and
put

ð

xi+1= 1   i
n

Þxi+itri ;
o
; for each i 2 N0, where d is the

with i defined by i=min 1;

metric on T n.

1

ði+1Þdðtri ;xiÞ

2.3.2 Algorithm for computing means Computing the mean is simi-
lar to the computation of the median. As a matter of fact, it only differs in
the coefficients determining the position of xi+1 on the geodesic from xi
to tk:
ALGORITHM 2.2 (Computing mean). Let x0 = t1 and, at each step, i 2 N0;
choose randomly ri 2 f1; . . . ; Kg according to the uniform distribution and
put

Two very typical choices for the loss function are the distance and the
squared distance. When the parameters to be estimated lie in a Euclidean

xi+1=

1

i+1

xi+

i

i+1

tri :

i536

The approximation algorithms for computing medians and means use
(at each step) the algorithm for finding a geodesic in tree space by Owen
and Provan (2011).

3 RESULTS

The content of this section is intended to illustrate the behavior
of the posterior mean and median, in comparison with the ma-
jority-rule consensus tree, which is, for instance, computed by
MrBayes (Huelsenbeck and Ronquist, 2001). Following a formal
argument that relates these two estimates when extremely large
or little information is available, the posterior distributions
derived from real and simulated datasets are investigated in a
way that best illustrates the different outcomes yielded by the
existing and the proposed approaches. A prerequisite is the adop-
tion of a specific statistical model, which is outlined first.

3.1 Consensus versus posterior mean

The majority-rule consensus method is a reference method to
summarize samples from a posterior distribution. There, the con-
sensus tree consists of those splits that occur in 450% of the
samples. The average length of a retained edge is computed
using the subsample where the corresponding split does occur,
thereby neglecting a fraction of the posterior mass, but also the
context in which the split occurs. In contrast, the Frechet mean
and geometric median account for the full posterior, and are
expected to provide a more meaningful summary. However,
both estimates have a property called stickiness (see Miller
et al., 2012): If there is a high posterior uncertainty on the
topology, the Frechet mean and geometric median result in
non-binary trees, a behavior that parallels the multiple branching
points reconstructed by the consensus tree when no absolute
majority occurs.
Take for instance the space T 3 that consists of three orthants
½0;1Þ glued together at 0, as discussed earlier, and place a tree
on each orthant. If all three trees are equally far apart, say at a
distance r to the origin, then obviously the Frechet mean lies at
the origin. The term stickiness refers to the fact that the mean
stays at the origin if one of the trees is moved further away. In
fact, one tree may be located at a distance anywhere between
r and 2r away from the origin without affecting the mean.
Instead of moving one tree further away from the origin, one
may similarly add another tree somewhere between the three
trees, and the Frechet mean would again stay at the origin.
this phenomenon can be
observed in the same setting. Equip T 3 with a distribution
whose trace in each orthant is a normalized Gaussian distribu-
tion, centered at identical distance from the origin, and truncated
at 0. By symmetry the Frechet mean is at the origin, and one can
ask how far the location parameter m of one component can be
perturbed without affecting the mean. In T 3, m is just a scalar,
and one can study the distance of the Frechet mean ^t to the
origin 0 as a function of m. An analytic but complicated solution
of the distance dð0; ^tÞ exists; however, a fairly good answer is
provided by the following approximation:

A probabilistic counterpart of

)

(
dð0; ^tÞ  max 0;

m  

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
p
2=ðeÞ
1+2ð1Þ

  2ð1Þ

; m  1

Point estimates in phylogenetic reconstructions

where  is the standard normal distribution function. The
Frechet mean stays at the origin until m reaches 2.16, which
roughly matches the case of only three trees. Also in this case one
may similarly increase the probability mass on one orthant and
the Frechet mean would stay at the origin until a certain thresh-
old is reached.

3.2 Statistical model

The statistical model we use in this study is often used for the
analyses of motifs of transcription factor binding sites. It became
popular because of its analytic tractability (cf. Siddharthan et al.,
2005), and it is simple enough so that the marginal likelihood of
an alignment, given a phylogenetic tree can be computed analyt-
ically. In particular, it permits Bayesian model selection, or to
gain some insights on how well an estimate generalizes to new
data, and therefore qualifies perfectly for the purpose of compar-
ing different downstream methods for summarizing the posterior
samples.

A dataset consists of an alignment of n + 1 homologous se-
quences. The observations within each column of the alignment
are assumed to evolve according to a phylogenetic tree t. The
topology of the phylogenetic tree is a priori uniformly distribu-
ted, and the edge lengths of t are drawn from a gamma distri-
bution. The process of evolution is specified by a mutation
model, which is parameterized by a column-specific stationary
distribution . It follows a priori a Dirichlet distributed with
pseudocounts . It is sufficient to discuss the model for a
the alignment. Binary trees have 2n   1
single column of
nodes, each of which is associated with a random variable XðkÞ
that takes values in an alphabet A. Assume that node k is the
parent of node i. The mutation process along the edge between
the two nodes is defined as

XðiÞjXðkÞ

=x; =#  pMi Categoricalð#Þ+pM i

x ;

which was introduced by Felsenstein (1981). The probability of a
mutation from node k to node i is denoted pMi and depends on
the length l of the edge that connects the two nodes,
i.e.
pMi =1   exp ð lÞ. Furthermore, pM i
denotes the probability of
=1   pMi .
no mutation, given as pM i

To obtain samples from the posterior distribution, we imple-
mented a Metropolis coupled MCMC algorithm (Geyer and
Thompson, 1995) for the given model. In the sequel, these sam-
ples will serve as input to the reconstrution of the posterior mean,
median, and consensus trees.

3.3 Estimation results
Using a multiple sequence alignment from a study by Karol et al.
(2001), which was slightly modified by Yang and Rannala
(2005), the phylogeny of the small subunit rRNA gene (SSU
rRNA) from the nuclear genome of eight land plants and six
charales (see Fig. 3) has been reconstructed. It appears that the
edge that separates Psilotum nudum and Dicksonia antarctica
from the remaining tree has a very short length of 0.0027.
Figure 4 shows the marginal posterior distribution of this edge
(e1) and a competing one (e2) that groups P.nudum with Taxus
baccata and Arabidopsis thaliana. There remains a high posterior
uncertainty about the exact topology of the tree at this very

i537

P.Benner et al.

Tolypella int prolifera

Nitella opaca

Marchantia polymorpha
Sphagnum palustre

Anthoceros formosae

Huperzia lucidula
Dicksonia antarctica

Psilotum nudum

Arabidopsis thaliana

Taxus baccata

Lamprothamnium macropogon
Chara connivens
Nitellopsis obtusa
Lychnothamnus barbatus

e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
y
t
i
s
n
e
D

0
4

0
3

0
2

0
1

0

0.05 0.025
← | e1|

0

0.025 0.05
| e2| →

Fig. 3. Frechet mean estimated from the small subunit rRNA gene (SSU
rRNA) from the nuclear genome of eight land plants and six charales.
Edge lengths are plotted in horizontal direction only

Fig. 4. Marginal posterior density estimate of two edges e1 and e2. The
edge e1 groups P.nudum with D.antarctica, while e2 groups P.nudum with
T.baccata and A.thaliana. The Frechet mean is shown as a vertical line

branching. The posterior mass on e1 is, however, sufficient for
the majority-rule consensus tree to include this edge. However,
there, it has a much longer length than in the posterior mean tree
(by 0.011) because this length is obtained by averaging only the
lengths of this edge when it occurs in the sample, neglecting the
contributions of the alternative edges. Clearly, the shorter edge
length of the posterior mean tree better accounts for the uncer-
tainty, and the consensus tree appears, in contrast, to have over-
estimated branch lengths.

The assessment of reconstruction methods for phylogenetic
trees is notoriously hindered by the ignorance of the true evolu-
tionary history to be uncovered, as the latter is never observed.
Instead, the estimated tree of Figure 3 has been used to generate
50 alignments of length m = 50, 100, 250 and 500. For each
generated dataset, 210 000 posterior samples were obtained
using one cold Markov chain and three heated chains. The
Frechet mean, geometric median and consensus tree of the last
200 000 samples were computed. In the whole study, tree topol-
ogies are uniformly distributed a priori, while branch lengths are
distributed according to a Gammað1; 0:4Þ.

Figure 5 shows the distances of the computed estimates to the
generating tree. For alignments of the lengths considered, the
Frechet mean and geometric median are generally closer to the
generating tree. A trend appears, from the greatest discrepancy
observed for the shortest alignments, to an almost systematic
agreement for the longest alignments. It should be noted that
even shorter alignments generally result in very broad a posterior
distributions so that all three estimates coincide with a star tree.
At the opposite extreme, large datasets support a clear decision
about the topology of the tree, placing most of the mass of the
posterior distribution in a single orthant, and resulting in mostly
agreeing estimates. One also observes that the geometric median
is in most cases closer to the generating tree than the Frechet
mean. This comes at no surprise given the skewness of the
gamma prior on the branch lengths.

The model permits an analytical computation of the marginal
likelihood of an alignment given a phylogenetic tree, thereby
offering an evaluation of how the estimated model generalizes
to novel observations. Using a leave-one-out approach, the aver-
age (unnormalized) posterior value achieved by the estimators
was computed on the remaining 49 datasets of the same length
(see Table 1). For all alignment lengths, the Frechet mean and

i538

(a)

)
2
ˆt

,
t
(
d
,
)
1
ˆt

,
t
(
d

5
0

.

4
.
0

3
.
0

(c)

0
2
.
0

5
1
.
0

0
1
.
0

)
2
ˆt

,
t
(
d
,
)
1
ˆt

,
t
(
d

(b)

3
.
0

2
.
0

ˆt1
ˆt2

ˆt1
ˆt2

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40

(d)

2
1
.
0

0
1
.
0

8
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

ˆt1
ˆt2

ˆt1
ˆt2

0.10

0.15
d(t, ˆt3)

0.20

0.06

0.08

0.10
d(t, ˆt3)

0.12

Fig. 5. Distances dð;Þ of the Frechet mean ^t1, geometric median ^t2 and
consensus tree ^t3 to the generating tree t for alignments of length 50 (a),
100 (b), 250 (c) and 500 (d). The straight line shows the main diagonal

geometric median show a slightly higher average posterior value
compared with the majority-rule consensus tree. But the differ-
ence is too minor to make any definite statements, as also shown
by the variance of the estimates. Interestingly, however, while the
variance of the mean and median steadily decreases with data
length, the consensus estimate shows an increase in variance for a
data length of 250. A much clearer picture is gained by consider-
ing how often the mean and median have a higher posterior
value than the consensus (see Table 1). The results show that
the consensus tree clearly perfomes worse.

Another quantity of interest is the Frechet variance of the pos-
terior distribution, which provides us with a measure of uncer-
tainty. The mean variance is shown in Figure 6 separately for all
four dataset lengths. Similar to the case of normal distributed i.i.d.
random variables, the variance decreases approximately with
1=m. Another, maybe more intuitive statistic, is to compute a
credibility region around the Frechet mean ^t that contains
a given proportion c of the posterior mass. More precisely,
consider the set of trees B= t 2 T n j dð ^t; tÞ  d
for some d



	

Point estimates in phylogenetic reconstructions

Table 1. (a) Mean posterior values for the Frechet mean, geometric median and consensus tree (the variance is shown in
brackets) and (b) percentage of times the mean and median show a higher posterior value on the remaining (joined) 49
datasets

(a) Posterior

(b) Performance

m

50
100
250
500

Mean

Median

Consensus

Mean

Median

–202.37 (11.23)
–409.30 (5.97)
–1035.66 (5.12)
–2074.11 (3.75)

–201.76 (11.29)
–409.04 (5.88)
–1035.62 (5.32)
–2074.01 (3.75)

–203.22 (10.10)
–409.39 (3.66)
–1036.72 (5.02)
–2074.96 (3.99)

0.76
0.66
0.90
0.78

0.78
0.64
0.90
0.80

Note: Both statistics were evaluated separately on datasets of length m = 50, 100, 250 and 500.

2
.
1

8
.
0

4

.

0

0
0

.

variance
credibility radius

100

200

300

400

500

m (data set length)

Fig. 6. Average Frechet variance and credibility radius d for datasets of
length 50, 100, 250 and 500. The error bars show 1 SD

R

BtjXdt=c. The bound d may be called the credibility

such that
radius. Figure 6 shows the results for c = 0.68.

4 DISCUSSION

By recognizing the global geometric nature of the space of phylo-
genetic trees, this article shows that the fundamental statistical
notions defined over linear spaces, such as sample mean, median
and variance, can be generalized to more complex spaces such as
the tree space. Besides the sheer recovery of well-defined funda-
mental statistical quantities in the particular setting of phylogen-
etic studies, this study also demonstrates critical differences in the
behavior of the posterior mean and the consensus tree.

The reconstruction of a consensus tree retains splits that occur
in at least half of the samples. This absolute majority rule
prevents the introduction of splits favored by sheer fluctuations,
but also aims to maximize the information extracted from the
sample. The length of the retained edges is indeed often simply
set to the average length of their occurrences in the sample, so
that the lengths of the discarded edges never enter the determin-
ation of the consensus tree. As illustrated on a real dataset by
Figure 4, the neglection of a fraction of the sample results in
biased estimates, where edge lengths are systematically overesti-
mated from the perspective of the geometry of the tree space.

The extent of the bias born by the consensus tree is however
tightly related to the concentration of the posterior distribution,

which decreases the amount of information dropped in the re-
construction process, and the simulation-based study shown
above confirms that the consensus tree and the posterior average
disagree mostly when there exists no compelling evidence for a
single topology. Illustrated on small datasets, the consensus tree
appears dramatically further of the generating tree than the pos-
terior mean, as a result of its neglection of a fraction of the
information brought by the sample.

The proper definition of a variance for a sample of phylogen-
etic trees has consequences that should not be overlooked, and is
believed by the authors to bear even more potential for applica-
tions. Not only is the reporting of the credibility of the Bayesian
estimate made simple by this quantity, but it also opens the way
to the generalization of variance-based studies of samples of
phylogenetic trees, including principal components analysis, a
task already tackled by Nye (2011). Measuring the spread of a
set of trees is a useful tool not only to quantify the posterior
uncertainty. For instance, in a recent study Salichos et al. (2014)
developed an information theoretic measure to quantify the in-
congruence of gene trees.

Funding: This work was supported by the European Research
Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework
Programme (FP7/2007-2013)/ERC grant agreement no 267087.

Conflict of Interest: none declared.

REFERENCES

Bacˇ ak,M. (2013) Computing medians and means in Hadamard spaces. arXiv,

1210.2145.

Bacˇ ak,M. (2014) Convex Analysis and Optimization in Hadamard Spaces, volume 22
of De Gruyter Series in Nonlinear Analysis and Applications. Walter de Gruyter
& Co., Berlin.

Billera,L. et al. (2001) Geometry of the space of phylogenetic trees. Adv. Appl.

Math., 27, 733–767.

Bryant,D. (2003) A classification of consensus methods for phylogenetics. DIMACS

Ser. Discrete Math. Theor. Comput. Sci., 61, 163–184.

Felsenstein,J. (1981) Evolutionary trees from DNA sequences: a maximum likeli-

hood approach. J. Mol. Evol., 17, 368–376.

Gascuel,O. (2005) Mathematics of Evolution and Phylogeny. Oxford University

Press, New York.

Geyer,C.J. and Thompson,E.A. (1995) Annealing markov chain monte carlo with

applications to ancestral inference. J. Am. Stat. Assoc., 90, 909–920.

Holder,M. et al. (2003) A justification for reporting the majority-rule consensus tree

in Bayesian phylogenetics. Syst. Biol., 57, 814–821.

i539

P.Benner et al.

Huelsenbeck,J. and Ronquist,F. (2001) MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylo-

genetic trees. Bioinformatics, 17, 754–755.

Huggins,P.M. et al. (2011) Bayes estimators for phylogenetic reconstruction. Syst.

Biol., 60, 528–540.

Robert,C. (2001) The Bayesian Choice. Springer Texts in Statistics. 2nd edn. Springer-
Verlag, New York. From decision-theoretic foundations to computational im-
plementation, Translated and revised from the French original by the author.

Robert,C. and Casella,G. (1999) Monte Carlo Statistical Methods. 1st edn. Springer-

Karol,K.G. et al. (2001) The closest living relatives of land plants. Science, 294,

Verlag, New York.

2351–2353.

Salichos,L. et al. (2014) Novel information theory-based measures for quantifying

Margush,T. and McMorris,F.R. (1981) Consensus n-trees. Bull. Math. Biol., 43,

incongruence among phylogenetic trees. Mol. Biol. Evol., 31, 1500–1513.

239–244.

Siddharthan,R. et al. (2005) PhyloGibbs: a Gibbs sampling motif finder that in-

McCue,L.A. et al. (2001) Phylogenetic footprinting of transcription factor binding

corporates phylogeny. PLoS Computat. Biol., 1, e67.

sites in proteobacterial genomes. Nucleic Acids Res., 29, 774–782.

Miller,E. et al. (2012) Averaging metric phylogenetic trees. arXiv, 1211.7046.
Nye,T.M.W. (2011) Principal components analysis in the space of phylogenetic

trees. Ann. Statist., 39, 2716–2739.

Sturm,K.T. (2003) Probability measures on metric spaces of nonpositive curvature.
In: Heat kernels and Analysis on Manifolds, Graphs, and Metric Spaces (Paris,
2002), volume 338 of Contemporary Mathematics. American Mathematics
Society, Providence, RI, pp. 357–390.

Owen,M. and Provan,S. (2011) A fast algorithm for computing geodesic distances in

Yang,Z. and Rannala,B. (2005) Branch-length prior influences bayesian posterior

tree space. IEEE/ACM Trans. Computat. Biol. Bioinform., 8, 2–13.

probability of phylogeny. Syst. Biol., 54, 455–470.

i540

