Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 13 (2015) 64–68

H O S T E D   BY

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics

www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb

www.sciencedirect.com

RESOURCE REVIEW

Web Resources for Model Organism Studies

Bixia Tang 1,2,a, Yanqing Wang 1,b, Junwei Zhu 1,c, Wenming Zhao 1,*,d

1 Core Genomic Facility, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China
2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China

Received 9 January 2015; revised 22 January 2015; accepted 31 January 2015
Available online 20 February 2015

Handled by Zhang Zhang

KEYWORDS

Model organism;
Database;
Genome;
Bioinformatics;
Biology

Introduction

Abstract An ever-growing number of resources on model organisms have emerged with the
continued development of sequencing technologies. In this paper, we review 13 databases of model
organisms, most of which are reported by the National Institutes of Health of the United States
(NIH; http://www.nih.gov/science/models/). We provide a brief description for each database, as
well as detail its data source and types, functions, tools, and availability of access. In addition,
we also provide a quality assessment about these databases. Signiﬁcantly, the organism databases
instituted in the early 1990s––such as the Mouse Genome Database (MGD), Saccharomyces
Genome Database (SGD), and FlyBase––have developed into what are now comprehensive, core
authority resources. Furthermore, all of the databases mentioned here update continually according
to user feedback and with advancing technologies.

Model organisms were placed at the forefront of biomedical
research by the end of the 20th century [1]. Deﬁning the
etymology of the term model organism is relatively difﬁcult;
however, the development of molecular biology technologies
during the 1960s and 1970s led to its materialization. The
key rationale for the study of model organisms in biomedical

* Corresponding author.

E-mail: zhaowm@big.ac.cn (Zhao W).

a ORCID: 0000-0002-9357-4411.
b ORCID: 0000-0002-7985-7941.
c ORCID: 0000-0003-4689-3513.
d ORCID: 0000-0002-4396-8287.

Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.

research is to examine fundamental mechanisms that may be
shared by many or all living entities.

Some model organisms––such as Drosophila, mouse, and
maize––have long histories of use, whereas others have been
developed more recently. Since the common conception of a
model organism is
changing along with technological
advances in genome sequencing and editing,
it is difﬁcult
to provide a complete list of model organisms; therefore,
here we mainly focus on the canonical set of model organ-
isms deﬁned by the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
during the 1990s. The available web resources for the 13
covered model organisms are listed in Table S1, and we also
provide a quality assessment for each resource (Table 1)
based on ﬁve aspects: (1) webpage esthetics, (2) system per-
formance, (3) data sources, (4) software and tools, and (5)
data availability. If all aspects are covered, a full score of
5 points is given.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2015.01.003
1672-0229 ª 2015 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and
Genetics Society of China.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Table 1 Major web resources for model organism studies

Name

MGD

RGD

SGD

Link

http://www.informatics.jax.org

http://rgd.mcw.edu/

http://www.yeastgenome.org/

dictyBase

http://dictybase.org/

WormBase

http://www.wormbase.org

FlyBase

ZFIN

Xenbase

TAIR

http://ﬂybase.org/

http://zﬁn.org/

http://www.xenbase.org

http://www.arabidopsis.org/

BeetleBase

http://www.beetlebase.org

MyMpn

http://mympn.crg.eu

MaizeGDB

http://www.maizegdb.org/

ASAP

https://asap.genetics.wisc.edu/asap/home.php

Main features

Well-designed webpage; standard access speed for data; data uploading
supported; abundant eﬀective tools; FTP accepted
Well-designed webpage; standard access speed for data; data uploading
supported; abundant eﬀective tools; FTP accepted
Some browser limitation such as Firefox v35 under Win7 system; low access
speed for data; data uploading not supported; abundant eﬀective tools; web
page downloading accepted
Well-designed webpage; standard access speed for data; data uploading not
supported; abundant eﬀective tools; web page downloading accepted
Well-designed webpage; standard access speed for data; data uploading
supported; abundant eﬀective tools; FTP accepted
Well-designed webpage; standard access speed for data; data uploading not
supported; abundant eﬀective tools; FTP accepted
Well-designed webpage; standard access speed for data; data uploading
supported; abundant eﬀective tools; web page downloading accepted
Well-designed webpage; some problems exist such as wild word search 12*; data
uploading supported; abundant eﬀective tools; FTP accepted
Well designed webpage; standard access speed for data; data uploading
supported; abundant eﬀective tools; FTP accepted
Well-designed webpage; standard access speed for data; data uploading
supported; abundant eﬀective tools; FTP accepted
Well-designed webpage; standard access speed for data; data uploading not
supported; abundant eﬀective tools; web page downloading accepted
Well-designed webpage; standard access speed for data; data uploading
supported; abundant eﬀective tools; FTP accepted
Well-designed webpage; standard access speed for data; data uploading
supported; abundant eﬀective tools; web page downloading accepted

Rating

wwwww

wwwww

wwwqq

wwwwq

wwwww

wwwwq

wwwww

wwwwq

wwwww

wwwwq

wwwwq

wwwww

wwwww

Refs.

[2–4]

[5]

[6,7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

Note: The assessment evidence covers 5 aspects: webpage esthetics, system performance, data sources, software and tools, and data availability. The details are as follows: whether webpage is well
designed; whether the accessing speed is acceptable; whether data uploading is supported; whether there are abundant effective tools, and whether instant downloading is supported.

T
a
n
g

B

e
t

a
l

/

W
e
b
R
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
s

f
o
r

M
o
d
e
l

O

r
g
a
n
i
s

m
S
t
u
d
i
e
s

6
5

66

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 13 (2015) 64–68

Mouse Genome Informatics

The Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) is a comprehensive
bioinformatics resource for the laboratory mouse (Mus muscu-
lus) that includes the Mouse Genome Database (MGD), Gene
Expression Database (GXD), Mouse Tumor Biology (MTB)
Database, Gene Ontology (GO), and MouseMine.

Initially designed in 1994, MGD is a key resource of MGI
used to curate genome information, as well as to track genome
mapping data and to record mouse mutant phenotypes [2].
MGD is mostly suited to inquire about the genetic basis of
human disease based on the phenotypic characterization of
transgenic mice. Within the database, users can access genetic,
genomic, and phenotypic data either curated from public
literature by the MGD group or deposited by researchers from
all over the world. A ‘‘Quick Search’’ function returns a broad
range of data from a keyword query, whereas more speciﬁc
search forms are also available for users, such as genes, mark-
ers and SNPs, among others. In addition, MGD supports three
vocabulary browsers for users to ﬁnd all associated annotated
information,
the Mammalian Phenotype
Ontology (MP), and the Online Mammalian Inheritance in
Man (OMIM), as well as the GBrowse and JBrowse graphical
browser to view genome interactively. Furthermore, MGD can
provide bulk access to certain kinds of information through
the Batch Query tool, or the BioMart [3] and InterMine [4]
databases. MGD undergoes weekly updates, and supports ﬁle
transfer protocol (FTP) and direct structure query language
(SQL) data retrieval methods. Overall, MGD has become a
researchers
prime
to obtain
biological information on the laboratory mouse.

including GO,

international

resource

for

Rat Genome Database

The Rat Genome Database (RGD) is a database of biological
information for studying the laboratory rat (Rattus norvegicus)
that started more than 10 years ago [5]. RGD allows research-
ers to investigate mechanisms of human physiology and dis-
ease based on experimental research acquired in the rat. The
RGD provides several types of disease-focused data, including
genetic and genomic data, as well as information on biological
pathways, phenotypes, and individual strains. To guarantee
quality data, the RGD curates a subset of data manually from
literature regarding disease models, molecular pathways, and
mammalian phenotypes. The database also utilizes controlled
vocabularies and ontologies to present data shared with other
data sources, including NCBI and Ensembl, and users can
access in-source tools to search and view data on hand. For
instance, users can use GBrowse to analyze the genetic or
genomic differences among the rat, mouse, and human.
Meanwhile, the Virtual Comparative Map function (VCMap:
http://www.animalgenome.org/VCmap/) allows users to com-
pare the genomic positions of various genes simultaneously.
Similar to the MGD, RGD users can bulk download data
from the FTP site.

Saccharomyces Genome Database

The Saccharomyces Genome Database
an
open-source database for querying the genetics and molecular

(SGD)

is

and cellular biology of Saccharomyces cerevisiae started in
1993 by David Botstein and colleagues at
the Stanford
University [6]. The SGD primarily sources manually curated
scientiﬁc literature to ensure the data quality. Currently, the
yeast genome, genes, proteins, and other encoded features
are available for user access. SGD employs GO and the
Ascomycete Phenotype Ontology (APO) to capture gene pro-
duct function and mutant phenotypes, respectively. SGD also
offers a number of tools for users to access data. For example,
users can use YeastMine to retrieve and analyze a variety of
data types, including chromosomal features, sequences, and
protein features, among others; whereas the GBrowse and
Serial Pattern of Expression Levels Locator (SPELL) [7] tools
allow users to explore genomic features and analyze microar-
ray gene expression data, respectively.

dictyBase

species

The recently contrived dictyBase is a genetic database for the
social ameba Dictyostelium discoideum [8]. Data provided in
dictyBase include the organism’s complete nuclear genome
sequence, mitochondrial genome sequence,
the extrachro-
mosomal rRNA genes, expressed sequence tags (ESTs), and
annotations information. dictyBase covers genomes of four
including D. discoideum, Dictyostelium
different
purpureum, Dictyostelium fasciculatum, and Polysphondylium
pallidum. The resource collects data from major resource
centers and projects such as Swiss-Prot and an international
consortium of the Dictyostelium Genome Project and the
Japanese cDNA Project. It also has an integrated central strain
repository to facilitate the ordering of Dictyostelium strains
and other slime molds, known as the Dicty Stock Center.
Besides maintaining the comprehensive dataset, dictyBase also
provides several tools, including a Genome Browser to display
information graphically such as genes, RNA-seq, Dicty align-
ments, and genome assembly information. Users can utilize
BLAST tools to perform comparison searches for nucleotide
and amino acid sequences, and the gene page displays inte-
grated information of genes, proteins, gene ontology, and gene
orthology. Data can be downloaded directly from the web
page and updated on a weekly to monthly basis.

WormBase

WormBase is a curated resource for the model organism
Caenorhabditis elegans [9]. Available data in WormBase
include gene models, allelic variations, mutant phenotypes,
anatomy function, expression patterns, gene interactions,
and human disease relevance. WormBase hosts the reference
genome (WBcel235) that includes 1402 corrections and loads
the annotated reference genomic sequence for over 20 species
[9]. Besides maintaining comprehensive data, WormBase also
provides several user tools. For example, users can view
graphical data with the GBrowse and BLAST/BLAT tools.
WormMine enables users to query, save, and manipulate
these objects, as well as download bulk data. Full text search
also provides the ability to do a customized search and users
can freely download data from the FTP site. WormBase con-
tinues to update and has become a dedicated resource for
researchers.

Tang B et al / Web Resources for Model Organism Studies

67

FlyBase

The Arabidopsis Information Resource

FlyBase is a Drosophila genomic database that was founded
in 1992 as a resource for collecting and representing related
information on the fruit ﬂy (Drosophila melanogaster) [10].
FlyBase curates data from the published scientiﬁc literature
accumulated over the past 20 years, including data detailing
animal phenotypes, gene expression,
interactions, and GO,
among others [10]. Besides providing several basic search
tools such as Quick Search and BLAST, FlyBase has also
developed several novel tools. These include (1) TermLink,
which uses a controlled vocabulary (CV) to classify and
annotate queried data; (2) RNA-seq Search tool, which pro-
vides a reads per kilobase per million (RPKM) value for
(3)
searching expression patterns of all annotated genes;
FeatureMapper
genomic
features such as functional elements, mutant event locations
and reagents
regions, and
QueryBuilder for full text searches. Users can download
the FlyBase data from its FTP site or use SQL to access
the database directly. FlyBase has grown into an integrated
and complex database for over 20 years and will continu-
ously update to accommodate data and software tools
available.

in one or more

sequence

function

speciﬁc

search

for

Zebraﬁsh Information Network

The Zebraﬁsh Information Network (ZFIN) is a database for
the model organism zebraﬁsh [11], which includes data on
genes, mutations, phenotypes, genotypes, gene expression,
orthology, and nucleotide and protein sequences. ZFIN col-
lects data from three primary sources: (1) curated scientiﬁc
literature; (2) collaborations with major resource centers, such
as the Sanger Institute, Ensembl, NCBI and UniProt; and (3)
submissions from individual investigators. Besides maintaining
the comprehensive data, ZFIN also provides several tools to
help users to browse data, such as BLAST and GBrowse for
alignment searches. The database also provides search inter-
faces for various data types such as genes, markers, clones,
and gene expression. Users can submit their own data to
ZFIN directly and download data from either their search
results or the web page. ZFIN updates daily.

Xenbase

Xenbase is a genetic database that maintains the genome
builds and gene models for two related species: the allote-
traploid Xenopus laevis (v7.1) and the diploid Xenopus tropi-
calis (v8.0). Xenbase provides eight module entries, including
BLAST, GBrowse, gene expression, genes search, information
and resources on Xenopus anatomy and development,
Xenopus-speciﬁc reagents and protocols, literature, and com-
munity [12]. Users can register an account to submit their
own data to Xenbase, as well as download data from the
Xenbase FTP site. The database is continually updating. At
present, the current version (v3.3.1) has added a substantial
number of relevant resources such as microarray data from
the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), antibody database,
and updated the software components over the previous
version released in 2008 (v2.01).

The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) is a genetic and
genomic database for Arabidopsis thaliana [13]. Data types
include genome sequences, gene structure and annotation,
metabolic pathways, gene expression, DNA and seed reserve
information, genome maps, genetic and physical markers, and
information on ecotypes and natural variation, among others.
TAIR manually curates public literature, integrates data and
resources from other sources––such as GenBank and the
Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC), and allows
users to upload own data. TAIR provides several tools for users
to query and analyze data, such as Textpresso to extract and
process biological literature, N-Browse to view interactive bio-
logical networks, and GBrowse that displays multiple genomes
to study genome duplication and evolution. Overall, TAIR
serves as a community resource for Arabidopsis researchers
and continues to be an essential resource for plant biologists.

Other resources

BeetleBase

BeetleBase is an integrated resource for the Tribolium research
community that hosts several data types, including unmapped
scaffolds, FGENESH-predicted genes, BAC-end sequences,
genetic markers, mutants, GO, sequence ontology, and links
to other databases. BeetleBase mainly collects sequence data
from public databases and the Tribolium research commu-
nity––including the Human Genome Sequencing Center,
NCBI, the Tribolium BAC library, and the Tribolium Mutant
Database, as well as annotation information and mapping
results from published literature. BeetleBase also provides sev-
eral user tools including BLAST for sequence alignments and a
BLAT/GMOD-integrated search engine to enhance querying
abilities. GBrowse, JBrowse, and Cmap are also provided as
map viewers. All the sequences can be downloaded from the
BeetleBase FTP site.

MyMpn

The MyMpn database is a web resource for the human
pathogen Mycoplasma pneumoniae. MyMpn mainly covers
the genomics data such as gene, gene essentiality, and operons,
transcriptomics data such as microarrays, proteomics data
including proteins, Pfam domains, complexes, and peptides,
and metabolomics data such as metabolic reactions and
growth curves
and
MyGBrowser to view genome information and enables users
to browse pathway information. Users can download data
directly from the MyMpn web page.

[15]. MyMpn supports GBrowse

Maize Genetics and Genomics Database

First released in 1991, the Maize Genetics and Genomics
Database (MaizeGDB)
includes a comprehensive dataset
encompassing information on genomic regions and loci, allelic
variation, markers and probes, gene sequences and products,
as well as phenotypic and metabolic information. MaizeGDB

68

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 13 (2015) 64–68

provides several data visualization tools, such as the ‘Locus
Lookup Tool’,
‘Bin Viewer’, and the MaizeGDB Genome
Browser to view relevant data. Users can register with the
website and submit data to data center or download data
from either the FTP site or webpage. MaizeGDB updates
continually.

Supplementary material

Supplementary material associated with this article can be
found,
in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
gpb.2015.01.003.

A Systematic Annotation Package for Community Analysis of
Genomes

References

A Systematic Annotation Package for Community Analysis of
Genomes (ASAP) is a database developed to curate sequence
and functional characterization data from the Escherichia coli
K-12 MG1655, the best studied genome of enterobacterial fam-
ily, as well as 576 other enterobacterial genomes [17]. Data
types provided by ASAP include annotations, sequences,
expression, experiments, and information on mutant strains.
ASAP is an authority-controlled database where guests can
view the published genomic data on genomes and experiments
and the full data of K-12 MG1655. However, users must be
registered as an annotator to achieve the complete set of fea-
tures potentially in a genome and add annotations [17].
ASAP supports data type-speciﬁc,
full-text, and BLAST
searches. The MG1655 data can be downloaded directly from
the webpage. ASAP is currently under development and
updates data continuously.

Concluding remarks

The web resources on model organisms have become increas-
ingly enriched in both the amount of data and available analysis
tools. The majority of the data surveyed in these databases are
manually curated from published scientiﬁc literature. All sup-
port hyperlinks to connect or share data with other databases.
To achieve user ﬂexibility and convenience, these databases also
provide several general and dedicated toolsets. Most of the
aforementioned databases are open-source and the users can
freely download data directly from the resources webpage or
FTP site. Furthermore, the databases above continuously
update, aiming to become authority resources for model organ-
ism study. Although many advantages are listed here, there are
shortcomings as well. For instance, different data formats or
interface standards are applied in establishing these databases,
which bring some limitations, for example data integration,
when the users want to access a kind of the data from different
databases. We hope that all these databases will be taken care of
by well-organized communities and perform the normative data
standardization to enhance data sharing and exchange, while
also pushing the applications of the model organism data.

Competing interests

The authors declared that there are no competing interests.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Strategic Priority Research
Program of
the Chinese Academy of Sciences of China
(Grant No. XDB13040500).

[1] Dietrich MR, Ankeny RA, Chen PM. Publication trends in model

organism research. Genetics 2014;198:787–94.

[2] Blake JA, Bult CJ, Eppig JT, Kadin JA, Richardson JEMouse
Genome Database group. The Mouse Genome Database: integra-
tion of and access to knowledge about the laboratory mouse.
Nucleic Acids Res 2014;42:D810–7.

[3] Kasprzyk A. BioMart: driving a paradigm change in biological

data management. Database (Oxford) 2011;2011 [bar049].

[4] Smith RN, Aleksic J, Butano D, Carr A, Contrino S, Hu F, et al.
InterMine: a ﬂexible data warehouse system for the integration
and analysis of heterogeneous biological data. Bioinformatics
2012;28:3163–5.

[5] Laulederkind SJ, Hayman GT, Wang SJ, Smith JR, Lowry TF,
Nigam R, et al. The rat genome database 2013 – data, tools and
users. Brief Bioinformatics 2013;14:520–6.

[6] Skrzypek MS, Hirschman J. Using the Saccharomyces Genome
Database (SGD) for analysis of genomic information. Curr
Protoc Bioinformatics 2011:1–3 [Chapter 1: Unit 1.20].

[7] Hibbs MA, Hess DC, Myers CL, Huttenhower C, Li K,
Troyanskaya OG. Exploring the functional landscape of gene
expression: directed search of
large microarray compendia.
Bioinformatics 2007;23:2692–9.

[8] Basu S, Fey P, Pandit Y, Dodson R, Kibbe WA, Chisholm RL.
DictyBase 2013: integrating multiple Dictyostelid species. Nucleic
Acids Res 2013;41:D676–83.

[9] Harris TW, Baran J, Bieri T, Cabunoc A, Chan J, Chen WJ, et al.
WormBase 2014: new views of curated biology. Nucleic Acids Res
2014;42:D789–93.

[10] St Pierre SE, Ponting L, Stefancsik R, McQuilton P, FlyBase C.
FlyBase 102 – advanced approaches to interrogating FlyBase.
Nucleic Acids Res 2014;42:D780–8.

[11] Howe DG, Bradford YM, Conlin T, Eagle AE, Fashena D,
Frazer K, et al. ZFIN, the zebraﬁsh model organism database:
increased support for mutants and transgenics. Nucleic Acids Res
2013;41:D854–60.

[12] Karpinka JB, Fortriede

James-Zorn C,
the Xenopus model
Ponferrada VG, Lee J, et al. Xenbase,
organism database; new virtualized system, data types and
genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2014;43:D756–63.

JD, Burns KA,

[13] Lamesch P, Berardini TZ, Li D, Swarbreck D, Wilks C,
Sasidharan R, et al. The Arabidopsis Information Resource
(TAIR):
improved gene annotation and new tools. Nucleic
Acids Res 2012;40:D1202–10.

[14] Kim HS, Murphy T, Xia J, Caragea D, Park Y, Beeman RW,
et al. BeetleBase in 2010: revisions to provide comprehensive
genomic information for Tribolium castaneum. Nucleic Acids Res
2010;38:D437–42.

[15] Wodke JA, Alibes A, Cozzuto L, Hermoso A, Yus E, Lluch-Senar
M, et al. MyMpn: a database for the systems biology model
organism Mycoplasma
pneumoniae. Nucleic Acids Res
2014;43:D618–23.

[16] Schaeffer ML, Harper LC, Gardiner JM, Andorf CM, Campbell
DA, Cannon EK, et al. MaizeGDB: curation and outreach go
hand-in-hand. Database (Oxford) 2011;2011 [bar022].

[17] Glasner JD. ASAP, a systematic annotation package for
community analysis of genomes. Nucleic Acids Res 2003;31:
147–51.

