Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 288–293

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics

www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb

www.sciencedirect.com

REVIEW

Induced Pluripotency for Translational Research

Menghua Wu, Guilai Chen, Baoyang Hu *

State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology and Key Laboratory of Translational Stem Cell Research,
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China

Received 29 July 2013; accepted 22 August 2013
Available online 19 September 2013

KEYWORDS

iPSCs;
Pluripotency;
Cell fate decision;
Translational medicine

Abstract The advent of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) has revolutionized the concept of
cellular reprogramming and potentially will solve the immunological compatibility issues that have
so far hindered the application of human pluripotent stem cells in regenerative medicine. Recent
ﬁndings showed that pluripotency is deﬁned by a state of balanced lineage potency, which can be
artiﬁcially instated through various procedures, including the conventional Yamanaka strategy.
As a type of pluripotent stem cell, iPSCs are subject to the usual concerns over purity of differen-
tiated derivatives and risks of tumor formation when used for cell-based therapy, though they pro-
vide certain advantages in translational research, especially in the areas of personalized medicine,
disease modeling and drug screening. iPSC-based technology, human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)
and direct lineage conversion each will play distinct roles in speciﬁc aspects of translational medi-
cine, and continue yielding surprises for scientists and the public.

Introduction

The reversion of differentiated cells to a state of pluripotency is
a fascinating idea that has long been explored in cell biology,
yet reversion to pluripotency simply through the over-expres-
sion of a set of pluripotency-associated factors in somatic cells
appeared to be impossible before Yamanaka and his col-
leagues successfully reprogrammed mouse ﬁbroblasts to plu-
ripotent stem cells, the so-called induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs). These cells exhibit the morphology and growth

properties of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and express endog-
enous ESC markers, such as Oct4 and Nanog [1]. This land-
mark breakthrough quickly evoked the enthusiasm of both
scientists and the public toward stem cells because of their
far-reaching scientiﬁc value and numerous potential applica-
tions. In this review, we summarize recent advances in the ﬁeld
of reprogramming and iPSCs, in particular the new conceptual
framework of cell fate determination and its potential applica-
tions in translational research.

From somatic cell nuclear transfer to iPSCs

* Corresponding author.

E-mail: byhu@ioz.ac.cn (Hu B).

Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.

Induced pluripotency has been studied for a very long time. In
the 1950s, Briggs and King established the technique of so-
matic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), or ‘‘cloning’’, by trans-
planting isolated nuclei into enucleated oocytes [2,3]. Using
this system, they successfully cloned tadpoles from cell nuclei
of late-stage embryos and tadpoles. In the early 1960s, John
Gurdon transplanted nuclei of adult frog intestinal cells into
1672-0229/$ - see front matter ª 2013 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China. Production and hosting
by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2013.08.001

Production and hosting by Elsevier

Wu M et al / Cell Fate Change Beyond iPSCs

289

unfertilized eggs and generated tadpoles [4,5]. Despite the pio-
neering success of SCNT in the amphibian, it was not until the
late 1990s that Ian Wilmut and colleagues cloned the ﬁrst
mammal, Dolly the sheep [6]. This work demonstrated that dif-
ferentiated somatic cells indeed retain the genetic information
that is necessary for the generation of a multicellular organism,
and during development, reversible epigenetic rather than irre-
versible genetic changes are imposed on the genome, most pos-
sibly by factors in the oocytes.

Another remarkable breakthrough in life science accompa-
nying SCNT was the derivation of ESCs from the inner cell
mass (ICM) of mouse and human blastocysts [7–9]. In an opti-
mal culture condition that enables the long-term maintenance
of pluripotency, ESCs, the in vitro counterparts of ICM cells,
can be propagated indeﬁnitely [10]. This has allowed the in-
depth dissection of pluripotency circuitry and identiﬁcation
of the master pluripotency genes Oct4, Nanog and Sox2, which
have been employed to generate iPSCs.

Just as ESCs, the properties of differentiated cell lineages
are determined by ‘‘master’’ genes necessary for establishing
and maintaining cellular identity. Products of these master
genes drive the expression of cell type-speciﬁc genes while
suppressing lineage-unrelated genes. Ectopic expression of
these master genes can induce a cell fate change. In Dro-
sophila, ectopic expression of the transcription factor Anten-
napedia in the head region results in the formation of legs
instead of antennae. Overexpression of skeletal muscle deter-
minant gene MyoD in the mouse ﬁbroblasts results in the
formation of myocytes [11,12]. Upon overexpression of the
myeloid transcription factor C/EBPa, primary B and T cells
efﬁciently convert to functional macrophages in mice [13,14].
These ﬁndings suggest that transcription factors play key
roles in cell fate determination, and that ectopic expression
of such factors can switch the cell fates of differentiated
cells.

Yamanaka and Takahashi devised a screening system that
could activate a dormant drug resistance allele that was inte-
grated into the ESC-speciﬁc Fbxo15 locus and selected from
a pool of 24 candidate pluripotency-associated genes. They
found that only four of the factors, Oct3/4 (also known as
Pou5f1), Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc, were needed to generate
ESC-like colonies from ﬁbroblasts of both embryonic and
adult mice. They termed these reprogrammed cells ‘induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cells’ [1]. However, it was later demon-
strated by Yamanaka’s group and other investigators that
these iPSCs were not fully reprogrammed, since iPSCs selected
through this approach failed to produce adult chimaeras. It
was soon recognized that Fbxo15 was not an ideal selection
gene, and thus later, with the use of Nanog or Pou5f1 instead
of Fbxo15 for selection, germline-competent iPSCs very similar
to ESCs were generated in multiple labs [15–17]. A few years
after iPSCs were initially developed, the last skeptics were ﬁ-
nally convinced by a stringent veriﬁcation of iPSC pluripoten-
cy: individual iPSCs were able to generate viable mice in a
tetraploid compensation assay [18]. At the same time, human
iPSCs (hiPSCs) were induced using the same or a similar set
of transcription factors, and subsequently were widely used
for disease modeling and drug screening [19–21]. The stem cell
research ﬁeld was then boosted by the emergence of hot topics
such as probing the mechanisms of reprogramming, increasing
reprogramming efﬁciency and improving therapeutic safety
[22–25].

All roads lead to cell fate change

During mammalian development, cells gradually lose potential
and become progressively differentiated to fulﬁll the special-
ized functions of somatic tissues. The traditional Wadding-
ton’s concept of
the ‘epigenetic landscape’ described a
progressively restricted and educative hierarchical model of
cell differentiation potential during normal development.
According to this model, the pluripotent state resides ‘above’
the differentiated somatic states, and lineage differentiation
and commitment are unidirectional and irreversible. Pluripo-
tency-associated factors and lineage speciﬁers have divergent
roles in maintaining identities of pluripotent or differentiated
states [26]. SCNT and transcription factor-based reprogram-
ming experiments demonstrated that a terminally-differenti-
ated somatic cell fate can be reversed, yielding a pluripotent
state. During reprogramming or direct lineage conversion,
the cells need to overcome the epigenetic hierarchy or the bar-
riers between the lineages. It was not until recently that Shu
et al. revealed that balanced overexpression of transcription
factors that control ectoderm and mesendoderm lineage spec-
iﬁcation can also reprogram the mouse ﬁbroblasts into iPSCs.
They proposed a ‘‘seesaw’’ model to explain their ﬁndings:
when all speciﬁcation forces are well balanced at an appropri-
ate level, the reprogrammed cells are allowed to assume a plu-
ripotent state [27]. This is in agreement with other ﬁndings that
preventing lineage speciﬁcation is sufﬁcient for pluripotency
induction. Although the precise mechanism by which lineage
speciﬁers coordinate the induction of pluripotency is still under
investigation, the insights that have already emerged in this re-
gard have enhanced our understanding of the true nature of
pluripotency.

Based on a careful analysis of the literature on direct
reprogramming, Ladewig et al. proposed an epigenetic disc
model of cell fate change, which seems more adaptable to so-
matic cell fate conversion, including iPSC induction [28]. In
this model, the pluripotent state locates in the central area
of a ﬂat disk, represents just one of many possible states of
a cell, and is metastable, requiring certain conditions for long
term maintenance. In the case of a cell fate change, a cell has
multiple choices in terms of its destination, and can proceed
through a shortcut to one cell fate or alternative routes to
reach a different cell fate. The non-hierarchical
‘epigenetic
disc’ model extends our understanding of cell fate change
and will facilitate the development of optimized approaches
for cell differentiation, reprogramming and trans-differentia-
tion. Although pluripotency induction seems feasible accord-
ing to this model,
it reminds us that a wide variation in
pluripotency might exist among different iPS cell lines, which
needs to be carefully considered when they are used for re-
search and discovery.

Since reprogramming factors such as Oct4, Sox2, c-Myc
and Klf4 regulate speciﬁc signaling pathways, it is conceivable
that different combinations of small molecules can be used to
reprogram somatic cells. Although the complete chemical
reprogramming approach remains to be further explored for
reprogramming of human somatic cells, chemically induced
pluripotent stem cells (CiPSCs) have already been generated
from mouse somatic cells, using a combination of seven small
molecule compounds [29]. These ﬁndings increase our under-
standing about the establishment of cell identities and open

290

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 288–293

up the possibility of generating functionally desirable cell types
for regenerative medicine, using speciﬁc chemicals or drugs, in-
stead of genetic manipulation and difﬁcult-to-manufacture
biologics. As the reprogramming strategies are improved, we
will be equipped to tackle challenges that have hampered the
use of iPSCs in clinical and translational medicine.

hiPSCs can and can’t

Similar to hESCs, iPSCs have the ability to proliferate indef-
initely and differentiate into any cell types of the body.
These features make iPSCs an attractive complement
to
hESCs in many aspects of research and translation, in par-
ticular disease modeling, and a potential source of cells for
personalized regenerative medicine. However, as a novel type
of cell still at an early stage of scientiﬁc study, plenty of
issues exist that limit the application of hiPSCs. The tech-
niques for reprogramming are far from optimized; mutations
during reprogramming may cause abnormalities in the iPSC
lines; and the differentiation potential of iPSC lines may
vary. At the top of the task list for promoting the applica-
tion of iPSCs is reﬁning the reprogramming technique, for
example, using small molecules to generate genomic non-
integrative iPSCs.

Ideal model for studying human development

hiPSCs, like ESCs, are invaluable tools for studying human
development. Because their in vitro differentiation faithfully
recapitulate what occurs in in vivo development, and iPSC lines
usually retain the same genetic information with their donors.
hiPSCs provide certain advantages in the study of neural
development, especially early neural system development.
The development and optimization of protocols for directed
differentiation have made it easy for investigators to differen-
tiate iPSCs into many subtypes of neurons with the course of
differentiation mimicking the endogenous human neural devel-
opment process. The hiPSCs can be converted to neuroepithe-
lial cells (NE cells), and these hiPSC-derived NE cells can then
‘‘pattern’’ efﬁciently to region-speciﬁc neural progenitors along
the anterior-posterior axis, which can further differentiate into
functional neurons including forebrain glutamatergic neurons,
midbrain dopaminergic neurons and spinal motor neurons
[30–32]. Most of these protocols have been developed based
on our knowledge of developmentally-relevant signals identi-
ﬁed in animal models. hiPSCs and animal models complement
each other, thus promoting the understanding of the mecha-
nisms of developmental processes. As for disease-based iPSCs,
especially those developmental disease-based iPSCs, they are
ideal tools for studying the early events relevant to the devel-
opment of the speciﬁc diseases. By studying molecular defects
or mutations that are readily observable in iPSC-derived cells,
we are able to investigate the important roles of the affected
molecules and identify how particular molecular events affect
normal development. For example, using iPSCs generated
from the ﬁbroblasts of a patient with Rett syndrome (RTT)
as models, investigators identiﬁed an unexplored critical win-
dow at the early stage of neural development, during which
subtle alterations in the nervous system, found to be caused
by MeCP2 mutations, play important roles in the initiation
of RTT [33].

Feasible system for disease modeling and drug screening

Because of the limitations of animal models, human speciﬁc as-
pects of diseases are hard to clarify. Mechanistic ﬁndings and
therapeutic approaches for animal models usually failed to be
translated into a human context. Patient-speciﬁc iPSCs pro-
vide a unique platform to study human genetic diseases
in vitro, particularly for inherited developmental disorders.
Through differentiation of iPSCs along speciﬁc lineages, some
of the phenotypes of mono-gene diseases have been recapitu-
lated in a dish. In addition, for some of the more complex
polygenic disorders, patient-speciﬁc iPSCs also proved to be
useful models of disease progression. As a model system, iPS-
Cs and in vitro differentiation can be used to explore pathogen-
esis, develop early diagnostic tools and discover potential
treatment approaches. A variety of patient-speciﬁc hiPSCs
from Parkinson’s disease (PD) [34], Alzheimer’s disease (AD)
[35–37], Huntington’s disease (HD) [38] and schizophrenia
[39] patients have been obtained and have all been shown com-
petent to model the disease progression in vitro. In most cases,
iPSCs were differentiated into disease-relevant subtypes of
cells exhibiting certain disease features. Using hiPSCs from
familial and sporadic AD patients, researchers have success-
fully established the AD model and revealed stress phenotypes
associated with intracellular Aaˆ
in neurons/astrocytes and dif-
ferential drug responsiveness [40]. Similarly, from somatic cells
of a late stage pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) pa-
tient, iPSCs were generated and re-differentiated into pancre-
atic tissue [41]. These disease-speciﬁc iPSC-derived pancreatic
cells mimic the progression of early to mid-stage pancreatic
cancer, releasing protein which later was identiﬁed as a bio-
marker of early-stage cancer progression. Identiﬁcation of bio-
markers for such cancers will eventually facilitate the early
detection and successful treatment of these diseases, and thus
potentially reduce associated mortality.

Usually, conventional drug discovery is costly and time-
consuming. In addition, a large proportion of candidate drugs
that have passed animal tests fail testing in the following
stages, largely because of efﬁcacy and safety issues when used
in humans. Thus most animal model-based pre-clinical studies
lead to uncertain results in clinical trials, which is a huge prob-
lem for the pharmaceutics industry. To help overcome this is-
sue, iPSCs and the differentiated derivatives that recapitulate
disease phenotypes can be used for stem cell-based drug
screening. Compared to other systems such as animal models,
hiPSCs offer unique advantages. They directly provide infor-
mation on how drugs affect human cells; iPSC-based screening
is much easier to operate on a large scale; disease-speciﬁc iPS-
Cs have higher sensitivity and accuracy; and iPSC-based
screening is cost effective. In an attempt to identify effective
drugs for the treatment of PD, investigators found that only
16 out of 44 compounds shown effective in animal models were
able to protect human stem cell derived-dopaminergic neurons
from rotenone-induced cell death [42], a result indicating the
need to use disease-relevant human neurons for drug screen-
ing. In a high-throughput drug screen, 8 out of 6912 small mol-
ecule compounds tested on neural crest precursors derived
from familial dysautonomia (FD) iPSCs proved able to rescue
phenotypes of the disease to a level similar to that observed in
cells with wt-IKBKAP, the gene that is responsible for FD.
Among these compounds, SKF-86466 could induce IKBKAP

Wu M et al / Cell Fate Change Beyond iPSCs

291

transcription through modulation of the levels of intracellular
cAMP and PKA-dependent CREB phosphorylation. SKF-
86466 was also able to rescue the expression of IKAP protein
and disease-speciﬁc loss of autonomic neuronal marker expres-
sion [43]. In another study, researchers employed the stem cell-
based drug screening techniques and found that the survival of
motor neurons was greatly improved upon treatment with a
compound called kenpaullone, which is much cheaper and
more effective than olesoxime and dexpramipexole, two drugs
that are currently used to treat amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS) patients [44].

Uncertain cell-based therapy

Another exciting aspect of iPSCs is the possibility that custom-
tailored pluripotent cells can be generated for autologous cell
transplantation, as has been indicated by a compelling study
showing that sickle cell anemia model mice can be rescued
by transplantation of hematopoietic progenitors differentiated
from autologous iPSCs [45]. In the central nervous system,
transplantation of hiPSC-derived oligodendrocyte progenitor
cells (OPCs) into the neonatal brains of myelin-deﬁcient shi-
verer mice resulted in a robust myelination of the hypomyeli-
nated shiverer brain and substantially increased host survival
with no evidence of either tumorigenesis or heterotopic
non-glial differentiation [46]. These studies indicate that trans-
plantation of iPSC derivatives for customized therapeutic
regeneration is feasible.

the lack of protocols

Although iPSCs have possible applications in personal-
ized clinical intervention, there are still challenges in using
iPSCs for translational applications. One problem in using
iPSC-derived cells for transplantation is that residual undif-
ferentiated cells increase the risk of teratoma formation. An-
other obstacle is
for efﬁciently
generating therapeutically-sufﬁcient numbers of puriﬁed line-
age-speciﬁc cells. Adding uncertainty to the application of
iPSC-derived cells in regenerative medicine is the fact that
cells differentiated in vitro are less mature than those that
develop in vivo, and might not be able to integrate into
the host tissues upon transplantation. In addition to these
problems that all
types of pluripotent stem cells have,
incomplete reprogramming or genetic aberrations that accrue
during iPSC derivation pose issues such as de novo immuno-
genicity and genomic instability. Because of this, even the
reliability of an iPSC-based drug screen would not be so so-
lid as to be unchallengeable.

ES age, iPSC decade and the post-iPSC era

Stem cell research promotes novel therapeutic innovations in
regenerative medicine, which are an important complement
to conventional medical interventions. It is conceivable that
pluripotent stem cells such as ESCs and iPSCs, somatic stem
cells and functional cells obtained through other approaches
would be recognized as key players in regenerative medicine.
The late 1990s and early 2000s represent the age of hESCs,
as these cells were recognized during those years as offering
a great promise both to the scientiﬁc community and the
public. However, in addition to ethical dilemmas, issues such
as researchers’ poor understanding of the nature of true plu-
ripotency, risks of tumor formation and immune rejection

upon allograft transplantation were not easily solvable and
enthusiasm for stem cells started to vanish as the public lost
their patience after years of waiting. Nonetheless, the repro-
gramming of human ﬁbroblasts back to a pluripotent state
with only a few transcription factors or small molecules
was a great breakthrough in the stem cell ﬁeld, and
launched a new decade of stem cell research. iPSCs provide
another important avenue to study pluripotency, and can be
used to develop systems for disease modeling, drug discovery
and cell-based therapy.
iPSCs have some advantages over
hESCs such as the absence of ethical concerns and presum-
ably immune rejection issues. Nevertheless, as a new type of
stem cell, they still must be studied using hESCs as a refer-
ence for a complete understanding of their nature and real-
ization of their application potential. In fact, in the context
of cell replacement therapy, hiPSCs are subject to the same
requirement that applies to hESCs: they need to be reliably
differentiated in large quantities and be functional before
they can be used for therapy. Compromising the potential
use of iPSCs for cell replacement therapy are the suboptimal
procedures for iPSC production, mutations during repro-
gramming and uncertainties over the genomic stability of
the differentiated derivatives. In this regard, other avenues,
such as direct
lineage conversion or transdifferentiation,
might be more promising for personalized regenerative med-
icine in the future. We expect in a post-iPSC era there will
be more advances in concepts and breakthroughs in transla-
tional research, addressing reprogramming, pluripotency and
cell fate change.

Conclusion

Ever since the use of Oct4, Sox2, Klf4 and c-Myc (OSKM) to
reprogram somatic cells into pluripotent stem cells, break-
throughs in the iPSC ﬁeld have been reported frequently and
these advances greatly challenge our conventional understand-
ing of cell fate determination. Pluripotency, which has long
been considered as being atop the epigenetic potency valley,
is probably a balanced state of counteracting differentiation
cues. Pluripotency factors, which were thought to prevent dif-
ferentiation by inhibiting the action of lineage speciﬁers, are
not indispensable for reprogramming somatic cells back to a
pluripotent state. Other lineage speciﬁers, when employed
appropriately, are also able to generate iPSCs. In this regard,
pluripotency represents just one of the states among many.
iPSCs could be very useful in modeling diseases and screening
drugs, and clariﬁcation of the molecular mechanism of repro-
gramming and cell fate determination is also important to efﬁ-
ciently produce the desired speciﬁc type of cells for cell-based
replacement therapy. However, as a type of pluripotent stem
cells still needing further investigation, iPSCs are not likely
ideal for this purpose. Other techniques that are being devel-
oped based on the theory of reprogramming and fate change,
such as direct lineage conversion or reprogramming of somatic
cells into lineage speciﬁed progenitors, might fulﬁll the prom-
ises of personalized cell-based therapy.

Competing interests

The authors declared that no competing interests exist.

292

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 288–293

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants from the Ministry of Sci-
ence and Technology of China (Grant No. 2013CB966904,
2014CB964600 and 2012CBA01307) and the ‘‘Strategic Prior-
ity Research Program’’ of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
(Grant No. XDA01040109).

References

[1] Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells
from mouse embryonic and adult ﬁbroblast cultures by deﬁned
factors. Cell 2006;126:663–76.

[2] Briggs R, King TJ. Transplantation of living nuclei from blastula
cells into enucleated frogs’ eggs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1952;38:455–63.

[3] King TJ, Briggs R. Changes in the nuclei of differentiating
gastrula cells, as demonstrated by nuclear transplantation. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1955;41:321.

[4] Gurdon J, Laskey R, Reeves O. The developmental capacity of
nuclei transplanted from keratinized skin cells of adult frogs. J
Embryol Exp Morphol 1975;34:93.

[5] Gurdon JB. The developmental capacity of nuclei taken from
intestinal epithelium cells of feeding tadpoles. J Embryol Exp
Morphol 1962;10:622–40.

[6] Wilmut I, Schnieke AE, McWhir J, Kind AJ, Campbell KH.
Viable offspring derived from fetal and adult mammalian cells.
Nature 1997;385:810–3.

[7] Evans MJ, Kaufman MH. Establishment in culture of pluripo-

tential cells from mouse embryos. Nature 1981;292:154–6.

[8] Martin GR. Isolation of a pluripotent cell line from early mouse
embryos cultured in medium conditioned by teratocarcinoma
stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1981;78:7634–8.

[9] Thomson JA, Itskovitz-Eldor J, Shapiro SS, Waknitz MA,
lines

Swiergiel JJ, Marshall VS, et al. Embryonic stem cell
derived from human blastocysts. Science 1998;282:1145–7.

[10] Smith AG, Heath JK. Inhibition of pluripotential embryonic stem

cell differentiation by. Nature 1988;336:639.

[11] Davis RL, Weintraub H, Lassar AB. Expression of a single
to myoblasts. Cell

transfected cDNA converts ﬁbroblasts
1987;51:987–1000.

[12] Schneuwly S, Klemenz R, Gehring WJ. Redesigning the body
plan of Drosophila by ectopic expression of the homoeotic gene
Antennapedia. Nature 1987;325:816–8.

[13] Laiosa CV, Stadtfeld M, Xie H, de Andres-Aguayo L, Graf T.
Reprogramming of committed T cell progenitors to macrophages
and dendritic cells by C/EBPa´ and PU. 1 transcription factors.
Immunity 2006;25:731–44.

[14] Xie H, Ye M, Feng R, Graf T. Stepwise reprogramming of B cells

into macrophages. Cell 2004;117:663–76.

[15] Maherali N, Sridharan R, Xie W, Utikal J, Eminli S, Arnold K,
et al. Directly reprogrammed ﬁbroblasts show global epigenetic
remodeling and widespread tissue contribution. Cell Stem Cell
2007;1:55–70.

[16] Okita K, Ichisaka T, Yamanaka S. Generation of germline-
induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature 2007;448:

competent
313–317.

[17] Wernig M, Meissner A, Foreman R, Brambrink T, Ku M,
Hochedlinger K, et al. In vitro reprogramming of ﬁbroblasts into
a pluripotent ES-cell-like state. Nature 2007;448:318–24.

[18] Zhao XY, Li W, Lv Z, Liu L, Tong M, Hai T, et al. IPS cells
produce viable mice through tetraploid complementation. Nature
2009;461:86–90.

[19] Lowry W, Richter L, Yachechko R, Pyle A, Tchieu J, Sridharan
R, et al. Generation of human induced pluripotent stem cells

from dermal ﬁbroblasts. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2008;105:2883–8.

[20] Park I-H, Zhao R, West JA, Yabuuchi A, Huo H, Ince TA, et al.
Reprogramming of human somatic cells to pluripotency with
deﬁned factors. Nature 2007;451:141–6.

[21] Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, Narita M, Ichisaka T,
Tomoda K, et al. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult
human ﬁbroblasts by deﬁned factors. Cell 2007;131:861–72.

[22] Esteban MA, Wang T, Qin B, Yang J, Qin D, Cai J, et al.
Vitamin C enhances the generation of mouse and human induced
pluripotent stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 2010;6:71–9.

[23] Li R, Liang J, Ni S, Zhou T, Qing X, Li H, et al. A mesenchymal-
to-epithelial transition initiates and is required for the nuclear
reprogramming of mouse ﬁbroblasts. Cell Stem Cell 2010;7:51–63.
[24] Liu X, Sun H, Qi J, Wang L, He S, Liu J, et al. Sequential
introduction of reprogramming factors reveals a time-sensitive
requirement for individual factors and a sequential EMT-MET
mechanism for
reprogramming. Nat Cell Biol
2013;15:829–38.

optimal

[25] Samavarchi-Tehrani P, Golipour A, David L, Sung HK, Beyer
TA, Datti A, et al. Functional genomics reveals a BMP-driven
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition in the initiation of somatic
cell reprogramming. Cell Stem Cell 2010;7:64–77.

[26] Waddington CH. The strategy of the genes: a discussion of some
aspects of theoretical biology. 1st ed. London: Allen & Unwin;
1957.

[27] Shu J, Wu C, Wu Y, Li Z, Shao S, Zhao W, et al. Induction of
pluripotency in mouse somatic cells with lineage speciﬁers. Cell
2013;153:963–75.

[28] Ladewig J, Koch P, Brustle O. Leveling Waddington:
emergence of direct programming and the loss of cell
hierarchies. Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio 2013;14:225–36.

the
fate

[29] Hou P, Li Y, Zhang X, Liu C, Guan J, Li H, et al. Pluripotent
stem cells induced from mouse somatic cells by small-molecule
compounds. Science 2013;341:651–4.

[30] Hu BY, Zhang SC. Differentiation of spinal motor neurons from

pluripotent human stem cells. Nat Protoc 2009;4:1295–304.

[31] Swistowski A, Peng J, Liu Q, Mali P, Rao MS, Cheng L, et al.
Efﬁcient generation of functional dopaminergic neurons from
human induced pluripotent stem cells under deﬁned conditions.
Stem cells 2010;28:1893–904.

[32] Zeng H, Guo M, Martins-Taylor K, Wang X, Zhang Z, Park JW,
et al. Speciﬁcation of region-speciﬁc neurons including forebrain
glutamatergic neurons from human induced pluripotent stem
cells. PloS One 2010;5:e11853.

[33] Marchetto MC, Carromeu C, Acab A, Yu D, Yeo GW, Mu Y,
et al. A model for neural development and treatment of Rett
syndrome using human induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell
2010;143:527–39.

[34] Devine MJ, Ryten M, Vodicka P, Thomson AJ, Burdon T,
Houlden H, et al. Parkinson’s disease induced pluripotent stem
cells with triplication of the a´ -synuclein locus. Nat Commun
2011;2:440.

[35] Israel MA, Yuan SH, Bardy C, Reyna SM, Mu Y, Herrera C,
et al. Probing sporadic and familial Alzheimer’s disease using
induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature 2012;482:216–20.

[36] Yagi T, Ito D, Okada Y, Akamatsu W, Nihei Y, Yoshizaki T,
et al. Modeling familial Alzheimer’s disease with induced plurip-
otent stem cells. Hum Mol Genet 2011;20:4530–9.

[37] Yahata N, Asai M, Kitaoka S, Takahashi K, Asaka I, Hioki H,
et al. Anti-Abeta drug screening platform using human iPS cell-
derived neurons for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. PloS
One 2011;6:e25788.

[38] Chae JI, Kim DW, Lee N, Jeon YJ, Jeon I, Kwon J, et al.
Quantitative proteomic analysis of induced pluripotent stem cells
derived from a human Huntington’s disease patient. Biochem J
2012;446:359–71.

Wu M et al / Cell Fate Change Beyond iPSCs

293

[39] Brennand KJ, Simone A, Jou J, Gelboin-Burkhart C, Tran N,
Sangar S, et al. Modelling schizophrenia using human induced
pluripotent stem cells. Nature 2011;473:221–5.

[40] Kondo T, Asai M, Tsukita K, Kutoku Y, Ohsawa Y, Sunada Y,
et al. Modeling Alzheimer’s disease with iPSCs reveals stress
phenotypes associated with intracellular Aaˆ and differential drug
responsiveness. Cell Stem Cell 2013;12:487–96.

[41] Kim J, Hoffman JP, Alpaugh RK, Rhimm AD, Reichert M,
Stanger BZ, et al. An iPSC line from human pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma undergoes early to invasive stages of pancreatic
cancer progression. Cell Rep 2013;3:2088–99.

[42] Peng J, Liu Q, Rao MS, Zeng X. Using human pluripotent stem
cell–derived dopaminergic neurons to evaluate candidate Parkin-
son’s disease therapeutic agents in MPP+ and rotenone models. J
Biomol Screen 2013;18:522–33.

[43] Lee G, Ramirez CN, Kim H, Zeltner N, Liu B, Radu C, et al.
Large-scale screening using familial dysautonomia induced plu-

ripotent stem cells identiﬁes compounds that rescue IKBKAP
expression. Nat Biotechnol 2012;30:1244–8.

[44] Yang Y, Gupta S, Kim K, Powers B, Cerqueira A, Wainger B,
et al. A small molecule screen in stem-cell-derived motor neurons
identiﬁes a kinase inhibitor as a candidate therapeutic for ALS.
Cell Stem Cell 2013;12:713–26.

[45] Hanna J, Wernig M, Markoulaki S, Sun CW, Meissner A,
Cassady JP, et al. Treatment of sickle cell anemia mouse model
with iPS cells generated from autologous
skin. Science
2007;318:1920–3.

[46] Wang S, Bates J, Li X, Schanz S, Chandler-Militello D, Levine C,
et al. Human iPSC-derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cells can
myelinate and rescue a mouse model of congenital hypomyelina-
tion. Cell Stem Cell 2013;12:252–64.

