Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 18–28

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics

www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb

www.sciencedirect.com

REVIEW

Interactome Mapping: Using Protein Microarray
Technology to Reconstruct Diverse Protein Networks

Ijeoma Uzoma 1,2, Heng Zhu 1,2,*

1 Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD

21205, USA

2 The Center for High-Throughput Biology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA

Received 5 December 2012; accepted 20 December 2012
Available online 17 January 2013

KEYWORDS

Protein microarray;
Protein network;
Biomarker;
Interactome;
Serum proﬁling;
Systems biology

Abstract A major focus of systems biology is to characterize interactions between cellular compo-
nents, in order to develop an accurate picture of the intricate networks within biological systems.
Over the past decade, protein microarrays have greatly contributed to advances in proteomics
and are becoming an important platform for systems biology. Protein microarrays are highly ﬂex-
ible, ranging from large-scale proteome microarrays to smaller customizable microarrays, making
the technology amenable for detection of a broad spectrum of biochemical properties of proteins.
In this article, we will focus on the numerous studies that have utilized protein microarrays to recon-
struct biological networks including protein–DNA interactions, posttranslational protein modiﬁca-
tions (PTMs), lectin–glycan recognition, pathogen–host interactions and hierarchical signaling
cascades. The diversity in applications allows for integration of interaction data from numerous
molecular classes and cellular states, providing insight into the structure of complex biological sys-
tems. We will also discuss emerging applications and future directions of protein microarray tech-
nology in the global frontier.

Introduction

Since the completion of major whole genome sequencing ef-
forts, the scientiﬁc community has been faced with the chal-
lenge of identifying and characterizing the expressed gene
products of given organisms [1]. The post-genomics era gave

* Corresponding author.

E-mail: Heng.Zhu@jhmi.edu (Zhu H).

Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.

Production and hosting by Elsevier

birth to the ﬁeld of proteomics that aimed to systematically
chart the biochemical properties and functions of all expressed
proteins [2]. With a global view in mind, we now strive to inte-
grate complex ‘‘omics’’-data from all molecular ranks. The
scope of proteomics is not limited to identifying protein–pro-
tein interactions, but also includes identiﬁcation of protein
posttranslational modiﬁcations (PTMs) and of interactions
with DNA and RNA sequences, lipids and glycans. Weaving
these layers together will allow us to construct the carefully
tuned network that exists within live cells. Improvements in
high throughput proteomic technologies coupled with ad-
vances in genomics and bioinformatics have laid a framework
to enable this level of research.

Two of the most powerful platforms for proteomic studies
are mass spectrometry and protein microarray technologies.

1672-0229/$ - see front matter ª 2013 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China. Published by Elsevier Ltd
and Science Press. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2012.12.005

Uzoma I and Zhu H / Using Protein Microarrays to Construct Protein Networks

19

Although mass spectrometry is well suited for high throughput
protein identiﬁcation, quantiﬁcation and PTM site mapping
[3], it still has its disadvantages such as bias against low abun-
dance proteins and modiﬁcations, as well as undersampling of
complex proteomes [4]. On the contrary, the protein micro-
array platform avoids these limitations and is particularly sui-
ted for unbiased global proﬁling [5].

A protein microarray, also termed a protein chip, is created
by immobilization of thousands of different proteins (e.g.,
antigens, antibodies, enzymes and substrates, etc.) in discrete
spatial locations at high density on a solid surface [6]. Depend-
ing on their applications, protein microarrays can be catego-
rized into two varieties: analytical and functional protein
microarrays. Analytical protein microarrays are usually com-
posed of well-characterized biomolecules with speciﬁc binding
activities, such as antibodies, to analyze the components of
complex biological samples (e.g., serum and cell lysates) or
to determine whether a sample contains a speciﬁc protein of
interest [7]. They have been used for protein activity proﬁling,
biomarker identiﬁcation, cell surface marker/glycosylation
proﬁling, clinical diagnosis and environmental/food safety
analysis [8–10]. Alternatively, functional protein microarrays
are constructed by printing a large number of individually
puriﬁed proteins and are mainly used to comprehensively
query biochemical properties and activities of those immobi-
lized proteins. In principle, it is feasible to print arrays com-
posed of virtually all annotated proteins of a given organism,
effectively comprising a whole-proteome microarray [11].

In 2001 the Snyder group reported the fabrication of the
ﬁrst proteome microarray in the budding yeast, representing
a major advance for the ﬁeld [12]. In order to construct this ar-
ray, approximately 5800 full-length yeast ORFs were individu-
ally expressed in yeast and their protein products puriﬁed as
N-terminal GST-fusion proteins. Each puriﬁed protein was
then robotically spotted on a single glass slide in duplicate at
high density to form the ﬁrst ‘‘proteome’’ microarray, covering
more than 75% of the yeast proteome. More recently, prote-
ome microarrays have been fabricated from the proteomes of
viruses, bacteria, plants and humans [8,13–16]. Functional pro-
tein microarrays have been successfully applied to identify pro-
tein–protein, protein–lipid, protein–antibody, protein–small
molecules, protein–DNA, protein–RNA, protein–lectin and
lectin–cell interactions [8,9,12,14,16–19], to identify substrates
or enzymes for phosphorylation, ubiquitylation, acetylation
and nitrosylation [11,20–24], as well as to proﬁle immune re-
sponse [25]. In this review, we will focus on inventive applica-
tions for protein microarrays and the signiﬁcant ﬁndings that
contribute to understanding the complex interactomes within
cells (Table 1).

Network construction

A solid understanding of the molecular mechanisms of biolog-
ical functions requires systematic proﬁling of dynamic interac-
tions between biomolecules. Processes such as transcriptional
regulation, viral infection, numerous PTMs and protein–pro-
tein interactions account for a small fraction of the potential
molecular interactions within a cell but highlight how funda-
mental
functions. High
throughput technologies strive to provide an unbiased plat-
form for charting these relationships at the proteome and gen-

these networks are for essential

ome scale. In this section we will review several studies that
demonstrate the utility of protein microarrays in reconstruct-
ing interaction networks.

Protein–DNA interactions

With the completion of the human genome sequencing, decod-
ing the functional elements is a major challenge. Computa-
tional approaches have the power to identify conserved
DNA regulatory elements; however, computational strategies
cannot conﬁdently predict the proteins that bind to these ele-
ments. Identiﬁcation of the interaction networks between the
DNA functional elements and the human proteome requires
extensive predictions and powerful high throughput tech-
niques. Hu and colleagues undertook a large-scale analysis
of protein–DNA interactions (PDIs) using a protein micro-
array composed of 4191 unique full length human proteins,
encompassing 90% of the annotated transcriptions factors
(TFs) and members of many other protein categories, such
as RNA-binding proteins, chromatin-associated proteins,
nucleotide-binding proteins, transcription co-regulators, mito-
chondrial proteins and protein kinases [18]. The protein micro-
arrays were probed with 400 predicted and 60 known DNA
motifs. As a result, a total of 17,718 PDIs were identiﬁed.
Many known PDIs and a large number of new PDIs for both
well characterized and predicted TFs were recovered, as well as
new consensus sites for human TFs. Surprisingly, over 300
proteins that do not encode any known DNA-binding do-
mains showed sequence-speciﬁc PDIs, suggesting that many
human proteins may bind speciﬁc DNA sequences as a second-
ary function. To further investigate whether the DNA-binding
activities of
these unconventional DNA binding proteins
(uDBPs) were physiologically relevant, Hu et al. carried out
in-depth analysis on a well-studied protein kinase, Erk2, to
determine the potential mechanism behind its DNA-binding
activity [18]. Using a combination of in vitro and in vivo ap-
proaches,
electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSA), luciferase assays, mutagenesis, and chromatin immu-
noprecipitation (chIP), they demonstrated that the DNA-bind-
ing activity of Erk2 is independent of its protein kinase activity
and it acts as a transcription repressor of transcripts induced
by interferon gamma signaling [18]. This approach allows for
sophisticated network mapping of protein–DNA interactions
and enables the discovery of the uncharacterized DNA-bind-
ing proteins. The emergence of uDBPs strengthens the ability
to piece together the machinery involved in transcriptional
regulation.

such as

MAP kinase substrate phosphorylation network

The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling cas-
cade involves a hierarchy of kinases that activate one another
through consecutive phosphorylation events in response to
extracellular or intracellular signals [15]. Standard methods
have only been able to establish a few combinatorial connec-
tions from upstream MKK-activating kinases (MKKKs) to
downstream MPK-activating kinases (MKKs), MAPKs and
their cytoplasmic and nuclear substrates [26,27]. Constructing
this complicated interconnected network necessitates a system-
atic unbiased high-throughput approach to avoid confounding
issues of redundancy and functional pleiotropy [15]. Akin to

20

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 18–28

Table 1 Applications of protein microarrays in diverse biological network construction

Assay type

Array content

Type of probe

Application

Protein–DNA interaction
Kinase assay
Ubiquitylation assay

Acetylation assay

Viral kinase assay
Protein–protein interaction

Protein–RNA interaction

Antigen–antibody interaction

Lectin–glycan interaction

Network construction
4191 Human proteins
2158 Arabidopsis proteins
Yeast proteome
9000 Human proteins
Human protoarray, invitrogen
Yeast proteome

Pathogen–host interactions
4191 Human proteins
60 EBV viral proteins
4191 Human proteins
Yeast proteome

Biomarker identiﬁcation
5011 Human proteins
82 Corona virus proteins
E. coli K12 proteome
Yeast proteome
94 Lectins

DNA motif
Protein kinase
Ubiquitylation enzymes
Concentrated cell extract

Protein–DNA interaction network
Signaling network
PTM network
PTM network

Acetyltransferase

PTM network

Conserved viral kinases
Human protein
Viral protein
BMV SLD RNA loop

Viral PTM target network
Protein–protein interaction network
Protein–protein interaction network
Protein–RNA interaction network

AIH patient sera
SARS patient sera
IBD patient sera
Lectins
Live mammalian cells

Biomarker identiﬁcation
Antibody proﬁling
Biomarker identiﬁcation
Protein glycosylation proﬁling
Cell surface biomarker identiﬁcation

Ref

[16]
[23]
[20]
[19]

[21]

[31]
[13]
[44]
[17]

[47]
[48]
[8]
[53]
[9]

the protein microarray based kinase assays developed by Pta-
cek et al. [20], Popescu et al. employed high-density protein
microarrays to identify novel MPK substrates. The authors
ﬁrst determined which Arabidopsis thaliana MKKs preferen-
tially activate 10 different MPKs in vivo and used the activated
MPKs to probe Arabidopsis protein microarrays containing
2158 unique proteins to reveal their phosphorylation sub-
strates [15]. The initial screen identiﬁed 570 nonredundant
MPK phosphorylation substrates with an average of 128 tar-
gets per activated MPK. With this data the authors were able
to reconstruct a complex signaling cascade involving nine
MKKs, 10 MPKs and 570 substrates [15]. Moreover, the
resulting nodes and edges highlighted the speciﬁcity conserved
within these interactions: 290 (51%) of MPK phosphorylation
targets were hit by only one MPK and only 94 (16%) were
phosphorylated by two or more MPKs [15]. Gene ontology
(GO) analysis of effector substrates showed enrichment in
TFs involved in the regulation of development, defense and
stress responses [15]. The network that emerged from this
study suggests the MAPK signaling cascade regulates tran-
scription through combinatorial enzyme speciﬁcity and dis-
crete phosphorylation events.

Ubiquitin E3 ligase substrate discovery

Ubiquitylation is one of the most widespread PTMs and medi-
ates a huge range of cellular events and processes in eukaryotes
[28]. Understanding ubiquitin substrate speciﬁcity is a complex
combinatorial question, as it is conferred by unique permuta-
tions of E1, E2 and E3 enzymes. Lu et al. developed an assay
to determine substrates of a HECT domain E3 ligase, Rsp5,
using yeast proteome microarrays [22]. Over 90 novel proteins
were found to be readily ubiquitylated by Rsp5, eight of which
were validated as in vivo targets. Deeper in vivo characteriza-
tion of two substrates, Sla1 and Rnr2, revealed that Rsp5-
dependent ubiquitylation affects either the posttranslational
process of the substrate or subcellular localization [22]. This
design offers the ability to dissect the molecular mechanisms

of a complex enzymatic cascade and gives the ﬁeld a tool to
understand how the system is organized globally.

Identiﬁcation of non-histone substrates of protein
acetyltransferases in yeast

Acetylation is a major epigenetic PTM widely known for its
role in regulating chromatin state. However, it is suspected
to regulate nonnuclear functions as well [29]. In yeast, no
non-histone proteins were reported as substrates of histone
acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs).
The catalytic enzyme, Esa1, of the essential nucleosome acetyl-
transferase of the complex, NuA4, is the only essential HAT in
yeast [30], strongly suggesting that it may mediate acetylation
of non-histone proteins critical for cell survival. Another
intriguing question was whether HATs could regulate activity
of cytosolic proteins or even enzymes like protein kinases. To
comprehensively discover the non-chromatin substrates of the
NuA4 HAT complex in the yeast proteome, Lin et al. devel-
oped in vitro acetylation reactions on the yeast proteome
microarrays, containing 5800 yeast proteins, using NuA4 and
[14C]-acetyl-CoA [23]. Over 90 non-histone proteins were read-
ily acetylated by the NuA4 complex. Although it was expected
that the majority of the substrates would be involved in nucle-
osome assembly and histone binding categories, a signiﬁcant
number of the identiﬁed substrates were cytoplasmic proteins
and metabolic enzymes [23]. Twenty proteins involved in a
variety of cellular functions such as metabolism, transcription,
cell cycle progression, RNA processing and stress response
were selected for further validation. Standard double-immuno-
precipitation techniques were used to validate 13 of the 20 sub-
strates,
carboxykinase
(Pck1p). To understand the physiological relevance of non-
chromatin acetylation, the authors focused on the cytosolic en-
zyme Pck1p to explore a connection between acetylation and
metabolism. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) identiﬁed
lysine 19 (K19) and K514 as the acetylation sites of Pck1p
and site-directed mutagenesis revealed that acetylation of
K514 is critical for its enzymatic activity and promotes exten-

phosphoenolpyruvate

including

Uzoma I and Zhu H / Using Protein Microarrays to Construct Protein Networks

21

sion of life span in yeast growing under starvation conditions.
These ﬁndings demonstrate a functional role for non-chroma-
tin acetylation in yeast metabolism and longevity.

Based on GO analysis, acetylation may regulate several
other cellular processes as well. In a follow up study, Lu et al.
investigated the impact of acetylation on another NuA4 sub-
strate, Sip2, a regulatory subunit of the SNF1 kinase complex
(yeast AMPK). Based on the MS/MS analysis and site-directed
mutagenesis studies, the authors found that Sip2 acetylation
enhances its interaction with the catalytic subunit Snf1 and
inhibits Snf1’s kinase activity [31]. As a result, phosphorylation
of one of Snf1’s downstream targets, Sch9 (homolog of Akt/
S6K), is decreased, ultimately leading to slower growth but ex-
tended replicative life span. Finally, the authors demonstrated
that the anti-aging effect of Sip2 acetylation is independent of
extrinsic nutrient availability and TORC1 activity. These stud-
ies are now echoed by recent discoveries of many mitochondrial
and cytosolic enzymes as substrates of acetyltransferases in
higher eukaryotes via MS-based PTM proﬁling [32–34].

Global ubiquitylation substrate discovery from cell extracts

Readily generating a snapshot of global protein PTM proﬁles
under various cellular conditions could be considered the Holy
Grail for those researching PTMs. General PTM substrate
identiﬁcation strategies require enrichment from a cell extract
sample followed by MS or in vitro assays using puriﬁed com-
ponents. While both approaches have their strengths and
weaknesses, a hybrid of the two is possible. The use of concen-
trated mammalian cell extracts in combination with protein
microarrays can serve to identify PTM targets in a semi-
in vivo setting while alleviating the challenge of analyzing a
complex mixture. Merbl and Kirschner generated cell extracts
that replicate the mitotic checkpoint and anaphase release to
identify differentially regulated polyubiquitylation substrates
[21]. The synchronized cell extracts were incubated with Invit-
rogen’s Human ProtoArray composed of 8000 proteins and
the resulting polyubiquitylated proteins were detected with
antibodies directed to ubiquitin chains [21]. The authors ex-
pected to recover substrates of the anaphase promoting com-
plex (APC), the major ubiquitin ligase in mitosis and G1. To
differentiate polyubiquitylation substrates of the APC from
other ligases, Merbl and Kirschner designed three experimen-
tal set ups. All cell extracts were arrested with nocodozole as
the control which inhibits the APC, in the second condition
the sample was released from checkpoint arrest with the addi-
tion of UbcH10, an E2 ligase, and the ﬁnal condition was sup-
plemented with both UbcH10 and a speciﬁc inhibitor of APC.
Approximately 132 proteins were differentially polyubiquity-
lated, 11 of which were known APC substrates, conﬁrming
the validity on the experimental design. Validation studies per-
formed in rabbit reticulocyte lysate conﬁrmed the degradation/
ubiquitylation of 7 novel APC substrates [21]. This study dem-
onstrates the efﬁcacy of using protein microarrays in combina-
tion with cell extracts to recapitulate the global PTM signature
in a speciﬁc cellular state.

Pathogen–host interactions

Protein microarrays allow for exploration of hypotheses that
cannot be addressed by standard methods. Investigating the

interactions between viral encoded proteins and the proteins
within the infected host has been an important yet cumber-
some task. Protein microarrays composed of either the host
or the viral proteome can be fabricated and subsequently used
to examine the relationships between the viral machinery and
the host. This in vitro approach recapitulates viral infection
in that the viral genome/proteome are allowed to physically
interact with the host. The Hayward and Zhu groups have re-
cently developed this new paradigm to examine direct interac-
tions between viral and host proteins [14,35,36], leading to a
deeper understanding of the mechanisms by which the viral
proteins hijack the host as well as uncovering the direct targets
of major viral enzymes.

Herpesvirus kinase-phosphorylome

The human a, b, and c herpesviruses cause diseases distinct
from one another, ranging from mild cold sores to pneumoni-
tis, birth defects and cancers [35]. Although the viruses are dif-
ferent, once they enter the host cells they all must reprogram
cellular gene expression, sense cell-cycle phase, modify cell-cy-
cle progression and reactivate the lytic life cycle to produce
new virions to spread infection [37]. Many lytic cycle genes in-
volved in replication of the viral genomes are highly conserved
across the herpesvirus family. For example, each herpesvirus
encodes for an orthologous serine/threonine kinase [38] that
shares structural similarity with human cyclin-dependent ki-
nases (CDKs) [39] and phosphorylates the substrates of CDKs
[38]. The ability of viral kinase to mimic host CDKs results in
hijacking of key pathways to potentiate their own replication.
Particular cellular phosphorylation events are observed during
herpes infection and speciﬁc phosphorylation of antiviral
drugs in infected cells are mediated by the conserved viral ki-
nases [40]. Identifying the collective host targets of the viral ki-
nases would reveal the commonly shared mechanisms and
signaling pathways among different herpesviruses to promote
their lytic replication. This knowledge will increase the thera-
peutic target options necessary for developing pan-antivirals.
To test this idea, Li et al. utilized the human transcription
factor (TF) proteome array containing 4191 human proteins
to identify commonly shared substrates of herpesvirus-en-
coded kinases [35]. Parallel kinases assays were performed
using the four viral kinases, UL31, UL97, BGLF4 and
ORF36, which is encoded by herpes simplex type 1 (HSV1),
human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
and Kaposi Sarcoma associated-virus (KSHV), respectively
[38]. In total, 643 nonredundant substrates were identiﬁed
across the four kinases and 110 substrates were targets of at
least three kinases. GO analysis of the 110 shared substrates
indicates that DNA damage functional class was signiﬁcantly
enriched. Among the DNA damage proteins, TIP60 was se-
lected as a lead candidate for regulation of viral replication,
due to its roles in DNA damage as well as transcriptional reg-
ulation through its HAT activity. Phosphorylation of TIP60
by BGLF4 in EBV-infected B cells was validated during fur-
ther analysis. BGLF4 is known to phosphorylate multiple
EBV proteins and only a small number of host proteins
[38,41]. The functions of its previously-characterized targets
are varied, implying that the kinase plays multiple roles to pro-
mote viral replication [41]. It is expressed in the early phase of
the lytic infection cycle and is localized mainly in the nuclei of

22

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 18–28

EBV-infected cells [42]. BGLF4 knockdown revealed that it is
critical for release of infectious virus during viral lytic reactiva-
tion [41]. Subsequent experiments demonstrated that BGLF4-
mediated phosphorylation enhanced TIP60 HAT activity by
10-fold, linking the phosphorylation event to viral replication.
They also demonstrated the importance of phosphorylation of
host DNA damage proteins for viral replication. More specif-
ically, phosphorylation and activation of TIP60 by BGLF4
triggers EBV-induced DNA damage response (DDR) and pro-
motes positive transcriptional regulation of critical lytic genes
involved in viral replication. Lastly, the study conﬁrmed that
TIP60 was also required for efﬁcient lytic replication in
HCMV, KSHV and HSV-1. Taken together, this unbiased ap-
proach provides a novel paradigm for discovery of conserved
targets of viral enzymes. While herpes kinases have been cred-
ible therapeutic candidates, knowing their targets and the sig-
exploit will better
naling pathways
the
development of widely effective antiviral drugs.

enable

they

BGLF4–SUMO2

transduction, regulation of

In a follow up study, Li et al. took the inverse approach that
employed a herpesvirus EBV protein microarray to assess hu-
man-host protein binding events [14]. Small ubiquitin-related
modiﬁer (SUMO) is covalently attached to proteins via an
enzymatic cascade analogous
to the ubiquitin pathway.
SUMO is involved in a broad range of cellular processes
including signal
transcription,
DNA damage response and mediation of protein–protein
interactions [43,44]. Both latent and lytic EBV proteins inter-
act with components of the SUMO machinery [14,44]. While
covalent modiﬁcation by SUMO is more commonly under-
stood, noncovalent interactions with SUMO also contribute
to SUMO effector signaling [43,44]. Noncovalent binding to
SUMO is often mediated through SUMO-interaction motif
(SIM) domains on target proteins [43,44]. To comprehensively
identify the EBV proteins that bind to the SUMO moiety, the
authors fabricated a protein microarray of full length proteins
from EBV and KSHV individually puriﬁed from yeast. The ar-
ray was used to perform a protein–protein binding assay using
the SUMO2 paralog. They identiﬁed 11 EBV proteins as po-
tential SUMO partners, including BGLF4, a conserved kinase
[14]. As BGLF4 is known to play a multitude of roles in EBV,
the authors pursued the importance of the cellular PTM in
BGLF4 function. The BGLF4 SIM domains were mapped
and when mutated at both the N- and C-terminal SIMs, the
intracellular localization of the kinase shifted from nuclear to
cytoplasmic. A mutation in the N-terminal SIM showed lar-
gely nuclear localization, whereas the C-terminal SIM muta-
tion generated an intermediate phenotype with nuclear and
cytoplasmic expression. The authors found that BGLF4 inhib-
its SUMOylation of lytic cycle transactivator ZTA and dem-
onstrated that the SIM domains as well as kinase activity are
required for inhibition [14]. SIM domains of BLGF4 were also
shown to be necessary for suppressing global SUMOylation,
inducing cellular DDR and promoting EBV lytic replication.
The virus takes advantage of the SUMOylation system by
encoding proteins that are SUMO modiﬁed and those that
bind to SUMO [14]. As previously mentioned SUMO is in-
volved in DDR, which is further supported by the ﬁnding that
BGLF4 appears to interact with sites of DNA damage via

SUMO binding, revealing an additional mechanism promoting
EBV-mediated DDR and lytic replication. SUMO interaction
is as important as the kinase activity for the function of
BGLF4.

LANA-interacting cellular protein

Another variation of protein microarray used for investigating
pathogen–host interaction involves the human TF array to
proﬁle the interactions between KSHV latency proteins and
host proteins. In KSHV-associated malignancies, majority of
the tumor cells are latently-infected and express viral latency
proteins including LANA [45]. LANA functions to maintain
KSHV latency by driving viral replication [46,47], promoting
dysregulated cell growth [48] and dynamically regulating both
viral and cell gene transcription [49–51]. Identiﬁcation of LA-
NA’s interacting partners would provide new insights into the
mechanisms LANA uses to maintain latent infection. LANA
has been an attractive target and previous efforts to identify
LANA binding proteins have attempted yeast two-hybrid
screens [52], glutathione S-transferase (GST) afﬁnity immuno-
precipitation [53] and MS, resulting in apparent approach-
dependent binding partners [54]. In a recent study, Shamay
et al. puriﬁed FLAG-tagged LANA and probed it against
the human TF array, which recovered 61 candidate binding
partners [36]. Eight candidates validated by co-immunoprecip-
itation assays
included TIP60, protein phosphatase 2A
(PP2A), replication protein A (RPA) and XPA. LANA-associ-
ated TIP60 retained its acetyltransferase activity and showed
enhanced stability, which is consistent with Li et al.’s ﬁnding
that TIP60 in critical for KSHV lytic replication (see above).
The binding interactions between LANA, RPA and XPA seem
to echo LANA’s role in DNA damage, but further character-
ization of the LANA’s ability to bind to additional RPA com-
plex members, RPA1 and RPA2, spawned a new hypothesis
that LANA may also regulate host telomere length. To test
this hypothesis, the authors performed ChIP assays with
anti-RPA1 and -RPA2 antibodies using primers speciﬁc to
the telomere regions and found that the presence of LANA
drastically reduced the recruitment of both RPA1 and RPA2
to the host telomeres, while it had no impact on the protein le-
vel of the RPA complex. This observation raised the possibility
that LANA might affect telomere length. Using Southern blot
analysis of terminal restriction fragments, the standard method
for quantifying telomere length, the authors demonstrated that
the average length of telomeres was shortened by at least 50%
in both LANA-expressing endothelial cells and KSHV-in-
fected primary effusion lymphoma cells [55].

Biomarker identiﬁcation

Biomarker identiﬁcation represents a major effort in modern
biomedical and clinical research, as it allows for better screen-
ing methods, diagnosis criteria, prognosis predictions and ulti-
mately superior treatment for a broad range of diseases.
Traditionally, biomarker discovery has utilized popular meth-
ods such as MS, ELISA, gene expression and antibody arrays
to proﬁle serum samples [56]. In recent years, protein micro-
array technology has extended into clinical proteomics and is
becoming a powerful tool for biomarker discovery. Proteins
on functional protein microarrays were originally viewed as

Uzoma I and Zhu H / Using Protein Microarrays to Construct Protein Networks

23

substrates and binding partners, but when applied to immunol-
ogy, the proteins on the array could be potential antigens asso-
ciated with certain diseases. By
comparison, protein
microarray based-serum proﬁling is much more sensitive and
can be performed at higher throughput while requiring less
amount of sample. Here we will review a variety of clini-
cally-relevant applications for protein microarrays in bio-
marker identiﬁcation.

Autoantigen discovery for autoimmune hepatitis

and

liver-related

autoantibodies

In many autoimmune diseases, there is an unmet clinical need
for cost-effective and accurate diagnostic methods. Improving
upon the current standard requires discovery and characteriza-
tion of reliable autoantigens coupled with sensitive and repro-
ducible assays. Take autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) as an
example: AIH is a chronic necroinﬂammatory disease of hu-
man liver with little known etiology. Detection of non-or-
gan-speciﬁc
using
immunoserological approaches has been widely used for diag-
nosis and prognosis [57]. However, these traditional autoanti-
gens, such as anti-smooth muscle autoantibodies (SMA) and
anti-antinuclear autoantibodies (ANA) are often mixtures of
complex biological materials. Unambiguous and accurate
detection of the disease demands identiﬁcation and character-
ization of these autoantigens. Therefore, Song et al. fabricated
a human protein microarray of 5011 non-redundant proteins
that were expressed and puriﬁed as GST fusions in yeast
[25]. There are several advantages associated with producing
human proteins in yeast rather than bacteria: (1) higher solu-
bility, (2) higher yields of large proteins (e.g., >50 kD), (3) bet-
ter preserved conformation of proteins and (4)
less
immunogenicity of proteins when produced in yeast than in
Escherichia coli [7,12,17]. However, unlike a viral or bacterial
protein microarray, a signiﬁcant obstacle to the use of a hu-
man protein microarray of high content is the high cost. For
example, cost for a human protein array of 9000 proteins
can exceed $1000 per array. In order to reduce the cost, Song
et al. developed a two-phase strategy to identify new biomark-
ers in AIH. Phase I is designed for rapid selection of candidate
biomarkers, which are then validated in Phase II (Figure 1). In
Phase I, serum samples from 22 AIH patients and 30 healthy
controls were selected and individually used to probe the hu-
man protein microarrays at a 1000-fold dilution, followed by
detection of bound human autoantibodies using a Cy-5-conju-
gated anti-human IgG antibody. Statistical analysis revealed
11 candidate autoantigens. To validate these candidates and
to avoid a potential overﬁtting problem (see below), which is
especially likely when dealing with a small sample size, the
11 proteins and 3 positive controls were re-puriﬁed to build
a large number of low-cost small arrays for Phase II valida-
tion. These arrays were then sequentially probed with serum
samples used in Phase I and serum samples obtained from
an additional 52 AIH, 50 primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), 43
hepatitis B virus (HBV), 41 hepatitis C virus (HCV), 11 system
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and 11 primary Sjo¨ gren’s syn-
drome (pSS) patients. As negative controls, they also included
26 serum samples from patients suffering from other types of
severe diseases and 50 samples from healthy subjects. Three
new antigens, RPS20, Alb2-like and dUTPase, were identiﬁed
as highly AIH-speciﬁc biomarkers with sensitivity of 47.5%,

Scheme of

Figure 1
the two-phase strategy for biomarker
identiﬁcation in human autoimmune diseases taking AIH as example
In Phase I, a small cohort is used to rapidly identify a group of
candidate biomarkers via serum proﬁling assays on a human
protein microarray of high cost. Because a small number of
microarrays are needed, cost of the experiments is relatively low.
In Phase II, a focused protein microarray of low cost is fabricated
by spotting down puriﬁed candidate proteins. A much larger
cohort is then assayed on these arrays in a double blind fashion to
validate the candidates identiﬁed in Phase I. AIH, autoimmune
hepatitis; ASGR2, asialoglycoprotein receptor 2; PBC, primary
biliary cirrhosis; HBV, hepatitis virus B; HCV, hepatitis C virus;
SLE,
system lupus erythematosus; pSS, primary Sjo¨ gren’s
syndrome.

45.5% and 22.7%, respectively, which were further validated
with additional AIH samples in a double-blind design. Finally,
they demonstrated that these new biomarkers could be readily
applied to ELISA-based assays for clinical diagnosis and prog-
nosis [25].

24

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 18–28

This study represents a new paradigm in biomarker identi-
ﬁcation using protein microarrays for three reasons. First, a
manageable number of candidate biomarkers can be rapidly
identiﬁed at low cost because fewer expensive protein micro-
arrays of high-content are needed in the ﬁrst phase of this
two-phase strategy. Second, by using small arrays comprised
of selected candidate proteins, the validation step can be rap-
idly carried out with a much larger cohort at low cost. This val-
idation step is extremely important for avoiding the overﬁtting
problem associated with statistical analysis in biomarker or
classiﬁer identiﬁcation, especially when dealing with a small
cohort (e.g., <40). Overﬁtting is a problem in which a statisti-
cal model describes random error or noise instead of the
underlying relationship. It generally occurs in biomarker iden-
tiﬁcation when the system is excessively complex, such as hav-
ing too many individual-to-individual variations relative to the
number of samples used. As a result, biomarkers that have
been overﬁt generally have poor predictive performance.
Therefore, testing an additional, larger cohort in a double-
blind design is an effective way to rule out overﬁt biomarkers.
Third, the authors developed ELISA-based assays to examine
the performance of the validated biomarkers with additional
samples. These newly identiﬁed biomarkers could serve as a
translational step toward clinical practice.

SARS-CoV diagnosis

Protein microarrays can also be used as a diagnostic tool for
infectious diseases. Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
is an infectious disease, caused by a novel coronavirus (CoV),
which appeared in Guangdong, China in November 2002. As
of March 2003, the virus had spread globally and by July over
8000 SARS cases and approximately 800 deaths were reported
worldwide [58]. At the time of the outbreak, no effective treat-
ment of SARS was available, thus isolation and infection con-
trol were the best way to limit the spread of the virus.
Therefore, rapid and reliable, early diagnosis is critical to con-
trol such an epidemic. Zhu et al. developed the ﬁrst virus pro-
tein microarray, which included all the SARS-CoV proteins as
well as proteins from ﬁve additional coronaviruses that can in-
fect human (HCoV-299E and HCoV-OC43), cow (BCV), cat
(FIPV) and mouse (MHVA59) [13]. The SARS microarray
was used to screen sera from infected and noninfected individ-
uals in a double-blind format. The samples were quickly distin-
guished as SARS positive or SARS negative based on the
presence of human IgG and IgM antibodies against SARS-
CoV proteins, with a 94% accuracy rate compared to a stan-
dard ELISA diagnostic test. The SARS microarray improved
the sensitivity of the assay 50-fold over the ELISA and dra-
matically reduced the amount of sample required. This method
may be suitable for diagnosis for many viral infections.

Novel serological biomarkers for inﬂammatory bowel disease

The two most common subtypes of inﬂammatory bowel dis-
ease (IBD) are Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis
(UC). They are idiopathic in nature and are both characterized
by an abnormal immunological response in the gut [59]. IBD is
clinically thought to have autoimmune etiology, although,
anti-microbial antibodies to normal bacteria are present in
the sera of patients, leading to the pathogenesis of the disease

[8]. The known serological antibodies are currently used as
partial diagnostic criteria as they are not robust enough to
stand alone [60]. Chen et al. elected to use an E. coli proteome
microarray to characterize the differential immune response
(serum anti-E. coli antibodies) in patients with CD and UC
compared to healthy controls (HC). The microarray included
4256 E. coli proteins, encompassing the vast majority of the
proteome of E. coli K12 strain. The sera from HC (n = 29),
CD (n = 66) and UC (n = 39) were proﬁled using this array
and the reactive anti-E. coli antibodies were detected with
anti-human IgG antibodies. Data analysis revealed differential
immunogenic response to 417 proteins between these three
groups: 169, 186 and 19 were highly immunogenic in HC,
CD and UC, respectively. Two robust sets of novel serological
biomarkers were identiﬁed that can discriminate CD from HC
or UC with >80% overall accuracy and sensitivity [8]. This is
the ﬁrst study to identify serological biomarkers in human
immunological diseases with respect to the entire proteome
of a microbial species. The underlying molecular pathology
of other immune system related diseases can also be examined
with this proteome microarray approach.

Lectin study: protein–glycan interaction

Cell surface glycosylation is a complex and highly-varied PTM
that in turn is not amenable to standard high-throughput tech-
niques. Glycosylation is present on the surface of all vertebrate
cells, and it serves to distinguish cell types through very deli-
cate differences [9]. It is also shown to be associated with cell
differentiation, malignant
transformation and subcellular
localization [61–65]. Glycan binding proteins, known as lec-
tins, are used to characterize glycosylation marks due to their
ability to discriminate sugar isoforms [66]. Lectin microarrays
have already been employed to characterize glycoproteins and
lysates [67,68], however, they have not been used to systemat-
ically proﬁle cell surface glycosylation signatures of mamma-
lian cell types. Such studies have the potential to provide a
tool for distinguishing normal versus abnormal cell surface
proﬁles based on glycan–lectin interactions. Tao et al. fabri-
cated a lectin microarray composed of 94 non-redundant lec-
tins selected for deﬁning cell surface glycan signatures [5].
Using 23 well-studied mammalian cell lines, the authors devel-
oped a systematic binary analysis of binding interactions of the
selected lectins and cell types. They observed a broad range of
binding potential and speciﬁcity across cell types, implying a
high level of variation in cell surface glycans within mamma-
lian cell types. For example, less than 20 lectins could capture
the hESC, Caco-2, D407 and U937 cells, while more than 50
lectins captured the HEK293, K1106 and MCF7 cells [9].
Interestingly, similar cell types such as various breast cancer
cell lines did not reveal overlapping lectin binding proﬁles,
indicating lectins can discern subtle differences between phys-
iologically-related cells.

To further test the utility of the lectin microarray for bio-
marker discovery, Tao et al. analyzed lectin binding in a model
cancer stem-like system by comparing cell surface glycan sig-
natures of all 24 cell types [9]. Focusing on MCF7, a breast
cancer cell line that adopts cancer stem-like phenotypes when
grown under speciﬁc conditions, the authors demonstrated
that different growth conditions give rise to distinct lectin
binding proﬁles that can distinguish these cancer cell subpop-

Uzoma I and Zhu H / Using Protein Microarrays to Construct Protein Networks

25

ulations [9]. The lectin LEL was identiﬁed as a biomarker that
can discriminate between MCF7 subpopulations. The authors
propose that combined with other stem cell enrichment meth-
ods, lectin microarray technology is a potential tool for identi-
fying cell surface markers in tumors, enabling the discovery of
cancer stem cell-like targeted therapies.

Perspectives

Over the past decade, protein microarrays have evolved into a
powerful and versatile tool for systems biology. They capitalize
on femtomolar sensitivity, proﬁling full proteomes and high-
throughput yet straightforward assays. We have described
their utility for a myriad of applications that have resulted in
impactful scientiﬁc ﬁndings including pathogen–host interac-
tions, biomarker identiﬁcation, unconventional transcription
factors and PTM substrates (Figure 2).

While protein microarrays leverage the advantage of uni-
form protein expression, for proteomics, their impact is limited
by the extent of coverage. A remarkable advance was put forth
by the Zhu laboratory with the construction of the ﬁrst human
proteome microarray containing over 17,000 full length pro-

teins [16], the largest available to date (Figure 3). The discovery
potential for this technology is dramatically increased by ex-
panded proteome coverage. Multiple large-scale studies in-
tended to link PTM substrates with their upstream enzymes,
such as kinases, SUMO E3 ligases and ubiquitin ligases, are
ongoing with the human proteome microarrays. As the num-
ber of bona ﬁde PTMs increase and more substrates are found
to acquire numerous modiﬁcations, we cannot ignore coregu-
lation of PTMs. Directed studies to recapitulate crosstalk be-
tween enzymes, PTMs and their common substrates are
possible with protein microarrays and may uncover key nodes
of regulation and critical points where pathways converge.
While MS is an ideal technology for the discovery of novel
PTMs, such as the crotonylation PTM [69], it is not well suited
to identify the enzymes responsible for novel modiﬁcation. The
richness of 17,000 natively-puriﬁed proteins on a single surface
provides an ideal platform for discovery of novel enzyme func-
tion. The human proteome array can also be harnessed as a
tool for high-throughput characterization of monoclonal anti-
body (mAb) speciﬁcity from hybridomas [16].

The capabilities of microarray technology are further
expanding with the development of label-free optical tech-

Figure 2 Reconstituted interaction networks in cellular systems generated through protein microarray studies
Interaction mapping with protein microarrays has been applied to numerous organisms to achieve diverse representations of molecular
networks. A. Li et al. probed a human transcription factor (TF) microarray with four conserved kinases encoded by herpesviruses to reveal
the host targets of the viral kinases [35]. Veriﬁed interactions between the viral target host proteins are shown. B. Using a yeast proteome
microarray, Lu et al. identiﬁed the substrates of the HECT E3 ligase Rsp5 [22]. Through gene ontology analysis Rsp5 was linked to
subgroups of substrates based on function. C. The A. thaliana MAP kinase signaling network was reconstructed using an Arabidopsis
protein microarray [15] (adapted with permission from Dr. Savithramma P. Dinesh-Kumar). The hierarchical phosphorylation network
depicts the MKKs (upper nodes), MPKs (middle nodes) and substrates (bottom nodes). D. DNA binding speciﬁcity of unconventional
DNA-binding proteins (uDBPs) was characterized using the TF microarray [18]. The uDBPs are clustered based on target sequence
similarity and proteins of different functional classes are color-coded. ‘‘C’’ denotes consensus sequences for each sub-branch are shown. E.
The E. coli proteome microarray was used to identify differentially immunogenic proteins between HC and CD patient samples depicted in
the heat map [8]. The yellow and blue colors indicate high and low immunogenic responses, respectively. HC, healthy controls; CD,
Crohn’s disease.

26

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 18–28

Figure 3 The human proteome microarray
A. The human proteome microarray composed of 16,368 unique full-length recombinant proteins printed in duplicate on Full Moon glass
slides. To monitor the quality, the microarray was probed with anti-GST monoclonal antibody, followed by Alexa-555 secondary
antibody to visualize the signals. The proteins positively detected by the anti-GST antibody are represented in green. B. Cellular
distribution of the proteins included in the human proteome microarray. ER, endoplasmic reticulum; Mito, mitochondria.

niques that monitor the real-time dynamics of biomolecular
interactions. Oblique-incidence reﬂectivity difference (OIRD)
is an emerging technique that measures the changes in reﬂectiv-
ity of polarized light [70,71]. OIRD has recently been applied
to DNA and protein microarrays and has successfully deter-
mine association and dissociation rates of biomolecular inter-
actions in a high-throughput format [72,73].

Constructing complex interaction networks involving the
full range of cellular components is critical for deciphering
how organisms are organized and is essential for understand-
ing the aberrant changes that result in diseases. We have dis-
cussed the vast applications of protein microarrays for global
characterization of interactomes and the signiﬁcance of their
ﬁndings for creating a comprehensive view of biological sys-
tems. In conclusion, protein microarray technology is no long-
er in its infancy and will undoubtedly serve as an invaluable
tool for proteomics and systems biology.

Competing interests

The authors have declared no conﬂicts of interest.

Acknowledgements

We thank the NIH for supporting this work through the
Grants awarded to HZ (Grant No. RR020839, DK082840,
RO1GM076102, CA125807, CA160036 and HG006434) and
an F31 NRSA Predoctoral Fellowship to IU (Grant No.
5F31GM096716).

References

[1] Kenyon GL, DeMarini DM, Fuchs E, Galas DJ, Kirsch JF, Leyh
TS, et al. Deﬁning the mandate of proteomics in the post-
genomics era: workshop report. Mol Cell Proteomics 2002;1:
763–80.

[2] Neet KE, Lee JC. Biophysical characterization of proteins in the
post-genomic era of proteomics. Mol Cell Proteomics 2002;1:
415–20.

[3] Aebersold R, Mann M. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics.

Nature 2003;422:198–207.

[4] Desiere F, Deutsch EW, Nesvizhskii AI, Mallick P, King NL, Eng
JK, et al. Integration with the human genome of peptide sequences
obtained by high-throughput mass spectrometry. Genome Biol
2005;6:R9.

Uzoma I and Zhu H / Using Protein Microarrays to Construct Protein Networks

27

[5] Yang L, Guo S, Li Y, Zhou S, Tao S. Protein microarrays for
systems biology. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai)
2011;43:161–71.

[26] Asai T, Tena G, Plotnikova J, Willmann MR, Chiu WL, Gomez-
Gomez L, et al. MAP kinase signalling cascade in Arabidopsis
innate immunity. Nature 2002;415:977–83.

[6] Smith MG, Jona G, Ptacek J, Devgan G, Zhu H, Zhu X, et al.
Global analysis of protein function using protein microarrays.
Mech Ageing Dev 2005;126:171–5.

[27] Ichimura K, Mizoguchi T, Yoshida R, Yuasa T, Shinozaki K.
Various abiotic stresses rapidly activate Arabidopsis MAP kinases
ATMPK4 and ATMPK6. Plant J 2000;24:655–65.

[7] Zhu H, Qian J. Applications of functional protein microarrays in

[28] VanDemark AP, Hill CP. Structural basis of ubiquitylation. Curr

basic and clinical research. Adv Genet 2012;79:123–55.

Opin Struct Biol 2002;12:822–30.

[8] Chen CS, Sullivan S, Anderson T, Tan AC, Alex PJ, Brant SR,
et al. Identiﬁcation of novel serological biomarkers for inﬂam-
matory bowel disease using Escherichia coli proteome chip. Mol
Cell Proteomics 2009;8:1765–76.

[9] Tao SC, Li Y, Zhou J, Qian J, Schnaar RL, Zhang Y, et al.
Lectin microarrays identify cell-speciﬁc and functionally signiﬁ-
cant cell surface glycan markers. Glycobiology 2008;18:761–9.

[10] Kumble KD. Protein microarrays: new tools for pharmaceutical

development. Anal Bioanal Chem 2003;377:812–9.

[11] Hu S, Xie Z, Qian J, Blackshaw S, Zhu H. Functional protein
microarray technology. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med
2011;3:255–68.

[12] Zhu H, Bilgin M, Bangham R, Hall D, Casamayor A, Bertone P,
et al. Global analysis of protein activities using proteome chips.
Science 2001;293:2101–5.

[13] Zhu H, Hu S, Jona G, Zhu X, Kreiswirth N, Willey BM, et al.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome diagnostics using a coronavirus
protein microarray. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006;103:4011–6.
[14] Li R, Wang L, Liao G, Guzzo CM, Matunis MJ, Zhu H, et al.
SUMO binding by the Epstein-Barr virus protein kinase BGLF4
is crucial for BGLF4 function. J Virol 2012;86:5412–21.

[15] Popescu SC, Popescu GV, Bachan S, Zhang Z, Gerstein M,
Snyder M, et al. MAPK target networks in Arabidopsis thaliana
revealed using functional protein microarrays. Genes Dev
2009;23:80–92.

[16] Jeong JS, Jiang L, Albino E, Marrero J, Rho HS, Hu J, et al.
Rapid identiﬁcation of monospeciﬁc monoclonal antibodies using
a
proteome microarray. Mol Cell Proteomics
2012;11:1–10.

human

[17] Huang J, Zhu H, Haggarty SJ, Spring DR, Hwang H, Jin F, et al.
Finding new components of the target of rapamycin (TOR)
signaling network through chemical genetics and proteome chips.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004;101:16594–9.

[18] Hu S, Xie Z, Onishi A, Yu X, Jiang L, Lin J, et al. Proﬁling the
human protein–DNA interactome reveals ERK2 as a transcrip-
tional repressor of interferon signaling. Cell 2009;139:610–22.

[19] Zhu J, Gopinath K, Murali A, Yi G, Hayward SD, Zhu H, et al.
RNA-binding proteins that inhibit RNA virus infection. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007;104:3129–34.

[20] Ptacek J, Devgan G, Michaud G, Zhu H, Zhu X, Fasolo J, et al.
Global analysis of protein phosphorylation in yeast. Nature
2005;438:679–84.

[21] Merbl Y, Kirschner MW. Large-scale detection of ubiquitination
substrates using cell extracts and protein microarrays. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:2543–8.

[22] Lu JY, Lin YY, Qian J, Tao SC, Zhu J, Pickart C, et al.
Functional dissection of a HECT ubiquitin E3 ligase. Mol Cell
Proteomics 2008;7:35–45.

[23] Lin YY, Lu JY, Zhang J, Walter W, Dang W, Wan J, et al.
Protein acetylation microarray reveals that NuA4 controls key
metabolic
Cell
2009;136:1073–84.

gluconeogenesis.

regulating

target

[24] Foster MW, Forrester MT, Stamler JS. A protein microarray-
based analysis of S-nitrosylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2009;106:18948–53.

[25] Song Q, Liu G, Hu S, Zhang Y, Tao Y, Han Y, et al. Novel
autoimmune hepatitis-speciﬁc autoantigens identiﬁed using pro-
tein microarray technology. J Proteome Res 2010;9:30–9.

[29] Close P, Creppe C, Gillard M, Ladang A, Chapelle JP, Nguyen L,
et al. The emerging role of lysine acetylation of non-nuclear
proteins. Cell Mol Life Sci 2010;67:1255–64.

[30] Allard S, Utley RT, Savard J, Clarke A, Grant P, Brandl CJ,
et al. NuA4, an essential
transcription adaptor/histone H4
acetyltransferase complex containing Esa1p and the ATM-related
cofactor Tra1p. EMBO J 1999;18:5108–19.

[31] Lu JY, Lin YY, Sheu JC, Wu JT, Lee FJ, Chen Y, et al.
Acetylation of yeast AMPK controls intrinsic aging independently
of caloric restriction. Cell 2011;146:969–79.

[32] Choudhary C, Kumar C, Gnad F, Nielsen ML, Rehman M,
Walther TC, et al. Lysine acetylation targets protein complexes
and
Science
2009;325:834–40.

co-regulates

functions.

cellular

major

[33] Chen Y, Zhao W, Yang JS, Cheng Z, Luo H, Lu Z, et al.
Quantitative acetylome analysis reveals the roles of SIRT1 in
regulating diverse substrates and cellular pathways. Mol Cell
Proteomics 2012;11:1048–62.

[34] Zhang T, Wang S, Lin Y, Xu W, Ye D, Xiong Y, et al.
Acetylation negatively regulates glycogen phosphorylase by
recruiting protein phosphatase 1. Cell Metab 2012;15:75–87.

[35] Li R, Zhu J, Xie Z, Liao G, Liu J, Chen MR, et al. Conserved
herpesvirus kinases target the DNA damage response pathway
and TIP60 histone acetyltransferase to promote virus replication.
Cell Host Microbe 2011;10:390–400.

[36] Shamay M, Liu J, Li R, Liao G, Shen L, Greenway M, et al. A
protein array screen for Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
LANA interactors links LANA to TIP60, PP2A activity and
telomere shortening. J Virol 2012;86:5179–91.

[37] Arvin A, Campadelli-Fiume G, Mocarski E, Moore PS, Roizman
B, Whitley R, et al., editors. Human herpesviruses: biology,
therapy and immunoprophylaxis. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press; 2007.

[38] Gershburg E, Pagano JS. Conserved herpesvirus protein kinases.

Biochim Biophys Acta 2008;1784:203–12.

[39] Romaker D, Schregel V, Maurer K, Auerochs S, Marzi A, Sticht
H, et al. Analysis of the structure–activity relationship of four
herpesviral UL97 subfamily protein kinases reveals partial but not
full functional conservation. J Med Chem 2006;49:7044–53.

[40] Meng Q, Hagemeier SR, Fingeroth JD, Gershburg E, Pagano JS,
Kenney SC. The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded protein
kinase, EBV-PK, but not the thymidine kinase (EBV-TK),
is
required for ganciclovir and acyclovir inhibition of lytic viral
production. J Virol 2010;84:4534–42.

[41] Gershburg E, Raffa S, Torrisi MR, Pagano JS. Epstein–Barr
virus-encoded protein kinase (BGLF4) is involved in production
of infectious virus. J Virol 2007;81:5407–12.

[42] Gershburg E, Pagano JS. Phosphorylation of the Epstein–Barr
virus (EBV) DNA polymerase processivity factor EA-D by the
EBV-encoded protein kinase and effects of the L-riboside benz-
imidazole 1263W94. J Virol 2002;76:998–1003.

[43] Gareau JR, Lima CD. The SUMO pathway: emerging mecha-
nisms that shape speciﬁcity, conjugation and recognition. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 2010;11:861–71.

[44] Johnson ES. Protein modiﬁcation by SUMO. Annu Rev Biochem

2004;73:355–82.

[45] Ye F, Lei X, Gao SJ. Mechanisms of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus latency and reactivation. Adv Virol 2011;2011:193860.

28

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 18–28

[46] Grundhoff A, Ganem D. The latency-associated nuclear antigen
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus permits replication of
terminal repeat-containing plasmids. J Virol 2003;77:2779–83.

[47] Hu J, Garber AC, Renne R. The latency-associated nuclear
antigen of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus supports
latent DNA replication in dividing cells. J Virol 2002;76:11677–87.
[48] Fakhari FD, Jeong JH, Kanan Y, Dittmer DP. The latency-
associated nuclear antigen of Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpes-
virus induces B cell hyperplasia and lymphoma. J Clin Invest
2006;116:735–42.

[49] An J, Sun Y, Rettig MB. Transcriptional coactivation of c-Jun by

the KSHV-encoded LANA. Blood 2004;103:222–8.

[50] Cai Q, Lan K, Verma SC, Si H, Lin D, Robertson ES. Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus latent protein LANA interacts
with HIF-1 alpha to upregulate RTA expression during hypoxia:
latency control under low oxygen conditions. J Virol 2006;80:
7965–75.

[51] Kusano S, Eizuru Y. Human I-mfa domain proteins speciﬁcally
interact with KSHV LANA and affect its regulation of Wnt
signaling-dependent transcription. Biochem Biophys Res Com-
mun 2010;396:608–13.

[52] Krithivas A, Fujimuro M, Weidner M, Young DB, Hayward SD.
Protein interactions
targeting the latency-associated nuclear
antigen of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus to cell chro-
mosomes. J Virol 2002;76:11596–604.

[53] Barbera AJ, Chodaparambil JV, Kelley-Clarke B, Joukov V,
Walter JC, Luger K, et al. The nucleosomal surface as a docking
station for Kaposi’s sarcoma herpesvirus LANA. Science 2006;
311:856–61.

[54] Chen W, Dittmer DP. Ribosomal protein S6 interacts with the
latency-associated nuclear antigen of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus. J Virol 2011;85:9495–505.

[55] Zhu H, Cox E, Qian J. Functional protein microarray as
molecular decathlete: a versatile player in clinical proteomics.
Proteomics Clin Appl 2012;6:548–62.

[56] Mattoon D, Michaud G, Merkel J, Schweitzer B. Biomarker
discovery using protein microarray technology platforms: anti-
body–antigen complex proﬁling. Expert Rev Proteomics 2005;2:
879–89.

[57] Manns MP, Vogel A. Autoimmune hepatitis, from mechanisms to

therapy. Hepatology 2006;43:S132–44.

[58] Satija N, Lal SK. The molecular biology of SARS coronavirus.

Ann N Y Acad Sci 2007;1102:26–38.

[59] Thoreson R, Cullen JJ. Pathophysiology of inﬂammatory bowel

disease: an overview. Surg Clin North Am 2007;87:575–85.

[60] Bossuyt X. Serologic markers in inﬂammatory bowel disease. Clin

Chem 2006;52:171–81.

[61] Hakomori S. Aberrant glycosylation in cancer cell membranes as
focused on glycolipids: overview and perspectives. Cancer Res
1985;45:2405–14.

[62] Hakomori S. Glycosylation deﬁning cancer malignancy: new wine

in an old bottle. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:10231–3.

[63] Dennis JW, Granovsky M, Warren CE. Glycoprotein glycosyla-
tion and cancer progression. Biochim Biophys Acta 1999;1473:
21–34.

[64] Dwek MV, Ross HA, Leathem AJ. Proteome and glycosylation
mapping identiﬁes post-translational modiﬁcations associated
with aggressive breast cancer. Proteomics 2001;1:756–62.

[65] Kung LA, Tao SC, Qian J, Smith MG, Snyder M, Zhu H. Global
analysis of the glycoproteome in Saccharomyces cerevisiae reveals
new roles for protein glycosylation in eukaryotes. Mol Syst Biol
2009;5:308.

[66] Hirabayashi J. Lectin-based structural glycomics: glycoproteo-

mics and glycan proﬁling. Glycoconj J 2004;21:35–40.

[67] Ebe Y, Kuno A, Uchiyama N, Koseki-Kuno S, Yamada M, Sato
T, et al. Application of lectin microarray to crude samples:
differential glycan proﬁling of LEC mutants.
J Biochem
2006;139:323–7.

[68] Kuno A, Uchiyama N, Koseki-Kuno S, Ebe Y, Takashima S,
Yamada M, et al. Evanescent-ﬁeld ﬂuorescence-assisted lectin
microarray: a new strategy for glycan proﬁling. Nat Methods
2005;2:851–6.

[69] Tan M, Luo H, Lee S, Jin F, Yang JS, Montellier E, et al.
Identiﬁcation of 67 histone marks and histone lysine crotonyla-
tion as a new type of histone modiﬁcation. Cell 2011;146:
1016–28.

[70] Chen F, Lv H, Chen Z, Zhao T, Yang G. Optical real-time
monitoring of the laser molecular-beam epitaxial growth of
perovskite oxide thin ﬁlms by an oblique-incidence reﬂectance-
difference technique. J Opt Soc Am B 2000;18:1031–5.

[71] Landry JP, Zhu XD, Gregg JP. Label-free detection of micro-
arrays of biomolecules by oblique-incidence reﬂectivity difference
microscopy. Opt Lett 2004;29:581–3.

[72] Lu H, Wen J, Wang X, Yuan K, Li W, Lv H, et al. Detection of
the speciﬁc binding on protein microarrays by oblique-incidence
reﬂectivity difference method. J Opt 2010;12:1–5.

[73] Wang X, Lu H, Wen J, Yuan K, Lv H, Jin K, et al. Label-free
and high-throughput detection of protein microarrays by oblique-
incidence reﬂectivity difference method. Chinese Phys Lett 2010;
27:1–4.

