Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 13 (2015) 40–45

H O S T E D   BY

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics

www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb

www.sciencedirect.com

RESOURCE REVIEW

Web Resources for Stem Cell Research

Ting Wei 1,2,a, Xing Peng 2,3,b, Lili Ye 1,2,c, Jiajia Wang 2,3,d, Fuhai Song 2,3,e,
Zhouxian Bai 2,3,f, Guangchun Han 2,g, Fengmin Ji 1,h, Hongxing Lei 2,4,*,i

1 College of Life Sciences and Bioengineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
2 CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,

Beijing 100101, China

3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
4 Center of Alzheimer’s Disease, Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Beijing 100053, China

Received 20 December 2014; revised 11 January 2015; accepted 12 January 2015
Available online 18 February 2015

Handled by Xiangdong Fang

In this short review, we have presented a brief overview on major web resources relevant
Abstract
to stem cell research. To facilitate more efﬁcient use of these resources, we have provided a pre-
liminary rating based on our own user experience of the overall quality for each resource. We plan
to update the information on an annual basis.

KEYWORDS

Reprogramming;
Direct conversion;
Physical interaction;
Regulatory interaction;
Network

Introduction

Stem cell research is at the frontier of regenerative medicine [1–
3]. To avoid the ethical issues related to the use of embryonic
stem cell (ESC) or somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT)

* Corresponding author.

E-mail: leihx@big.ac.cn (Lei H).

a ORCID: 0000-0002-3966-7545.
b ORCID: 0000-0002-3645-8115.
c ORCID: 0000-0001-8471-1480.
d ORCID: 0000-0001-5001-8290.
e ORCID: 0000-0003-0848-8349.
f ORCID: 0000-0001-7071-666X.
g ORCID: 0000-0001-9277-2507.
h ORCID: 0000-0001-6984-8075.
i ORCID: 0000-0003-0496-0386.

Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.

technology, induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology
has been developed and matured in recent years [4,5]. Fibrob-
last and other types of terminally-differentiated cells can be
reprogrammed into iPSCs using deﬁned factors. iPSCs can
be further differentiated into various tissues using tissue-speci-
ﬁc inducing factors [6]. Differentiated cells can also be directly
converted to other types of differentiated cells (also termed
‘‘trans-differentiation’’) [7]. To foster the fast development in
this ﬁeld, several databases and web servers have been
established in the past few years (Figure 1). Relevant literature
and high-throughput experimental data have been curated.
Available data analyses range from identiﬁcation of physical
interactions and regulatory partners to enrichment analysis
and network construction. Here, we provide a brief overview
of these web resources. Based on our own user experience
of the overall quality of the resources, we have provided a
preliminary rating for those resources (Table 1). The rating is
mainly based on: (1) how many types of data have been includ-
ed? (2) how many samples or high-throughput experiments have

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2015.01.001
1672-0229 ª 2015 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and
Genetics Society of China.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Wei T et al / Web Resources for Stem Cell Research

41

Integration of high-throughput data in stem cell research

Figure 1
In order to achieve better understanding on reprogramming, direct conversion, self-renewal, and other processes in stem cell biology, genome-
wide proﬁling have been conducted at the end points and sometimes during those processes. Various types of high-throughput data have been
collected and integrated in over a dozen of specialized web resources. The relationship among critical genes can be visualized in a variety of
ways. Shown on the background is a network generated by StemCellNet.

been included? (3) what kind of online data analysis is available?
(4) is the web interface user friendly? and most importantly, (5)
can we gain any novel insight by using the web tool?

CellNet

Among the available web resources, CellNet is the most practical
tool for somatic cell reprogramming and direct conversion [8].
Analyses on the gene regulatory network (GRN) have been con-
ducted on 20 mouse cell lines or tissue types and 16 human cell
lines or tissue types, and several characteristic GRN modules
have been identiﬁed for each cell line or tissue type. The main
aim of CellNet is to facilitate cell engineering, not limited to stem
cell biology. User-uploaded gene expression proﬁles are com-
pared with the benchmark proﬁles, and three types of analysis
results can be obtained. The ﬁrst is cell and tissue type classiﬁca-
tion, basically indicating how close the engineered cell is to any
of the benchmark cells or tissues. The second is the GRN status,
i.e., the evaluation of the establishment of the characteristic
GRN modules for intended target cell or tissue. The third is
the network inﬂuence score. For each of the critical transcrip-
tional regulators of the intended target cell or tissue, the distance

to the expected expression level will be calculated and the top 50
down-regulated regulators will be highlighted. Overall, CellNet
provides a practical guide to ﬁll the gap between the engineered
cell and the intended target. Although CellNet is not speciﬁcally
designed for stem cell research, this unique application on cell
engineering is the main reason we gave it a 5-star rating.

LifeMap

LifeMap contains a large collection of the literature and gene
expression data relevant to stem cell differentiation, embryonic
development and regenerative medicine [9]. Information is
available for cell types including ESCs, iPSCs, embryonic pro-
genitor cells, adult stem cells, primary cells, and fully-differen-
tiated somatic cells from human and mouse. Retrievable
information include gene expression, signaling pathways, cell
types, developmental stages, anatomical compartments, differ-
entiation protocols, diseases, cell therapies, and literature ref-
erences. Illustrative and interactive images are provided for
better user experience. LifeMap is more like an encyclopedia
for embryonic development and regenerative medicine. The
main highlights include comprehensive curation of both

Table 1 Major web resources for stem cell research

Name

CellNet

LifeMap

ESCAPE

StemCellNet

HSC-explorer

SyStemCell

CORTECON

SCDE

StemBase

CODEX
ESCD

Link

Main features

Rating

Refs.

http://cellnet.hms.harvard.edu/

http://discovery.lifemapsc.com/

http://www.maayanlab.net/ESCAPE/

http://stemcellnet.sysbiolab.eu/

http://mips.helmholtz-muenchen.de/HSC/

http://lifecenter.sgst.cn/SyStemCell/

http://cortecon.neuralsci.org/

http://discovery.hsci.harvard.edu/

http://www.stembase.ca/?path=/

http://codex.stemcells.cam.ac.uk/
http://biit.cs.ut.ee/escd/

Cell type classiﬁcation; gene regulatory networks; reﬁnement
of factors for cell engineering
Diﬀerentiation, development, and regenerative medicine;
graphical display of embryonic development ontology tree
Multiple data types for human and mouse ESCs; network
construction, enrichment analysis, lineage prediction
Network with physical interaction and regulation; interactive
visualization of the network online
Early stage of hematopoiesis; interactive graphical display with
many functionalities
Clear indication of up or down regulation; co-localization
analysis for discovery of novel correlation
NGS data from in vitro cortical development; gene, cluster,
disease, KEGG pathway, and GO term
Tissue and cancer stem cells; curation on experiments;
enrichment analysis; code sharing
Detailed curation of experiment information; correlation and
mutual information analysis
NGS data for ESCs and haematopoietic cells
ESCs, embryonic carcinoma cells; search by GO terms

wwwww

wwwww

wwwww

wwwww

wwwww

wwwwq

wwwwq

wwwwq

wwwwq

wwwqq
wwqqq

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]

Note: Our rating is mainly based on the number of data types included; the number of samples or high-throughput experiments included, the kinds of online data analysis available, whether the web
interface is user-friendly, and most importantly, whether users can gain any novel insight by using the web tool.

4
2

G
e
n
o
m
i
c
s

P
r
o
t
e
o
m
i
c
s

B
i
o
i
n
f
o
r

m
a
t
i
c
s

1
3

(
2
0
1
5
)

4
0
–
4
5

Wei T et al / Web Resources for Stem Cell Research

43

literature and gene expression information, interactive graphi-
cal interface of the full development tree, and unique informa-
tion on regenerative medicine. Registration is required for the
access of the full features.

ESCAPE

The Embryonic Stem Cell Atlas from Pluripotency Evidence
(ESCAPE) database is developed based on gene sets from pub-
lished experiments on human and mouse ESCs [10]. The curat-
ed data types include chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
data for protein DNA interaction, regulatory information
from loss-of-function and gain-of-function (Logof) experi-
ments, protein–protein interaction (PPI) using key factors as
baits, miRNA target interactions from popular miRNA web-
sites, potential key regulators from RNAi experiments, ESC-
or differentiating ESC- speciﬁc proteins, histone modiﬁcations,
miRNA expression, and time-course expression. In addition to
the retrieval of the collected information, these gene sets can
also be used to construct interaction and regulatory networks,
conduct enrichment analysis for user-supplied gene lists, and
predict one of the four lineages during ESC differentiation,
the latter being a unique feature among the available web tools
described in this article. The network is built upon the input
gene list, curated ChIP, PPI, and Logof data.

StemCellNet

StemCellNet is mainly a network tool for stem cell biology
[11]. The datasets supporting the network construction include
physical protein interactions with key regulators, transcrip-
tional regulatory interactions from ChIP binding experiments,
generic physical and regulatory interactions from public
resources, and stemness gene sets from the literature. The con-
structed network can be visualized online or downloaded (as
exempliﬁed in Figure 1). The online network display can be
reﬁned according to several options. The node size can be
adjusted based on the number of appearances of the speciﬁc
gene in the stemness datasets. Users can also evaluate the
importance of the nodes based on the number of key stemness
neighbors. In addition, analysis on the signiﬁcance of enrich-
ment can be performed on the network for each of the stem-
ness gene sets. The network can also be annotated by
incorporating user-uploaded gene expression proﬁles. Trim-
ming of the network can be achieved by applying one or sev-
eral of the ﬁlters. The network functionality in StemCellNet
is the best among the web tools reviewed in this article.

HSC-explorer

HSC-explorer is a curated database for hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs) [12]. This database is focused on the early stage
of hematopoiesis. At the time of the writing of this manuscript,
over 7000 experimentally-validated interactions have been col-
lected from 217 publications. Detailed data statistics is shown
on the homepage. Search results can be displayed as both
tables and graphical networks. The interactions are carefully
curated with links to the original publications when necessary.
The graphical network is user-friendly with a variety of
functionalities. The heterogeneous network nodes include

gene/protein, SNP, CpG site, drug, pathway, disease, organ-
ism, and environment, among others. The types of directional
interactions include increasing, decreasing and affecting the
expression, quantity, activity, etc. of one entity by the other.
Detailed information can be displayed on mouseover at the
nodes or edges. In addition to the retrieval of directly-collected
information, several topics with special interest in hematopoi-
esis have been curated. Overall, this database is a good
resource for researchers interested in hematopoiesis.

SyStemCell

SyStemCell collected 285 stem cell related publications at the
initial release [13]. The majority of the data is on human and
mouse, although a small amount of data is on rat and rhesus
macaque. The data types include mRNA expression, protein
expression, DNA methylation and hydromethylation, histone
modiﬁcation, miRNA information, and transcription factor
(TF) regulation. The search results are displayed as increase,
detected, and decrease with different colors. Annotations
include information from gene ontology (GO), BioCarta, the
NCBI BioSystems database, and the database of Differentially
Expressed Proteins in human Cancer (dbDEPC). Other func-
tionalities include data browsing and co-localization analysis.
The co-localization analysis can be used to discover novel
correlation among the selected features. The last release of
SyStemCell was on Feb 10, 2012. Therefore, data in the past
three years may not be available at this website.

CORTECON

CORTECON is a neural stem cell (NSC)-speciﬁc resource and
a repository for gene expression in the in vitro developing
human cortex [14]. The web tool is mainly based on one high-
throughput sequencing study by the authors themselves. The
temporal expression data can be retrieved by gene, disease,
KEGG pathway, or GO term. Every gene belongs to one of
the clusters according to the temporal expression proﬁle. But
a gene may be associated with several diseases or multiple
stages of cortical development. In general, the relationship
among gene cluster, disease, KEGG pathway, GO term, and
development stage seems to be many-to-many. Since this is a
single study-based web tool, interpretation of the search results
shall be cautioned.

SCDE

The Stem Cell Discovery Engine (SCDE) is mainly focused on
resources for cancer stem cells [15]. Over 53 relevant datasets
(1098 assays) have been curated in the database, including
samples from blood,
intestine, and brain, almost all from
human and mouse. User-speciﬁed gene lists can be compared
against the curated datasets. They can also be compared again-
st molecular signatures in GeneSigDB, MSigDB, and Wik-
iPathway. SCDE has recently evolved into two components,
Stem Cell Commons and Galaxy, although both appear to
be in the process of further development. The Galaxy is mainly
devoted to data analysis mentioned above. The Stem Cell
Commons (http://stemcellcommons.org/) is being developed
into an integrated platform, including browse, search, analysis,

44

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 13 (2015) 40–45

visualization, and code sharing. Users can also upload data to
the Stem Cell Commons. The main goals are to promote dis-
covery and reproducibility in stem cell research.

portion of the data from these projects has already been curat-
ed in some of the web tools described above.

StemBase

StemBase has curated 62 experiments and 217 samples from
mouse, human, and rat [16]. The database can be searched in
simple and advanced modes. A portion of the expression infor-
mation can be retrieved by specifying several ﬁelds. The
retrieved information can be annotated by GO terms and rele-
vant publications. An additional feature in StemBase is the
correlation and mutual information of expression among the
speciﬁed genes or probes. The expression of each probe can
also be viewed on the UCSC genome browser, which seems
to be a unique feature. StemBase was originally designed in
2007 without any major update. Therefore, most of the data
collected are not so up-to-date.

CODEX

CODEX is devoted to next-generation sequencing (NGS)
experiments including ChIP-seq, RNA-seq, and DNase-seq
[17]. The datasets are divided by species (human and mouse
data). The regulatory information derived from the datasets
can also be retrieved. The CODEX server consists of three sec-
tions, i.e., HAEMCODE for haematopoietic cells, ESCODE
for embryonic stem cells, and CODEX for all cell types. Due
to the limited NGS data available for stem cell-related experi-
ments, CODEX is of limited use at the present time.

ESCD

The Embryonic Stem Cell Database (ESCD) has mainly col-
lected datasets on key transcription factor binding, RNAi
knockdown, and protein overexpression experiments [18].
Data from both human and mouse samples have been includ-
ed. In addition to ESCs, data for embryonic carcinoma cells
have also been included. ESCD can be queried by gene IDs
and GO terms. The major weakness of ESCD is the limited
data types and datasets covered.

Other resources

Several other resources are available on the web. StemCellDB
(http://stemcells.nih.gov/research/nihresearch/scunit/Pages/
Default.aspx) is established by the NIH Stem Cell Unit with an
aim for direct comparison of human ESC lines, adult stem
cells, and iPSCs
[19]. PluriNetWork (http://www.ibima.
med.uni-rostock.de/IBIMA/PluriNetWork/) has curated 274
pluripotency genes in mouse with 574 interactions (the current
data statistics) [20]. The network can be downloaded for fur-
ther exploration. FunGenES was originally designed for
mouse ESC differentiation [21]. However, the web server is
no longer active. Additionally,
large amount of data is
available from some worldwide collaboration projects with
broad scope,
including ENCODE (http://genome.ucsc.edu/
ENCODE/), TCGA (https://icgc.org/), and Roadmap Epige-
nomics (http://www.roadmapepigenomics.org/). However, a

Concluding remarks

It is an ongoing effort to develop efﬁcient tools for the better
understanding of reprogramming, differentiation, and trans-
differentiation. Some of the web resources are continuously
updated or upgraded. We shall point out that a good portion
of the web resources have not been well maintained since the
initial publication. New tools will surely emerge in the future.
The continuous effort on web maintenance should be carefully
considered when developing new web tools. We ourselves are
also in the process of developing an integrated web server
for stem cell research. Mere collection of public data will be
far from sufﬁcient in the future. A major effort should be
focused on enhancing our fundamental understanding of the
mechanism regarding the maintenance of pluripotency and
gaining precise control of the reprogramming, differentiation,
and direct conversion.

Competing interests

The authors declare that there are no conﬂicts of interest.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the grants from the National
Basic Research Program of China (973 Program; Grant No.
2014CB964901) and the National High-tech R&D Program
of China (863 Program; Grant No. 2015AA020100) awarded
to HL by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China.

References

[1] Young RA. Control of the embryonic stem cell state. Cell

2011;144:940–54.

[2] Krupalnik V, Hanna JH. Stem cells: the quest for the perfect

reprogrammed cell. Nature 2014;511:160–2.

[3] Wang H, Zhang Q, Fang X. Transcriptomics and proteomics in

stem cell research. Front Med 2014;8:433–44.

[4] Takahashi K, Yamanaka S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells
from mouse embryonic and adult ﬁbroblast cultures by deﬁned
factors. Cell 2006;126:663–76.

[5] Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, Narita M, Ichisaka T,
Tomoda K, et al. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult
human ﬁbroblasts by deﬁned factors. Cell 2007;131:861–72.

[6] Hartﬁeld EM, Yamasaki-Mann M, Ribeiro Fernandes HJ,
Vowles J, James WS, Cowley SA, et al. Physiological charac-
terisation of human iPS-derived dopaminergic neurons. PLoS One
2014;9:e87388.

[7] Xue Y, Ouyang K, Huang J, Zhou Y, Ouyang H, Li H, et al.
Direct conversion of ﬁbroblasts to neurons by reprogramming
PTB-regulated microRNA circuits. Cell 2013;152:82–96.

[8] Cahan P, Li H, Morris SA, Lummertz da Rocha E, Daley GQ,
Collins JJ. CellNet: network biology applied to stem cell
engineering. Cell 2014;158:903–15.

[9] Edgar R, Mazor Y, Rinon A, Blumenthal J, Golan Y, Buzhor E,
et al. LifeMap discovery: the embryonic development, stem cells,

Wei T et al / Web Resources for Stem Cell Research

45

regenerative medicine

and
2013;8:e66629.

research

portal. PLoS One

[10] Xu H, Baroukh C, Dannenfelser R, Chen EY, Tan CM, Kou Y,
et al. ESCAPE: database for integrating high-content published
data collected from human and mouse embryonic stem cells.
Database (Oxford) 2013;2013:bat045.

[11] Pinto JP, Reddy Kalathur RK, Machado RS, Xavier JM,
Braganca J, Futschik ME. StemCellNet: an interactive platform
for network-oriented investigations in stem cell biology. Nucleic
Acids Res 2014;42:W154–60.

[12] Montrone C, Kokkaliaris KD, Loefﬂer D, Lechner M, Kasten-
muller G, Schroeder T, et al. HSC-explorer: a curated database
for hematopoietic stem cells. PLoS One 2013;8:e70348.

[13] Yu J, Xing X, Zeng L, Sun J, Li W, Sun H, et al. SyStemCell: a
database populated with multiple levels of experimental data from
stem cell differentiation research. PLoS One 2012;7:e35230.

[14] van de Leemput J, Boles NC, Kiehl TR, Corneo B, Lederman P,
Menon V, et al. CORTECON: a temporal transcriptome analysis
of in vitro human cerebral cortex development from human
embryonic stem cells. Neuron 2014;83:51–68.

[15] Ho Sui SJ, Begley K, Reilly D, Chapman B, McGovern R, Rocca-
Sera P, et al. The Stem Cell Discovery Engine: an integrated
repository and analysis system for cancer stem cell comparisons.
Nucleic Acids Res 2012;40:D984–91.

[16] Porter CJ, Palidwor GA, Sandie R, Krzyzanowski PM, Muro
EM, Perez-Iratxeta C, et al. StemBase: a resource for the analysis
of
expression data. Methods Mol Biol
2007;407:137–48.

stem cell gene

[17] Sanchez-Castillo M, Ruau D, Wilkinson AC, Ng FS, Hannah R,
Diamanti E, et al. CODEX: a next-generation sequencing
experiment database for the haematopoietic and embryonic stem
cell communities. Nucleic Acids Res 2015;43:D1117–23.

[18] Jung M, Peterson H, Chavez L, Kahlem P, Lehrach H, Vilo J,
et al. A data integration approach to mapping OCT4 gene
regulatory networks operative in embryonic stem cells and
embryonal carcinoma cells. PLoS One 2010;5:e10709.

[19] Mallon BS, Chenoweth JG, Johnson KR, Hamilton RS, Tesar PJ,
Yavatkar AS, et al. StemCellDB: the human pluripotent stem cell
database at the National Institutes of Health. Stem Cell Res
2013;10:57–66.

[20] Som A, Harder C, Greber B, Siatkowski M, Paudel Y, Warsow G,
et al. The PluriNetWork: an electronic representation of the
network underlying pluripotency in mouse, and its applications.
PLoS One 2010;5:e15165.

[21] Schulz H, Kolde R, Adler P, Aksoy I, Anastassiadis K, Bader
M, et al. The FunGenES database: a genomics resource for
mouse
differentiation. PLoS One
2009;4:e6804.

stem cell

embryonic

