Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 1–7

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics

www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb

www.sciencedirect.com

REVIEW

Relative Speciﬁcity: All Substrates Are Not Created Equal

Yan Zeng *

Department of Medicine, Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA

Received 26 November 2013; revised 21 December 2013; accepted 7 January 2014
Available online 31 January 2014

Handled by Jun Yu

KEYWORDS

Relative speciﬁcity;
Biochemical activity;
Substrates;
Biological systems

Abstract A biological molecule, e.g., an enzyme, tends to interact with its many cognate sub-
strates, targets, or partners differentially. Such a property is termed relative speciﬁcity and has been
proposed to regulate important physiological functions, even though it has not been examined
explicitly in most complex biochemical systems. This essay reviews several recent large-scale studies
that investigate protein folding, signal transduction, RNA binding, translation and transcription in
the context of relative speciﬁcity. These results and others support a pervasive role of relative
speciﬁcity in diverse biological processes. It is becoming clear that relative speciﬁcity contributes
fundamentally to the diversity and complexity of biological systems, which has signiﬁcant
implications in disease processes as well.

Introduction

Relative speciﬁcity is deﬁned as the characteristic whereby in a
biochemical system, a molecule, symbolized as E, interacts
with its numerous substrates, targets or partners (collectively
symbolized as {S}) differentially, thereby impacting them dis-
tinctively depending on the identity of individual substrates,
targets or partners [1]. E can be a protein, RNA or any other
biological molecule, capable of interacting with other mole-
cules, i.e., {S}, through binding and/or catalysis. Some exam-
ples are hemoglobin binding to O2, CO2 and a few other

* Corresponding author.

E-mail: zengx033@umn.edu (Zeng Y).

Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.

Production and hosting by Elsevier

molecules, a receptor capturing different ligands, a cytochrome
P450 enzyme metabolizing diverse chemicals, an RNA-binding
protein associating with its RNA targets, a protein kinase
phosphorylating substrates, a protein chaperone contacting
unfolded or partially folded proteins, RNA polymerases tran-
scribing genes, and the ribosome translating mRNAs. In many
cellular systems, {S} can number in the hundreds, thousands or
more. Research, however, has traditionally been centered on
determining whether a molecule is the substrate or not of an
E of interest. For various reasons, that an E might not target all
of its {S} equally in complex systems, i.e., relative speciﬁcity, is
rarely treated as default, and what physiological consequences
relative speciﬁcity may incur is even less investigated [1].

Evidence does exist to suggest that relative speciﬁcity is
functionally relevant in complex biochemical systems. For
example, the RNase Drosha (E) cleaved hundreds of human
primary microRNA transcripts ({S}) with different efﬁciencies
in vitro, which correlated with the expression of mature
microRNAs in vivo, and such speciﬁcity was partially explain-
able by the structural properties of {S} [2]. The functionality of

1672-0229/$ - see front matter ª 2014 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China. Production and hosting
by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2014.01.001

2

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 1–7

relative speciﬁcity was also detected in systems involving a
transcription factor and a protein kinase in budding yeast
and an RNA-binding protein in humans [1]. The phenomena
were generalized to formulate the relative speciﬁcity hypothe-
sis, which has a number of features and implications. Firstly,
it focuses on complex systems where an E acts on many,
e.g., hundreds or thousands of substrates, since such systems
are abundant in nature, yet their relative speciﬁcity has been
largely ignored partially due to technical limitations. Testing
the hypothesis requires that we examine and compare the
interactions between an E and its numerous substrates and
then correlate the preferential interactions with a phenotype,
in order to ﬁlter out the effects from factors other than the E
of interest and make credible references to how the E’s relative
speciﬁcity contributes to a biological outcome. This is critical
also because an observed biochemical property, e.g., the bind-
ing of an E to a target, does not automatically equate to any
biological function in vivo.

Secondly, the hypothesis does not stipulate the nature or
origin of relative speciﬁcity in myriad biochemical systems or
consider the abundance and subcellular localization of E and
{S} to a ﬁrst approximation. An E can bind to {S} with differ-
ent on and off rates, different afﬁnities, etc. It can bind to {S}
to induce distinct conformational changes to selectively impact
downstream signaling. It can also bind to {S} before efﬁcient
or inefﬁcient enzymatic reactions. Any of these modes and
their combinations could underlie the mechanism of relative
speciﬁcity.

Thirdly, biological processes frequently mandate several
biochemical activities in succession or in parallel. Analogous
to rate-limiting reactions, even if relative speciﬁcity is exhibited
by multiple Es in a biological process, the process may still be
determined largely by the speciﬁcity from one of these Es. As
an example, RNases Drosha and Dicer function in the same
microRNA biogenesis pathway and were shown to cleave their
respective substrates of microRNA transcripts preferentially
in vitro, yet only the selectivity by Drosha signiﬁcantly corre-
lated with mature microRNA expression in vivo [2,3].

Lastly, the hypothesis promotes a reevaluation of certain
concepts. For example, the literature contains ample state-
ments like this: protein X has a high speciﬁcity. What it ulti-
mately means is that X does not have many substrates. But it
is likely that X still has more than one substrate, and X does
not treat them equally. Conversely, if protein Y has a low spec-
iﬁcity, then Y has many substrates, but again, Y still differen-
tially interacts with these {S}. Furthermore, consider the
following two schemes. In the ﬁrst, an E acts identically on
many substrates, which have different, sometime even opposing
functions, but a speciﬁc biologic outcome nevertheless results,
e.g., cancer. In the second, the E acts on the same {S} differen-
tially, again leading to a speciﬁc outcome, e.g., cancer. Hence, a
similar phenotype might originate from two distinct mecha-
nisms. The key to distinguish between the two possibilities is
to reveal whether the E reacts with {S} differently and the phe-
notypes can be partially explained by this relative speciﬁcity.

Below, I will review several recent studies of diverse
biological systems in the context of relative speciﬁcity: (1)
Hsp90–client interactions, (2) protein phosphorylation by the
mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1), (3)
RNA stabilization by RNA binding protein, fox-1 homolog
(RBFOX1),
codons on
translation and (5) genome-wide transcription. I will then

impact of N-terminal

the

(4)

discuss a number of issues raised by the relative speciﬁcity
hypothesis.

Hsp90–client interactions

Hsp90 is a molecular chaperone that associates with a large
number of client proteins ({S}) to facilitate their folding. To
study how Hsp90 recognizes {S}, Taipale et al. used a reporter
assay to quantify the interactions between Hsp90 and hun-
dreds of potential clients systematically in cell cultures [4].
Hsp90 was shown to interact with the majority of human ki-
nases. However, the interaction was not binary, i.e., substrate
vs. non-substrate, but rather, as a sign of relative speciﬁcity,
varied over a 100-fold range in strength, according to the re-
porter readouts. Cdc37, a co-chaperone of Hsp90, also selec-
tively interacted with human kinases in a manner highly
correlated with Hsp90. Mechanistically, the thermal stability
of the kinases, with still poorly deﬁned but both localized
and broadly distributed components, was proposed to be the
major determinant of how Hsp90 selects and discriminates {S}.
What are the functional consequences of differential
Hsp90–client interactions? Taipale et al. found a modest but
signiﬁcant, negative correlation between the strength of
Hsp90
expression
(R2 = 0.15; [4]). Experimentally, the stronger the interaction,
the larger the extent to which a recombinant client protein
might be destabilized in cell cultures when Hsp90 was inhibited
pharmacologically. In addition, weak human Hsp90 client ki-
nases were more readily overexpressed than strong clients in
bacteria, which lack Hsp90. These data suggest that Hsp90
selectivity might buffer protein folding; without Hsp90, intrin-
sically unstable proteins would have been even less stable and
expressed at a lower level.

interaction and recombinant kinase

Protein phosphorylation by mTORC1

That relative speciﬁcity is functionally relevant can be easily
rationalized if it correlates with differential gene expression.
For the budding yeast Cdk1, its relative speciﬁcity in vitro pos-
itively correlated with substrate phosphorylation during mito-
sis, but whether the mere fact that Cdk1 phosphorylates {S} to
varying degrees would have a biological consequence is not
straightforward to address [1]. This potentially novel, global
form of regulation has been at least partially tackled in the
mTORC1 system [5].mTORC1 is a protein kinase that controls
metabolism and growth in response to many stimuli, and its
activity is altered by aging and in human disease such as can-
cers and can be inhibited by the drug rapamycin. Kang et al.
performed in vitro kinase assays with recombinant mTORC1
and short peptides corresponding to mTORC1 phosphoryla-
tion sites in various substrates and their mutants [5]. Short
peptides were used as the proxy for endogenous proteins be-
cause sequences immediately surrounding the phosphorylation
sites in native substrates contain the most critical information
necessary for kinase
recognition and phosphorylation.
mTORC1 was shown to phosphorylate some peptides/sub-
strates more readily than others, indicative of relative speciﬁc-
ity, or substrate quality as termed by Kang et al. [5]. mTORC1
activity depended partially on substrate binding afﬁnity. Kang
et al. then used a number of tests to demonstrate functional
relevance [5]. For example, rapamycin, a pharmacologically

Zeng Y / Relative Speciﬁcity Regulates Biological Systems

3

important agent, preferentially reversed the phosphorylation
of poor mTORC1 substrates while had little effect on that of
the strong substrates. This is because rapamycin blocks
mTORC1 incompletely, and weak mTORC1 substrates would
be the ﬁrst or more acutely affected by reduced mTORC1
activity. Moreover, low amino acid and serum conditions dif-
ferentially affected the phosphorylation of mTORC1 sub-
strates in cell cultures, consistent with the in vitro kinase
assay data and substrate quality. Lastly, under a starving ami-
no acid condition, mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts expressing a
wildtype mTORC1 substrate S6K1 grew slower than cells
expressing an engineered S6K1 that was better phosphorylated
by mTORC1, indicating that a change in relative speciﬁcity or
substrate quality impacted cell proliferation under reduced
nutrient conditions. Relative speciﬁcity, therefore, enables
mTORC1 to differentially phosphorylate substrates under
the same physiological inputs, which modulates cell behaviors
and drug sensitivity.

RNA stabilization by RBFOX1

Most RNA-binding proteins associate with RNA targets via
short, degenerate RNA sequences or motifs. Ray et al. system-
atically analyzed RNA motifs recognized by over 200 RNA-
binding domains/proteins in vitro and computationally corre-
lated the presence of RNA motifs in transcriptomes to the
functions of RNA-binding proteins [6]. A number of proteins
were thereby proposed to regulate RNA expression or splicing.
One of them was RBFOX1, a protein implicated in neurode-
velopmental and psychiatric disorders such as autism spectrum
disorder. The numbers of predicted RBFOX1 RNA binding
motifs at the 30 untranslated regions (UTRs) of mRNAs posi-
tively correlated with the abundance of mRNAs [6]. Using the
data of RNA-seq following RBFOX1 knockdown in primary
human neural progenitor cells [7], Ray et al. found that the
number of predicted FBFOX1 binding sites in mRNAs also
positively correlated with the extent to which RBFOX1 knock-
down reduced the expression of the mRNAs [6], reminiscent of
the ﬁnding concerning Hsp90 and clients [4]. As reduced
RBFOX1 levels in the brains of autism patients had been
noted [8], it was further shown that predicted RBFOX1 targets
had progressively lower mRNA expression in these patients
[6]. In summary, mRNAs varied in their predicted RBFOX1
binding sites, and mRNAs with a high number of predicted
binding sites were more likely dependent on RBFOX1 for their
expression levels than those with fewer binding sites, poten-
tially contributing to differential gene expression under
normal, physiological conditions as well as pathological condi-
tions such as autism. Our understanding of the functions of
RNA-binding proteins such as RBFOX1 would be enhanced
by considering relative binding strength of the binding sites,
studying
incorporating
information about the actual binding events through isolating
protein:RNA complexes from cells followed by RNA-seq.

splicing

effects

and

the

on

Impact of N-terminal codons on translation

The ribosome does not translate its {S}, i.e., mRNAs equally.
Translation efﬁciency depends on factors such as mRNA
length, expression, structure, codon usage, cognate tRNA

dosage and ribosome abundance [9]. In bacteria and many
eukaryotes, though not necessarily in other eukaryotes such as
mammals, the ﬁrst 10 codons after the start AUG in mRNAs
are enriched for low efﬁciency codons and the RNA secondary
structure in this 50 region is less stable than that in other regions
of the mRNAs [10–15]. Because rare codons are also more A/U
rich, especially at the wobble position, it was unclear whether
slower translation at the N-terminus due to rare codons or re-
duced RNA structure ultimately led to increased protein expres-
sion. Two recent reports addressed this question [15,16].

In the ﬁrst report, Bentele et al. surveyed 414 bacterial gen-
omes and found that at the N-terminal region, codon usage fa-
vors a ﬂexible mRNA structure [15]. Rare codons are selected
only if they are A/U rich, while abundant codons disfavored
only if they are G/C rich. The authors proposed that rare co-
dons are selected for not because they are rare, but because
they weaken the mRNA structure. The authors went on to
conﬁrm this conclusion by testing the expression of two repor-
ter genes in Escherichia coli.

In the second report, Goodman et al. directly examined the
cause and effect of N-terminal codon bias on translation by
analyzing the expression of 14,234 artiﬁcial constructs that dif-
fered in their promoters, ribosome binding sites, 11 N-terminal
codons with various amino acid sequences and synonymous
codons in front of a common reporter gene [16]. There was a
signiﬁcant increase (P10-fold) in protein abundance from
adopting the common to the rare synonymous codons, after
adjusting for the effects of promoters and ribosome binding.
The authors then correlated reporter expression to a number
of metrics. As expected, codon rarity and reduced secondary
structure were the strongest predictors of high expression.
After controlling for the secondary structure changes among
codons, however, there was no longer any relationship between
N-terminal codon usage and expression, while secondary
structure remained correlated with reporter expression after
controlling for codon usage. Thus, a weak secondary structure
is primarily responsible for increases in protein expression.
Endogenous mRNAs differ in their N-terminal coding se-
quences, codon usage and secondary structures, which could
greatly impart their differential translation efﬁciencies. Indeed,
highly expressed genes might contain more low efﬁciency co-
dons at this region than weakly expressed genes [17].

Genome-wide transcription

Beneﬁting from the availability of genome sequences and early
application of genomics technologies, a number of studies of
gene transcription have incorporated the analysis of relative
speciﬁcity, albeit often implicitly. These include correlating
transcription factor (TF) binding to target mRNA expression
following computational predictions of target genes or experi-
mental measurements of DNA binding using the chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-microarray or ChIP-seq method
[18]. As reviewed by Biggin [19], animal TFs might bind to
many targets in a cell over a quantitative continuum in ‘‘Con-
tinuous Networks’’, as opposed to the ‘‘Discrete Networks’’
most people or models describe. Here I will use data chieﬂy
from the recently completed, ENcyclopedia Of DNA Elements
(ENCODE) project as an example to discuss relative speciﬁcity
in DNA transcription.

4

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 1–7

in dozens of human cell

The ENCODE project generated genome-wide DNA bind-
ing data for 119 proteins, including sequence-speciﬁc TFs, gen-
eral TFs, RNA polymerases II (Pol II) and III, and histone
modifying complexes,
lines/types
[20]. Consistent with other studies, ENCODE found that a
protein typically binds to regions associated with a large num-
ber of loci with varying binding signals. How relevant are these
variations, since binding as identiﬁed by ChIP does not neces-
sitate functionality in a cell? The authors went on to show that
the total TF binding signals near the transcription start sites
could predict the vast differences in transcript abundance
[20–22]. For example, aggregate TF binding explained at least
67% of the variance in the levels of 50 m7GpppN cap-contain-
ing RNAs in K562 cells, although the predictive power was
weaker for RNAs prepared and sequenced in different man-
ners [21]. Contribution by individual proteins was likewise
analyzed, and TFs with more binding sites in the genome, such
as Yin Yang 1 (YY1), also tended to contribute more to RNA
variations in cells.

Interestingly, DNA binding by the protein REST positively
correlated with the variance in transcription initiation, despite
REST being a transcriptional repressor [21]. To reconcile this
discrepancy, I compared the relative speciﬁcity of RE1-silenc-
ing transcription factor (REST), serum response factor (SRF),
YY1 and Pol II using the publicly available ChIP-seq and
RNA-seq data for human K562, HepG2, GM12878 and
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Here, protein binding to a target
gene was represented by cumulative ChIP signals from two
kilobases upstream of the transcription start site to two kilo-
bases downstream of the transcription termination site. This
adjustment was made to accommodate the fact that Pol II
elongates transcripts along the body of genes and that
although usually 60% of the ChIP peaks by sequence-speciﬁc
TFs are near the transcription start sites, TFs also bind and
function further away. DNA binding was then correlated to
RNA-seq data. In essence, transcriptional activities along the
whole gene loci were examined.

Table 1 shows the Spearman correlation between protein
binding and RNA expression. In all four human cell lines,
REST bound hundreds of target genes differentially, which
negatively correlated with target mRNA expression. This re-
sult is consistent with the transcriptional repressor role of

REST and suggests that its relative speciﬁcity contributes to
differential gene suppression in human cells. The correlation
was the weakest in K562 cells, perhaps partially explaining
why a positive correlation was obtained by Cheng and col-
leagues [21]. On the other hand, REST target genes identiﬁed
in K562 cells far out-numbered those in other cells (Table 1).
If limited to the 2000 genes with the highest REST ChIP sig-
nals, a target number more in line with those in the other three
lines, a stronger correlation was obtained: q =  0.38,
cell
P = 5.9 · 10 71. Thus, capped-RNA production at the pro-
moter regions might not adequately reﬂect the functions of cer-
tain TFs or transcription of the whole genes; e.g., a TF might
act on transcription elongation. SRF ChIP signals correlated
weakly with target mRNA expression, and not surprisingly,
Pol II usually possessed the highest target gene numbers and
strongest positive correlations, followed closely by YY1 (Ta-
ble 1), consistent with the ﬁndings of Cheng and colleagues
[21]. Notably, correlation shown in Table 1 was weaker than
that reported in a few other studies in mammalian cells (e.g.,
[21,23,24]). Explanations may lie in the differences in cells
and TFs that were examined and how ChIP signals were se-
lected and weighted for analyses. Nevertheless, the trend is
clear: TFs including Pol II occupy DNA in a quantitative con-
tinuum, and for some of these proteins, their relative speciﬁcity
likely plays a nontrivial role in differential mRNA expression
in vivo.

Does relative speciﬁcity contribute to other
biological phenomena?

From the examples above and others, an argument can be
made that relative speciﬁcity is a prevalent, even if often over-
looked, regulatory mechanism in biological processes. For
example, there have been a number of puzzling discoveries:
chieﬂy, while a protein is known to serve as a universal and
essential factor in a fundamental biological process, its muta-
tion, or gain or loss of function can yield a very speciﬁc out-
come. A case in point
translation
initiation factor, yet its enhanced activity promotes tumorigen-
esis [25] or induces an autisitic phenotype [26–28] in mamma-
lian systems. Moreover, ribosome biogenesis factors and

is eIF4E, a general

Table 1 Correlation between TF occupancy and mRNA expression in several human cell lines

K562 (GSM581666)

HepG2 (GSM591672)

GM12878 (GSM591661)

ESC (GSM591658)

TF

N

REST

7822

q
 0.14

P
2.6 · 10

 36

N

1154

(GSM803440)

SRF

3076

0.1

8.6 · 10

 8

3023

Pol II

10,067

YY1

9988

(GSM803520)

0.51

0
(GSM803410)

0.4

0
(GSM803446)

q
 0.33
(GSM803344)

P
1.5 · 10

 30

N

1812

q
 0.34
(GSM803349)

P
6.9 · 10

 49

N

3789

q
 0.21
(GSM803365)

P
6.2 · 10

 40

0.03

0.08
(GSM803502)

1812

0.12

3.1 · 10

 12

1859

(GSM803350)

0.02

0.37
(GSM803425)

9865

0.36

1.2 · 10 296

10,589

0.53

0

10,891

0.35

5.8 · 10 304

(GSM803368)

(GSM803355)

(GSM803366)

10,801

0.41

0

11,117

0.47

0

10,189

0.24

4.6 · 10 129

(GSM803381)

(GSM803406)

(GSM803513)

Note: Transcription factors (TFs) include Pol II here. N indicates number of target genes that had both ChIP-seq and RNA-seq signals in the same
cell line; q represents Spearman rank correlation coefﬁcient; and P stands for the P values calculated using SPSS, version 19 (IBM). Genes
were identiﬁed by aligning the ChIP-seq data to the Human Genome hg19 using Galaxy at http://galaxyproject.org/. Listed in parentheses are the
Gene Expression Omnibus accession numbers of RNA-seq datasets for the four indicated cell lines and ChIP-seq datasets for the respective TFs in
these cell lines. ESC, embryonic stem cell; REST, RE1-silencing transcription factor; SRF, serum response factor; YY1, Yin Yang 1.

Zeng Y / Relative Speciﬁcity Regulates Biological Systems

5

ribosomal proteins are necessary for the production and func-
tion of ribosomes, but mutations in some of those proteins
lead to tissue-speciﬁc phenotypes and diseases, or ribosomop-
athies [29,30]. An example is the universal ribosomal protein
L38, whose mutations cause unique patterning defects in
mouse embryos, including homeotic transformations of the ax-
ial skeleton, whereas mutants of several other ribosomal pro-
teins show no such defects [29,31].

How to explain these phenotypes? Elevated eIF4E might in-
crease the translation of some cancer-promoting mRNAs with
a long and stable 50 UTR [25] or the expression of neuroligins,
leading to neurological deﬁcits [27]. In L38 mutant embryos,
the translation of a subset of Homeobox mRNAs was altered
[31]. Despite these ﬁndings, the underlying mechanisms remain
incompletely understood. Multiple possibilities may be in play,
including varying tissue or developmental requirements for the
general factors or sensitivities to their perturbations, and
potentially non-identical ribosome composition in different
cells [29,31]. To gain a better understanding of ribosomopa-
thies and, in fact, other analogous biological phenomena, how-
ever, one might also want to consider relative speciﬁcity. There
is little direct experimental evidence yet, but it is not hard to
imagine that even the same ribosome would differentially
translate its tens of thousands of mRNAs, and that translation
of some mRNAs would naturally be more affected than that of
others by changes in the translation machinery. This is analo-
gous to the aforementioned example of how N-terminal codon
bias inﬂuences translation efﬁciency, although our understand-
ing of the regulation of mammalian mRNA translation re-
mains limited.

To further illustrate the functional ramiﬁcations of relative
speciﬁcity, consider the scenario shown in Figure 1A. There are
two systems, led by E1 and E2, which act on and only on the
same substrates, S1, S2, S3, . . ., S100, but differ in their relative

Functional signiﬁcance of relative speciﬁcity

Figure 1
A. E1 and E2 act on the same set of substrates (S1, S2,
S3, . . ., S100) but with different relative speciﬁcity to produce
phenotypes 1 and 2, respectively. B. E has a number of substrates
that are functionally negative, neutral or positive with respect to a
certain phenotype. A mutant E* that produces the net phenotype
may alter the substrates in two ways (I and II). In scenario I,
E* represses only the negative substrates and induces only the
positive substrates. In scenario II, E* can repress or induce all
three types of substrates, and it is the uneven changes in these
substrates that would ultimately lead to the phenotype of interest.
The height of columns symbolizes expression levels, with dash
lines representing expression under E.

speciﬁcity. E1 through these {S} produces phenotype 1,
whereas E2 through the same {S} produces phenotype 2. The
question, then, is: will phenotype 1 be the same as phenotype
2? The relative speciﬁcity hypothesis would say no. An approx-
imate situation is perhaps created by a common experimental
strategy where E2 is an overexpressed version of E1. It is pre-
dicted that even if E1 and E2 still target the same {S}, {S} un-
der E2 will not change uniformly compared to {S} under E1,
and in the case of eIF4E, E2 leads to cell transformation. Fur-
ther worth mentioning is a fascinating ﬁnding of Claverıa and
colleagues [32]. During mouse embryonic development, epi-
blast cells express heterogeneous levels of Myc, and cells with
high Myc levels would out-compete neighboring cells with rel-
atively lower Myc levels. If, for simplicity, Myc regulates the
same sets of genes regardless of Myc levels, but differentially,
then this might be a clear functional consequence as a result
of Myc relative speciﬁcity. Of course, it is unknown whether
the phenotypes of increased eIF4E and Myc are the direct or
indirect effects of relative speciﬁcity, but it will be interesting
to see if one can ﬁnd or create different types of systems of Fig-
ure 1A to deliberately and directly test the relative speciﬁcity
hypothesis.

Testing the relative speciﬁcity hypothesis

Evaluating relative speciﬁcity and its signiﬁcance in biological
processes can be challenging. Better in vitro assays, e.g., to
compare the translation of endogenous mRNAs, may have
to be developed to more faithfully reﬂect situations especially
in mammalian systems. Also needed are better measurements
of biological molecules and their interactions in cells. For
example, RNA-seq has the potential to more accurately reveal
RNA expression than microarray that is based on hybridiza-
tion to short oligonucleotide probes. Global protein expression
has been proﬁled using mass spectrometry and calculated
based on raw peptide signals, which give a poor account of
endogenous protein levels. Furthermore, the majority of ChIP
studies have examined TF occupancy, but TF binding dynam-
ics may be a more appropriate predictor of gene transcription
[33]. The above considerations could partly explain why the
correlation between relative speciﬁcity and a phenotype, e.g.,
gene expression, tends to be low. However, with improved
technologies and modeling, relative speciﬁcity’s functional
contribution will be more precisely determined.

So far, the ﬁnal step in testing relative speciﬁcity is to obtain
a signiﬁcant correlation with a cellular phenotype. Because the
biochemical activity of an E in question is usually known, e.g.,
a kinase phosphorylates substrates, an RNase cleaves RNA
intermediates preceding the production of mature RNAs, the
causal relationship between the E’s relative speciﬁcity and a
particular biological outcome can be safely inferred. Kang
et al. went further to show that manipulating the substrate
quality of an mTORC1 target
impacted cell growth [5],
although it remains possible that the manipulation of a single
target affected its function irrespective of its phosphorylation
by mTORC1. Nevertheless, studying phenotypic changes fol-
lowing alteration of relative speciﬁcity at a larger scale, as
shown in Figure 1A, will fundamentally enhance our appreci-
ation of relative speciﬁcity and its regulation of biological
systems.

6

Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 1–7

Is relative speciﬁcity evolutionarily conserved?

Does Drosha or another microRNA processing factor in ﬁsh
or ﬂies discriminate its substrates to regulate microRNA pro-
duction, and does mTORC1 differentially phosphorylate sub-
strates in other species as in humans? We do not have the
answers yet. At the sequence level, Es such as kinases, RNA-
binding proteins and TFs are often conserved and recognize
homologous motifs, suggesting that they might have and dif-
ferentiate similar sets of {S} across species as well. On the other
hand, sequence homology is not the only way to conserve bio-
logical functions. For example, rRNAs differ in their primary
structures but maintain a similar fold throughout evolution,
while mating gene expression and heterochromatin formation
are enforced by different mechanisms in fungi. It is plausible,
therefore, that relative speciﬁcity functions as a conserved
mechanism even in the absence of obvious sequence homology.
Related to this issue, the genome-wide DNA binding sites of
TFs had been compared in multiple species and found to have
undergone widespread gains and losses [34–40]. Yet, a signiﬁ-
cant number of binding site losses in one species are recovered
by gains at nearby loci in another species, vice versa [38,41].
When a TF binds to orthologous genes in humans and mice,
most binding sites need not be aligned [35]. These results sug-
gest that even as genomes and TF binding sites have exten-
sively diverged, there is a constraint to buffer the loss of
differential target gene binding by TFs at a global scale. Like-
wise, translation efﬁciency across many species is regulated by
mRNA codon usage and structures near the start codon, and
orthologous genes are translated differentially to reﬂect the
physiological divergence of species [15,16,42].

Implications of relative speciﬁcity in biological
systems

Biological systems are diverse and complex, with variations at
the species level, at the individual organisms’ level, at the
cellular level and at the molecular level. For example, the
mammalian genomes contain over 20,000 protein-coding
genes, and their mRNA levels vary by at least 4 orders of
magnitude and protein levels at least 6 orders of magnitude
[43]. What, then, accounts for such diversity and complexity?
An obvious explanation is evolution by natural selection.
Other possible answers include stochasticity and self assembly
[44]. Conceivably, relative speciﬁcity could also contribute
to the diversity and complexity in biological systems. Differen-
tial TF binding has been proposed to lead to individual
variability [37,45].

Although clear evidence is lacking, if relative speciﬁcity is
important for normal, physiological processes, it likely impacts
pathogenesis as well. For example, the functions of Hsp90,
mTORC1, RBFOX1 and many transcription factors, such as
Myc and p53, have been implicated in human disease.
Therefore, studying relative speciﬁcity could further help us
understand disease processes, as illustrated in Figure 1B. Sup-
pose an E has its normal, physiological substrates or targets,
while a mutation in E results in a disease. Traditionally, one
would go by identifying changes in the substrates or targets of
E that are consistent with the disease phenotype, such as
increased oncogene or decreased tumor suppressor expression

(scenario I, Figure 1B). Studies over the years, however, have
shown that rarely a single target or a small set of targets, can
sufﬁciently account for the mutant effects. More likely, the E
has many {S}, and its mutation alters {S} differentially: e.g.,
some growth-promoting genes have increased expression, while
some growth-promoting genes have decreased expression, same
with growth-inhibitory genes (scenario II, Figure 1B). It is spec-
ulated that it is these changes and the unbalanced changes in
many {S}, not a dominant change in a small number of {S}, that
may lead to the disease phenotype.

Conclusion

The appreciation of relative speciﬁcity in complex biochemical
systems and its prevalent physiological signiﬁcance has been
closely linked to technological advances, which have in turn
led to conceptual changes. Up until 20 years ago, to under-
stand the function of an enzyme, for example, one could only
focus on a handful of substrates at a time while ignoring a vast
number of
‘‘non-substrates’’. The development of high-
throughput techniques and bioinformatics allowed one to
identify hundreds of substrates simultaneously, but typically
only a small number of ‘‘the most promising’’ ones were sub-
sequently scrutinized. Then, approximately 10 years ago, the
importance of groups of genes in common complexes and
pathways began to be widely appreciated, and research now
routinely examines hundreds of genes according to their func-
tional classiﬁcations. The acknowledgement of relative speci-
ﬁcity could prompt us, in a more deliberate manner, to seek
out a comprehensive list of {S}, investigate and compare their
changes in response to perturbations, and rationalize how the
uneven changes in many of the {S} ultimately contribute to the
complex biological phenotypes.

Competing interests

The author declares no competing interest.

Acknowledgements

This work was partly supported by the National Institutes
of Health (Grant Nos.
and R01
DA031202). I thank Dr. Clifford Steer for suggestions and
help.

5P50-DA011806-12

References

[1] Zeng Y. The functional consequences and implications of relative
substrate speciﬁcity in complex biochemical systems. Front Genet
2011;2:65.

[2] Feng Y, Zhang X, Song Q, Li T, Zeng Y. Drosha processing
controls the speciﬁcity and efﬁciency of global microRNA
expression. Biochim Biophys Acta 2011;1809:700–7.

[3] Feng Y, Zhang X, Graves P, Zeng Y. A comprehensive analysis of
precursor microRNA cleavage by human Dicer. RNA
2012;18:2083–92.

[4] Taipale M, Krykbaeva I, Koeva M, Kayatekin C, Westover KD,
Karras GI, et al. Quantitative analysis of HSP90–client interac-
tions
recognition. Cell
2012;150:987–1001.

principles

substrate

reveals

of

Zeng Y / Relative Speciﬁcity Regulates Biological Systems

7

[5] Kang SA, Pacold ME, Cervantes CL, Lim D, Lou HJ, Ottina K,
et al. mTORC1 phosphorylation sites encode their sensitivity to
starvation and rapamycin. Science 2013;341:1236566.

[26] Neves-Pereira M, Mu¨ ller B, Massie D, Williams JH, O’Brien PC,
Hughes A, et al. Deregulation of EIF4E: a novel mechanism for
autism. J Med Genet 2009;46:759–65.

[6] Ray D, Kazan H, Cook KB, Weirauch MT, Najafabadi HS, Li X,
et al. A compendium of RNA-binding motifs for decoding gene
regulation. Nature 2013;499:172–7.

[27] Gkogkas CG, Khoutorsky A, Ran I, Rampakakis E, Nevarko T,
Weatherill DB, et al. Autism-related deﬁcits via dysregulated
eIF4E-dependent translational control. Nature 2013;493:371–7.

[7] Fogel BL, Wexler E, Wahnich A, Friedrich T, Vijayendran C,
Gao F, et al. RBFOX1 regulates both splicing and transcriptional
networks in human neuronal development. Hum Mol Genet
2012;21:4171–86.

[8] Voineagu I, Wang X, Johnston P, Lowe JK, Tian Y, Horvath S,
et al. Transcriptomic analysis of autistic brain reveals convergent
molecular pathology. Nature 2011;474:380–4.

[28] Santini E, Huynh TN, MacAskill AF, Carter AG, Pierre P,
Ruggero D, et al. Exaggerated translation causes synaptic and
behavioural
autism. Nature
2013;493:411–5.

associated with

aberrations

[29] Topisirovic I, Sonenberg N. Translational control by the eukary-

otic ribosome. Cell 2011;145:333–4.

[30] McCann KL, Baserga SJ. Mysterious ribosomopathies. Science

[9] Shah P, Ding Y, Niemczyk M, Kudla G, Plotkin JB. Rate-limiting

2013;341:849–50.

steps in yeast protein translation. Cell 2013;153:1589–601.

[10] Allert M, Cox JC, Hellinga HW. Multifactorial determinants of
protein expression in prokaryotic open reading frames. J Mol Biol
2010;402:905–18.

[11] Gu W, Zhou T, Wilke CO. A universal trend of reduced mRNA
stability near the translation-initiation site in prokaryotes and
eukaryotes. PLoS Comput Biol 2010;6:e1000664.

[12] Tuller T, Carmi A, Vestsigian K, Navon S, Dorfan Y, Zaborske J,
et al. An evolutionarily conserved mechanism for controlling the
efﬁciency of protein translation. Cell 2010;141:344–54.

[31] Kondrashov N, Pusic A, Stumpf C, Shimizu K, Hsieh AC, Xue S,
et al. Ribosome-mediated speciﬁcity in Hox mRNA translation
and vertebrate tissue patterning. Cell 2011;145:383–97.

[32] Claverı´ a C, Giovinazzo G, Sierra R, Torres M. Myc-driven
endogenous cell competition in the early mammalian embryo.
Nature 2013;500:39–44.

[33] Lickwar CR, Mueller F, Hanlon SE, McNally JG, Lieb JD.
Genome-wide protein–DNA binding dynamics suggest a molec-
ular
function. Nature
2012;484:251–5.

transcription

clutch

factor

for

[13] Tuller T, Waldman YY, Kupiec MM, Ruppin E. Translation
efﬁciency is determined by both codon bias and folding energy.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010;107:3645–50.

[34] Borneman AR, Gianoulis TA, Zhang ZD, Yu H, Rozowsky J,
Seringhaus MR, et al. Divergence of transcription factor binding
sites across related yeast species. Science 2007;317:815–9.

[14] Pechmann S, Frydman J. Evolutionary conservation of codon
optimality reveals hidden signatures of cotranslational folding.
Nat Struct Mol Biol 2013;20:237–43.

[15] Bentele K, Saffert P, Rauscher R, Ignatova Z, Blu¨ thgen N.
Efﬁcient translation initiation dictates codon usage at gene start.
Mol Syst Biol 2013;9:675.

[16] Goodman DB, Church GM, Kosuri S. Causes and effects of N-

terminal codon bias in bacterial genes. Science 2013;342:475–9.

[17] Eyre-Walker A, Bulmer M. Reduced synonymous substitution
rate at the start of enterobacterial genes. Nucleic Acids Res
1993;21:4599–603.

[18] Kim HD, Shay T, O’Shea EK, Regev A. Transcriptional
regulatory circuits: predicting numbers from alphabets. Science
2009;325:429–32.

[19] Biggin MD. Animal transcription networks as highly connected,

quantitative continua. Dev Cell 2011;21:611–26.

[20] ENCODE. An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the

human genome. Nature 2012;489:57–74.

[21] Cheng C, Alexander R, Min R, Leng J, Yip KY, Rozowsky J,
et al. Understanding transcriptional regulation by integrative
analysis of
transcription factor binding data. Genome Res
2012;22:1658–67.

[22] Gerstein MB, Kundaje A, Hariharan M, Landt SG, Yan KK,
Cheng C, et al. Architecture of the human regulatory network
derived from ENCODE data. Nature 2012;489:91–100.

[23] Cheng C, Gerstein M. Modeling the relative relationship of
transcription factor binding and histone modiﬁcations to gene
expression levels in mouse embryonic stem cells. Nucleic Acids
Res 2012;40:553–68.

[24] Ouyang Z, Zhou Q, Wong WH. ChIP-Seq of transcription factors
predicts absolute and differential gene expression in embryonic
stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:21521–6.

[25] Sonenberg N. EIF4E, the mRNA cap-binding protein, from
basic discovery to translational research. Biochem Cell Biol
2008;86:178–83.

[35] Odom DT, Dowell RD, Jacobsen ES, Gordon W, Danford TW,
MacIsaac KD, et al. Tissue-speciﬁc transcriptional regulation has
diverged signiﬁcantly between human and mouse. Nat Genet
2007;39:730–2.

[36] Tuch BB, Li H, Johnson AD. Evolution of eukaryotic transcrip-

tion circuits. Science 2008;319:1797–9.

[37] Kasowski M, Grubert F, Heffelﬁnger C, Hariharan M, Asabere
A, Waszak SM, et al. Variation in transcription factor binding
among humans. Science 2010;328:232–5.

[38] Schmidt D, Wilson MD, Ballester B, Schwalie PC, Brown GD,
Marshall A, et al. Five-vertebrate ChIP-seq reveals the evolu-
tionary dynamics of
transcription factor binding. Science
2010;328:1036–40.

[39] Hemberg M, Kreiman G. Conservation of transcription factor
binding events predicts gene expression across species. Nucleic
Acids Res 2011;39:7092–102.

[40] Stefﬂova K, Thybert D, Wilson MD, Streeter I, Aleksic J,
Karagianni P, et al. Cooperativity and rapid evolution of
cobound transcription factors in closely related mammals. Cell
2013;154:530–40.

[41] Doniger SW, Fay JC. Frequent gain and loss of functional
transcription factor binding sites. PLoS Comput Biol 2007;3:e99.
[42] Man O, Pilpel Y. Differential translation efﬁciency of orthologous
genes is involved in phenotypic divergence of yeast species. Nat
Genet 2007;39:415–21.

[43] Schwanha¨ usser B, Busse D, Li N, Dittmar G, Schuchhardt J,
Wolf J, et al. Global quantiﬁcation of mammalian gene expres-
sion control. Nature 2011;473:337–42.

[44] Whitesides GM, Boncheva M. Beyond molecules: self-assembly of
mesoscopic and macroscopic components. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 2002;99:4769–74.

[45] McDaniell R, Lee BK, Song L, Liu Z, Boyle AP, Erdos MR,
et al. Heritable individual-speciﬁc and allele-speciﬁc chromatin
signatures in humans. Science 2010;328:235–9.

