 AutOphAgic punctum

BioArchitecture 1:5, 221-224; September/October 2011;  2011 Landes Bioscience

pERSpEctiVE

Control of cortical microtubule organization and desmosome stability 
by centrosomal proteins

Kaelyn D. Sumigray1 and Terry Lechler1,2,*
1Department of Cell Biology; 2Department of Dermatology; Duke University Medical Center; Durham, NC USA

In  many  tissues,  microtubules  reorga-

nize  into  non-centrosomal  arrays  in 
differentiated  cells.  In  the  epidermis, 
proliferative basal cells have a radial array 
of microtubules organized around a cen-
trosome,  while  differentiated  cells  have 
cortical  microtubules.  The  desmosomal 
protein  desmoplakin  is  required  for  the 
microtubules to organize around the cell 
cortex.  Furthermore,  the  centrosomal 
and/or  microtubule-associated  proteins 
ninein,  Lis1,  Ndel1,  and  CLIP170  are 
recruited  to  the  cell  cortex,  where  they 
have  been  implicated  in  the  cortical 
organization  of  microtubules.  Recently, 
it has been shown that in Lis1-null epi-
dermis, microtubules are disorganized in 
the differentiated layers of the epidermis. 
Furthermore,  Lis1-null  mice  die  peri-
natally due to dehydration. This is due, 
in  part,  to  the  unexpected  desmosome 
phenotype  observed  in  Lis1-null  skin. 
Upon loss of Lis1, desmosomal proteins 
become less stable. Here, we propose that 
Lis1  may  regulate  desmosomal  stabil-
ity  through  its  binding  partners  Nde1/
Ndel1 and dynein. 

Introduction

by  bacterial  infections.3,4  Traditionally, 
desmosomes have been thought of as static 
structures,  strictly  providing  strength  to 
tissues  that  undergo  mechanical  stress 
by attaching to the intermediate filament 
cytoskeleton.  However,  recent  data  sug-
gest that desmosomes are dynamic struc-
tures that participate in the organization 
of several cytoskeletal networks.1,5,6

In  many  tissues,  microtubules  in  dif-
ferentiated  cells  adopt  non-centrosomal 
arrays  (Fig.  1).  Although  their  specific 
arrangements  are  thought  to  be  essential 
for  many  cellular  functions,  including 
polarity, cell shape, and trafficking, little 
is  known  about  how  the  microtubules 
adopt  these  non-centrosomal  arrays.  In 
both  plant  cells  and  the  Drosophila  tra-
chea, microtubule reorganization involves 
the  recruitment  of  microtubule-nucleat-
ing  complexes  including  gamma-tubulin 
to areas at the cell cortex.7,8 Work in the 
epidermis highlights novel ways in which 
non-centrosomal  microtubule  arrays  can 
form.

Desmoplakin Recruits a Subset  
of Centrosomal Proteins to the 

Cell Cortex

The epidermis provides a mechanical and 
chemical barrier against the environment. 
An integral part of maintaining this bar-
rier  is  proper  cell-cell  adhesion.  In  par-
ticular, desmosomes bear the bulk of the 
mechanical  stress  to  which  the  skin  is 
exposed. Loss or mutation of desmosomal 
proteins results in blistering in the epider-
mis, in some cases leading to death.1-3 This 
occurs not only in genetic disease, but can 
also be caused by autoimmune disease and 

In  the  epidermis,  microtubules  are  orga-
nized around an apically localized centro-
some in the proliferative basal cells. Lying 
above the basal cells in the stratified epider-
mis are cells at various levels of differentia-
tion that we will collectively call suprabasal 
cells. In suprabasal cells, the microtubules 
reorganize,  ultimately  to  the  cell  cortex 
(Fig.  2).6  In  the  mouse  skin,  desmopla-
kin (DP), the linker protein that attaches 
keratin  filaments  to  the  desmosome,  

Keywords: Lis1, microtubule, desmo-
some, desmoplakin, epidermis
Submitted: 10/05/11
Accepted: 10/08/11
http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/bioa.1.5.18403
Correspondence to: Terry Lechler; 
Email: terry.lechler@duke.edu

www.landesbioscience.com 

BioArchitecture 

221

 2012 Landes Bioscience.Do not distribute.that it may be. Most human mutations in 
DP  affect  both  DPI  and  DPII,  and  they 
cause a range of disease from skin thick-
ening  and  woolly  hair  to  severe  blister-
ing  diseases  and  cardiomyopathies.2,3  A 
single  case  has  been  described,  however, 
of  a  mutation  that  affects  the  splicing  of 
DP, leading essentially to complete loss of 
DPI,  but  retention  of  DPII.  The  patient 
presented with palmoplantar keratoderma 
and heart defects.13 While the heart defects 
may be due to the low levels of expression 
of  DPII  in  that  tissue,  DP  levels  in  the 
epidermis were not dramatically affected. 
The  heart  phenotype  could  therefore  be 
due  to  changes  in  the  total  levels  of  DP, 
or  to  the  specific  absence  of  DPI.  The 
epidermal phenotypes caused by the DPI-
specific  mutation  may  be  due  to  DPII’s 
inability  to  recruit  centrosomal  proteins 
and/or microtubules to the cell cortex of 
the  epidermis.  That  said,  much  work  is 
required to define the direct protein-pro-
tein interations that allow recruitment of 
centrosomal proteins to the desmosome.

Human  mutations  also  offer  evidence 
that DP may have functions outside sim-
ply  tethering  intermediate  filaments  to 
the desmosome. Loss of full-length DP in 
mouse  results  in  early  embryonic  lethal-
ity.14,15  Even  after  rescue  of  the  extra-
embryonic  defects,  the  mice  die  shortly 
after  gastrulation  with  multiple  defects 
in  heart,  vasculature  and  neuroepithe-
lium.15 In humans, loss of the intermedi-
ate filament-binding region in both alleles 
of the DP-gene results in lethal acantho-
lytic  epidermolysis  bullosa—a  blistering 
disease  causing  much  later  lethality,  just 
after  birth.2  While  this  discrepancy  may 
be ascribed to species-specific differences, 
it may also highlight functions for DP in 
addition to simply tethering desmosomes 
to intermediate filaments.

Lis1 is Essential for Cortical  
Microtubule Organization

Not  only  is  Lis1  recruited  to  the  desmo-
some by DP, but Lis1 is also essential for 
proper  microtubule  organization  in  dif-
ferentiated  epidermis.  The  microtubules 
of  the  suprabasal  cells  in  Lis1  condition-
ally ablated epidermis were not organized 
at  the  cortex,  but  rather,  were  cytoplas-
mic.5  This  finding  that  Lis1  is  required 

Figure 1. microtubules adopt non-centrosomal arrays in several cell types. cultured fibroblasts 
have a radial array of microtubules organized around a centrosome, where microtubule-nucle-
ating and anchoring material is found. in myocytes the centrosomal array of microtubules is 
replaced by a linear array organized parallel to the long axis. microtubule-nucleating material 
clusters around the nuclei. in older myotubes, centrioles completely disappear. neurons contain 
linear arrays of microtubules in axons and dendrites. in axons, microtubules are long and plus 
ends are distal to the cell body. in dendrites, microtubules are short and have mixed polarity. in 
polarized epithelial cells, microtubules are organized along the apical-basal axis, with the minus 
ends closest to the apical surface. microtubule-nucleating complexes localize in the apical region 
of the cell.

is required for cortical microtubule orga-
nization.  Upon  loss  of  DP,  microtubules 
of  the  suprabasal  cells  are  lost  from  the 
cortex  and  aggregate  in  the  cytoplasm.6 
Recent  work  has  begun  to  uncover  how 
DP  functions  in  microtubule  organiza-
tion.  At  least  three  centrosomal  proteins 
implicated 
in  anchoring  microtubules 
at  the  centrosome,  ninein,  Lis1,  and 
Ndel1, and one plus-end binding protein, 
CLIP170, are recruited to the desmosome 
by  desmoplakin.5,6  Furthermore,  con-
ditional  ablation  of  the  Lis1  gene  in  the 
epidermis led to a microtubule phenotype 
very similar to loss of DP.5 This is consis-
tent with the hypothesis that centrosomal 
proteins are required to organize microtu-
bules  at  the  cortex.  Unexpectedly,  how-
ever,  loss  of  Lis1  also  resulted  in  severe 
defects  in  the  desmosome  itself.5  We 
propose  two  models  for  how  loss  of  Lis1 
may  result  in  desmosomal  defects,  likely 
caused  by  the  mislocalization  of  at  least 
one Lis1-interacting protein.

Notably, DP is not required for the dif-
ferentiation-induced loss of these proteins 
from the centrosome, but only their sub-
sequent  recruitment  to  the  desmosome. 
This  is  evident  in  DP-null  keratinocytes 

where  ninein,  Lis1,  and  Ndel1  are  no 
longer found on the centrosome, but are 
cytoplasmic.5,6  The  loss  of  ninein  from 
centrosomes  during  differentiation  has 
been  seen  in  a  number  of  cell  types, 
including  myocytes,  neurons  and  pillar 
cells of the inner ear.9-11 This suggests that 
changes  in  centrosome  composition  and 
function are common in many differenti-
ated cells. The signaling pathways that are 
important for this change in centrosome 
composition  during  differentiation  and 
their immediate centrosomal targets have 
not yet been identified.

The region of DP required for centro-
somal  protein  recruitment  is  specific  to 
one isoform of DP.5 DPI has a longer rod 
domain than its alternatively spliced iso-
form DPII. The region of the rod required 
for  centrosomal  protein  recruitment  is 
only  found  in  DPI.  This  suggests  an 
unexpected difference in functions of the 
DP isoforms. Previous data demonstrated 
that  purified  DPI  and  DPII  behave  as  a 
dimer  and  monomer,  respectively,12  but 
this  is  the  first  demonstration  of  a  func-
tional difference. Whether this difference 
is physiologically relevant requires further 
investigation,  but  human  genetics  hints 

222 

BioArchitecture 

Volume 1 issue 5

 2012 Landes Bioscience.Do not distribute.for microtubule organization supports the 
model in which desmoplakin recruits cen-
trosomal proteins like Lis1, which are sub-
sequently required for the recruitment of 
microtubules to the cortex. Desmoplakin 
can recruit both plus-end binding proteins 
and minus-end associated proteins to the 
cell cortex. We hypothesize that these pro-
teins  transform  the  cortex  into  a  region 
that is capable of binding and stabilizing 
microtubules.

Lis1 is Essential  

for Desmosome Function

levels  of  cortical 

In  addition  to  microtubule  defects  and 
mitotic  defects,  the  epidermal-specific 
Lis1  knockout  mice  (Lis1  cKO)  had  a 
compromised  barrier  and  died  at  birth 
from dehydration. Notably, the Lis1 cKO 
also  exhibited  blistering  and  peeling  of 
the skin. In general, the Lis1 cKO mouse 
phenocopied  the  DP  cKO  mouse.5  In 
both  skin  sections  and  isolated  keratino-
cytes,  desmosomal  components  showed 
lower 
localization. 
Furthermore,  the  total  levels  of  desmo-
somal proteins were decreased. This effect 
of Lis1 was specific to desmosomal com-
ponents, as loss of Lis1 did not alter adhe-
rens junction protein levels or localization. 
Ultrastructurally, 
desmosomes  were 
smaller and had less robust attachment to 
the keratin filament cytoskeleton. Studies 
in  cultured  cells  revealed  that  while  the 
initial formation of desmosomes occurred 
normally in Lis1 null cells, stabilization of 
the desmosomal proteins at the cell cortex 
was  compromised.5  The  unexpected  des-
mosomal defects precluded analysis of the 
function  of  cortical  microtubules,  as  the 
contribution of the microtubule defect to 
the viability of the mouse and the epider-
mal  barrier  function  could  not  be  deter-
mined. Below, we discuss several possible 
reasons for the desmosomal phenotype in 
the Lis1 cKO mice.

Ndel1: Lis1’s Link to Intermediate 

Filaments

One of the most well-characterized inter-
acting partners of Lis1 is Ndel1, initially 
identified  in  screens  for  nuclear  distribu-
tion  mutants  in  Aspergillus.  These  evo-
lutionarily  conserved  proteins  have  been 

Figure 2. centrosomal protein and microtubule organization in the epidermis. in basal cells of the 
epidermis, microtubules are organized in a radial array around an apically localized centrosome. 
Lis1, ndel1, and ninein localize at the centrosome. in the differentiated suprabasal cells where 
desmosomes are robust, Lis1, ndel1, and ninein are lost from the centrosome and are recruited to 
the desmosome by desmoplakin, along with cLip170. microtubules are organized around the cell 
cortex.

shown to form a complex with dynein to 
control  cell  migration,  especially  in  neu-
rons.16  The  ability  of  Lis1  and  Ndel1  to 
interact with dynein heavy chain may pro-
vide a mechanism for how Lis1 organizes 
microtubules. This will be discussed more 
in  the  next  section.  However,  Ndel1  has 
also  emerged  as  an  integrator  of  several 
cytoskeletal  networks.  Neurofilaments, 
a  type  of  intermediate  filament  protein, 
comprise part of the cytoskeletal network 
in the axons and dendrites of central ner-
vous  system  neurons.  Although  interme-
diate  filaments  can  self-assemble,  Ndel1 
has been shown to facilitate neurofilament 
polymerization by binding to the neurofil-
ament light subunit. Loss of Ndel1 results 
in  destabilized  neurofilaments,  and  ulti-
mately, neurodegeneration.17 Additionally, 
Ndel1 has been shown to bind vimentin 
and to be required for its transport through 
dynein.18  Finally,  Ndel1  associates  with 
another  intermediate  filament  protein, 
lamin B, in the mitotic spindle. Lamin B 
is required for proper microtubule organi-
zation into a spindle. Ndel1 interacts with 
lamin B in the spindle, and both the lamin 
B  matrix  and  spindle  organization  are 
perturbed when Ndel1 is depleted.19 This 
occurs  in  a  dynein-dependent  manner. 
Therefore,  Ndel1  and  dynein  cooperate 

to  organize  the  lamin  B  network,  which 
in turn is required for proper microtubule 
spindle organization. Similar mechanisms 
for Ndel1-mediated intermediate filament 
organization  may  exist  in  the  epidermis. 
We  have  seen  that  loss  of  Lis1  results  in 
loss of Ndel1 from the cell cortex (unpub-
lished  data).  Therefore,  Lis1  is  required 
for Ndel1 recruitment to the desmosome. 
Ndel1 could act locally at the desmosome 
to  promote  intermediate  filament  assem-
bly  or  attachment.  Whether  attachment 
of  keratin  filaments  to  the  desmosome 
is  required  for  proper  desmosome  stabil-
ity is unclear.20 Embryos that are null for 
the entire keratin superfamily had smaller, 
mislocalized  desmosomes,20  suggesting 
that keratin filaments are required for the 
proper  localization  and  structure  of  the 
desmosome.  Furthermore,  embryos  that 
are  null  for  desmoplakin,  and  therefore 
lack attachment of intermediate filaments, 
show defects in desmosome assembly and 
stabilization,14  again  suggesting  that  the 
desmosomal  connection  to  the  interme-
diate  filament  cytoskeleton  is  important 
to maintain desmosomes. Additionally, if 
Ndel1  can  interact  with  keratin  filament 
precursors  on  microtubules  similarly  to 
its interactions with the lamin B subunits, 
the  disorganization  of  microtubules  in 

www.landesbioscience.com 

BioArchitecture 

223

 2012 Landes Bioscience.Do not distribute.the  Lis1  cKO  may  result  in  the  inability 
of Ndel1 and the keratin filament precur-
sors to be properly transported to the cell 
cortex. This could be dependent or inde-
pendent of Ndel1’s ability to interact with 
dynein.

Lis1 and its Interactions  

with Dynein

Lis1 and Ndel1 have been shown to form 
a complex with dynein. Ndel1 can recruit 
both Lis1 and dynein to the centrosome,21 
where  Lis1  and  Ndel1  may  cooperate  to 
regulate  dynein  force  production.22  Lis1 
is  thought  to  prolong  the  interaction  of 
dynein  with  microtubules,  where  it  can 
cooperate  with  Ndel1  to  allow  sustained 
force  production  from  dynein.  In  addi-
tion,  the  Lis1-binding  protein  CLIP170 
can  also  bind  to  and  localize  dynein  to 
microtubule plus ends. Loss of Lis1 could 
result  in  the  mislocalization  of  CLIP170 
and  Ndel1,  and  in  turn,  the  misregula-
tion  of  dynein.  Proper  dynein  function 
is  required  for  organelle  transport  and 
has been shown to be involved in vesicle 
recycling.23 Misregulation of dynein upon 
loss of Lis1 could result in mistargeting of 
organelles or proteins, or in defects in the 
recycling and endocytosis of desmosomal 
proteins.  Therefore,  when  desmosomal 
proteins are internalized, they may not be 
properly recycled back to the surface but 
sent  to  the  lysosome  for  degradation.  In 
fact, desmosomal components in Lis1-null 
keratinocytes  partially  colocalized  with 
lysosomal markers. That said, we have not 
observed a strong enrichment of dynein at 
desmosomes, though dynein is present at 
low levels at the cell cortex.

Conclusions

Recent  studies  have  shed  light  on  the 
many  roles  that  Lis1  plays  in  the  epider-
mis,  both  in  microtubule  organization 
and  desmosomal  stability  and  function. 
Although  further  work  is  needed,  our 

study  highlights  an  important  function 
for desmosomes in recruiting centrosomal 
proteins.  Desmosomes  also  require  Lis1, 
and  potentially  other  centrosomal  pro-
teins,  to  stabilize  and  maintain  proper 
adhesion and attachment to keratin. The 
mechanisms  behind  Lis1-mediated  des-
mosome  stability  have  just  begun  to  be 
elucidated. While Lis1 could directly pro-
mote  desmosome  stability  by  preventing 
their endocytosis (similar to p120-catenin 
in  adherens  junctions),24  it  may  also  do 
so  indirectly  by  interacting  with  other 
proteins that affect intermediate filament 
assembly  or  transport  of  proteins  to  the 
desmosome. It is clear that the function of 
Nde1/Ndel1 and dynein in the epidermis 
must be investigated to determine the role 
they play in cortical microtubule organi-
zation and/or proper centrosomal protein 
localization.

Acknowledgments
cell 

Work  on 
adhesion/cytoskeleton 
organization  in  the  Lechler  lab  is  sup-
ported  by  a  grant  from  NIH/NIAMS 
(R01AR055926).

References

1.  Vasioukhin  V,  Bowers  E,  Bauer  C,  Degenstein  L, 
Fuchs E. Desmoplakin is essential in epidermal sheet 
formation. Nat Cell Biol 2001; 3:1076-85.

2.  Jonkman  MF,  Pasmooij  AM,  Pasmans  SG,  van  den 
Berg  MP,  Ter  Horst  HJ,  Timmer  A,  et  al.  Loss  of 
desmoplakin  tail  causes  lethal  acantholytic  epider-
molysis bullosa. Am J Hum Genet 2005; 77:653-60.
3.  Thomason HA, Scothern A, McHarg S, Garrod DR. 
Desmosomes:  adhesive  strength  and  signalling  in 
health and disease. Biochem J 2010; 429:419-33.

4.  Amagai  M,  Matsuyoshi  N,  Wang  ZH,  Andl  C, 
Stanley JR. Toxin in bullous impetigo and staphylo-
coccal  scalded-skin  syndrome  targets  desmoglein  1. 
Nat Med 2000; 6:1275-7.

5.  Sumigray  KD,  Chen  H,  Lechler  T.  Lis1  is  essential 
for cortical microtubule organization and desmosome 
stability in the epidermis. J Cell Biol 2011; 194:631-
42.

6.  Lechler  T,  Fuchs  E.  Desmoplakin:  an  unexpected 
regulator of microtubule organization in the epider-
mis. J Cell Biol 2007; 176:147-54.

7.  Brodu  V,  Baffet  AD,  Le  Droguen  PM,  Casanova  J, 
Guichet  A.  A  developmentally  regulated  two-step 
process generates a noncentrosomal microtubule net-
work  in  Drosophila  tracheal  cells.  Dev  Cell  2010; 
18:790-801.

8.  Murata T, Sonobe S, Baskin TI, Hyodo S, Hasezawa 
S,  Nagata  T,  et  al.  Microtubule-dependent  micro-
tubule  nucleation  based  on  recruitment  of  gamma-
tubulin in higher plants. Nat Cell Biol 2005; 7:961-8.

9.  Mogensen MM, Malik A, Piel M, Bouckson-Castaing 
V, Bornens M. Microtubule minus-end anchorage at 
centrosomal  and  non-centrosomal  sites:  the  role  of 
ninein. J Cell Sci 2000; 113 ( Pt 17):3013-23.

10.  Baird DH, Myers KA, Mogensen M, Moss D, Baas 
PW. Distribution of the microtubule-related protein 
ninein  in  developing  neurons.  Neuropharmacology 
2004; 47:677-83.

11.  Bugnard  E,  Zaal  KJ,  Ralston  E.  Reorganization  of 
microtubule  nucleation  during  muscle  differentia-
tion. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 2005; 60:1-13.

12.  O’Keefe  EJ,  Erickson  HP,  Bennett  V.  Desmoplakin 
I and desmoplakin II. Purification and characteriza-
tion. J Biol Chem 1989; 264:8310-8.

13.  Uzumcu A, Norgett EE, Dindar A, Uyguner O, Nisli 
K, Kayserili H, et al. Loss of desmoplakin isoform I 
causes  early  onset  cardiomyopathy  and  heart  failure 
in a Naxos-like syndrome. J Med Genet 2006; 43:e5.
14.  Gallicano GI, Kouklis P, Bauer C, Yin M, Vasioukhin 
V, Degenstein L, et al. Desmoplakin is required early 
in  development  for  assembly  of  desmosomes  and 
cytoskeletal linkage. J Cell Biol 1998; 143:2009-22.
15.  Gallicano  GI,  Bauer  C,  Fuchs  E.  Rescuing  desmo-
plakin function in extra-embryonic ectoderm reveals 
the  importance  of  this  protein  in  embryonic  heart, 
neuroepithelium, skin and vasculature. Development 
2001; 128:929-41.

16.  Sasaki  S,  Shionoya  A,  Ishida  M,  Gambello  MJ, 
Yingling J, Wynshaw-Boris A, et al. A LIS1/NUDEL/
cytoplasmic  dynein  heavy  chain  complex  in  the 
developing and adult nervous system. Neuron 2000; 
28:681-96.

17.  Nguyen MD, Shu T, Sanada K, Lariviere RC, Tseng 
HC,  Park  SK,  et  al.  A  NUDEL-dependent  mecha-
nism of neurofilament assembly regulates the integ-
rity of CNS neurons. Nat Cell Biol 2004; 6:595-608.
18.  Shim SY, Samuels BA, Wang J, Neumayer G, Belzil 
C, Ayala R, et al. Ndel1 controls the dynein-mediated 
transport  of  vimentin  during  neurite  outgrowth.  J 
Biol Chem 2008; 283:12232-40.

19.  Ma  L,  Tsai  MY,  Wang  S,  Lu  B,  Chen  R,  Iii  JR,  et 
al.  Requirement  for  Nudel  and  dynein  for  assembly 
of  the  lamin  B  spindle  matrix.  Nat  Cell  Biol  2009; 
11:247-56.

20.  Vijayaraj  P,  Kroger  C,  Reuter  U,  Windoffer  R, 
Leube  RE,  Magin  TM.  Keratins  regulate  protein 
biosynthesis  through  localization  of  GLUT1  and 
-3 upstream of AMP kinase and Raptor. J Cell Biol 
2009; 187:175-84.

21.  Guo J, Yang Z, Song W, Chen Q, Wang F, Zhang Q, 
et al. Nudel contributes to microtubule anchoring at 
the mother centriole and is involved in both dynein-
dependent  and  -independent  centrosomal  protein 
assembly. Mol Biol Cell 2006; 17:680-9.

22.  McKenney RJ, Vershinin M, Kunwar A, Vallee RB, 
Gross SP. LIS1 and NudE induce a persistent dynein 
force-producing state. Cell 2010; 141:304-14.

23.  Driskell  OJ,  Mironov  A,  Allan  VJ,  Woodman  PG. 
Dynein is required for receptor sorting and the mor-
phogenesis  of  early  endosomes.  Nat  Cell  Biol  2007; 
9:113-20.

24.  Davis MA, Ireton RC, Reynolds AB. A core function 
for  p120-catenin  in  cadherin  turnover.  J  Cell  Biol 
2003; 163:525-34.

224 

BioArchitecture 

Volume 1 issue 5

 2012 Landes Bioscience.Do not distribute.