 AutOphAgic punctum

BioArchitecture 1:5, 225-229; September/October 2011;  2011 Landes Bioscience

pERSpEctiVE

Homeostasis of the apical plasma membrane during regulated  
exocytosis in the salivary glands of live rodents

Andrius Masedunskas,1,2 Monika Sramkova1 and Roberto Weigert1,*
1Intracellular Membrane Trafficking Unit; Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer Branch; National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research;  
National Institutes of Health; Bethesda, MD USA; 2Department of Biology; University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill; Chapel Hill, NC USA

In exocrine organs such as the salivary 

glands, fluids and proteins are secreted 
into ductal structures by distinct mecha-
nisms that are tightly coupled. In the aci-
nar cells, the major secretory units of the 
salivary  glands,  fluids  are  secreted  into 
the  acinar  canaliculi  through  paracellu-
lar  and  intracellular  transport,  whereas 
proteins are stored in large granules that 
undergo  exocytosis  and  fuse  with  the 
apical plasma membranes releasing their 
content  into  the  canaliculi.  Both  secre-
tory  processes  elicit  a  remodeling  of  the 
apical  plasma  membrane  that  has  not 
been fully addressed in in vitro or ex vivo 
models. Recently, we have studied regu-
lated  exocytosis  in  the  salivary  glands 
of live rodents, focusing on the role that 
actin  and  myosin  plays  in  this  process. 
We observed that during exocytosis both 
secretory granules and canaliculi are sub-
jected  to  the  hydrostatic  pressure  gener-
ated by fluid secretion. Furthermore, the 
absorption of the membranes of the secre-
tory granules contributes to the expansion 
and  deformation  of  the  canaliculi.  Here 
we  suggest  that  the  homeostasis  of  the  
apical  plasma  membranes  during  exocy-
tosis  is  maintained  by  various  strategies 
that include: (1) membrane retrieval via 
compensatory endocytosis, (2) increase of 
the surface area via membrane folds and 
(3) recruitment of a functional actomyo-
sin  complex.  Our  observations  under-
score the important relationship between 
tissue architecture and cellular response, 
and highlight the potential of investigat-
ing biological processes in vivo by using 
intravital microscopy. 

Introduction

The  dynamics  of  several  biological  pro-
cesses  have  been  studied  primarily  in 
model systems, such as cell cultures, that 
do not recapitulate the complex architec-
ture  that  tissues  maintain  in  their  physi-
ological environment.1-4 As a consequence, 
the  roles  played  by  tissue  components, 
such  as  surrounding  cells,  extracellular 
matrix,  and  signaling  molecules  or  by 
other physiological events that may occur 
in parallel to the process of interest have 
not been fully appreciated. This issue can 
be  overcome  by  using  intravital  micros-
copy (IVM). IVM encompasses a series of 
techniques based on light microscopy and 
has  enabled  imaging  biological  processes 
in live animals.5-9 Although IVM has been 
used for the last 10–15 years to study tis-
sue  and  cell  behavior,  only  recently  has 
been applied to study subcellular events in 
vivo.3,9-11

In a recent study, we have investigated 
the  modality  and  the  machinery  of  exo-
cytosis  in  the  salivary  glands  (SGs)  of 
live rodents that are an established model 
for  exocrine  secretion.3  In  SGs,  proteins 
destined  to  secretion  are  sorted  at  the 
trans-Golgi  network  into  large  secretory 
granules (SCGs), that undergo a matura-
tion process, and are delivered to the api-
cal  plasma  membrane  (APM).12,13  Upon 
β-adrenergic  stimulation,  SCGs  dock  at 
the acinar canaliculi and fuse with APM, 
releasing their content into the extracellu-
lar space. We found that after the opening 
of  the  fusion  pore  SCGs  gradually  col-
lapse and their membranes are completely 

Keywords: exocytosis, membrane ten-
sion, actin, myosin, cytoskeleton, intravital 
microscopy, exocrine glands, secretion, 
salivary glands
Abbreviations: IVM, intravital micros-
copy; SGs, salivary glands; SCGs,  
secretory granules; APM, apical plasma 
membrane; iso, isoproterenol; carb,  
carbachol; SC, subcutaneous
Submitted: 10/06/11
Revised: 10/10/11
Accepted: 10/12/11
http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/bioa.1.5.18403
Correspondence to: Roberto Weigert; 
Email: weigertr@mail.nih.gov

www.landesbioscience.com 

BioArchitecture 

225

 2012 Landes Bioscience.Do not distribute.absorbed 
into  the  acinar  canaliculi.3 
Usually, protein secretion is accompanied 
by fluid secretion. Fluids are secreted para-
cellularly,  by  osmotic-driven  processes, 
and/or intracellularly, through the activa-
tion of water channels, such as aquaporin 
5, that are both controlled by the activa-
tion of muscarinic receptors.14,15 However, 
smaller amount of fluids are also secreted 
during β-adrenergic stimulation.3

The  role  of  the  actin  cytoskeleton  in 
exocytosis  has  been  controversial,  most 
likely  due  to  the  fact  that  its  function(s) 
may  change  depending  on  the  specific 
architecture of the exocytic model under 
investigation.16,17  Furthermore,  different 
approaches and experimental systems have 
been used to study the same exocytic path-
way, often reaching contradicting results.18 
In  SGs,  actin  is  localized  primarily  at 
the  plasma  membrane  with  a  particular 
enrichment at the apical pole.3,19 Recently, 
we found that two of the isoforms of the 
actin-based motor myosin II (IIa and IIb) 
are localized at the APM.3 The actomyo-
sin complex seems to serve multiple func-
tions,  such  as  facilitating  the  collapse  of 
the SCGs through its contractile activity, 
preventing homotypic fusion between the 
secretory granules, and, as suggested here, 
counteracting  the  hydrostatic  pressure 
built in the ductal system that may disrupt 
exocytosis and affect both the architecture 
and the physiology of the SGs.

Expansion of the Acinar Canaliculi 

During Exocytosis:  
Hydrostatic Pressure  
and Membrane Absorption

To image the exocytosis of SCGs in SGs 
we used a transgenic mouse model, which 
expresses  cytosolic  GFP.3,20  GFP  is  local-
ized  in  the  cytoplasm  and  the  nuclei,  is 
excluded  from  the  SCGs,  which  appear 
as  dark  vesicles,  and  is  enriched  at  the 
APM (Fig. 1A, arrows). When exocytosis 
was  stimulated  by  isoproterenol  (iso),  an 
agonist  of  the  β-adrenergic  receptors,  we 
observed  the  expansion  of  the  canaliculi 
that  increased  significantly  in  diameter 
(Fig.  1A,  arrows).  This  expansion  may 
be  attributed  to  at  least  two  causes:  (1) 
the hydrostatic pressure generated by the 
fluids  that  are  secreted  during  regulated 
exocytosis, and (2) the membranes of the 

SCGs that are absorbed into the canaliculi 
after their fusion with the APM.3

To  show  that  hydrostatic  pressure  is 
built  up  into  the  ductal  system  during 
regulated  exocytosis,  we  used  an  indi-
rect method aimed at imaging the move-
ment  of  fluids  into  ducts  and  canaliculi 
in the SGs of live rodents. As previously 
described,  we  imaged  the  clearance  of  a 
fluorescent dye that was retro-infused by 
gravity  into  the  ductal  system  through  a 
fine cannula inserted in the major excre-
tory duct of a live rat (Fig. 1B).3,10,11 Upon 
injection  of  iso,  we  observed  the  rapid 
expulsion of the dye, consistent with the 
release of fluids from the acini. The ducts 
were  almost  completely  cleared  from  the 
dye  within  30–40  sec,  suggesting  that  a 
high  hydrostatic  pressure  built  up  into 
the ductal system. Although we could not 
image  fluid  expulsion  beyond  this  time 
point, secretion continued for at least 30 
min,  as  determined  by  collecting  saliva 
from  the  cannula.3  We  want  to  empha-
size  that  since  biological  membranes  are 
not  elastic,  the  expansion  of  the  cana-
liculi  driven  by  the  hydrostatic  pressure 
requires  membrane  remodeling.  Given 
that in the first minute after the injection 
of  iso  we  did  not  observe  any  exocytosis 
of large SCGs, one possibility is that the 
extra membranes required for the expan-
sion may be provided by the APM micro-
villi that were described in EM studies.21 
Notably,  the  generation  of  hydrostatic 
pressure requires intact ductal structures, 
as shown by the fact that similar dilations 
were  observed  in  freshly  explanted  lob-
ules, but never described in isolated acinar 
preparations.22

As  for  the  contribution  of  exocytic 
membranes,  we  estimated  that  approxi-
mately  200  SCGs  are  absorbed  into  a 
single  canaliculus  in  30  min.  How  the 
cell  deals  with  this  excess  of  membranes 
is  a  fascinating  question.  Indeed,  a  rigid 
canaliculus  that 
is  confined  between 
two  adjacent  cells  would  not  be  able  to 
accommodate  a  large  excess  of  mem-
branes.  We  hypothesized  that  the  excess 
of  membranes  is  retrieved  by  the  activa-
tion  of  a  process  termed  compensatory 
endocytosis, as reported for other exocytic 
events.11,23,24  Indeed,  by  retro-infusing 
fluorescent dextrans into the canaliculi we 
have shown that small endocytic vesicles 

are  internalized  from  the  APM  during 
exocytosis (Fig. 1C, right panel, arrows).11 
Although, we could not establish the exact 
size  of  these  endocytic  vesicles,  they  did 
not  exceed  0.2  µm  in  diameter,  suggest-
ing  that  the  membranes  delivered  by  a 
single  SCG  (1–1.5  µm  in  diameter)  may 
be  retrieved  by  approximately  25–50 
endocytic  vesicles.  However,  in  addition 
to  compensatory  endocytosis  acinar  cells 
may employ other strategies to deal with 
the excess of membranes, such as increas-
ing the surface area of the APM. This can 
be  accomplished  by  uniformly  increas-
ing  the  diameter  of  the  canaliculi,  and/
or  through  membrane  folding.  Although 
we  did  not  accurately  measure  the  rela-
tive  contribution  of  these  two  processes, 
we  observed  that  stimulation  of  water 
secretion  by  carbachol  (carb),  an  ago-
nist  of  muscarinic  receptors,  induced  a 
smaller expansion of the canaliculi when 
compared  with  β-adrenergic  stimulation 
(Fig.  1D).  Since  muscarinic  stimulation 
does not elicit exocytosis of large SCGs in 
vivo,3  this  observation  suggests  the  uni-
form  expansion  of  the  canaliculi  along 
their length may be used to accommodate 
the excess of membranes delivered at the 
APM. However, since canaliculi are rigid 
structures  embedded  between  two  cells 
that are part of a compact tissue, we argued 
that this process would not be effective as 
more exocytic membranes are added. This 
hypothesis  was  indeed  supported  by  the 
fact that a series of folds were observed in 
the canaliculi 20–30 min after the injec-
tion of iso (Fig. 1D, upper panels). These 
folds were not observed upon carb injec-
tion  suggesting  that  they  are  originated 
from exocytic membranes (Fig. 1D, lower 
panels). However, we cannot rule out that 
smaller folds that are below the resolution 
provided  by  light  microscopy  formed  in 
the canaliculi at the onset of exocytosis.

Finally, we observed that the actomyo-
sin complex may also serve as a structural 
scaffold  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  the 
canaliculi  under  both  resting  and  stimu-
lated  conditions.  When  the  actin  cyto-
skeleton or the motor activity of myosin II 
were disrupted canaliculi increased in size. 
This  effect  was  more  dramatic  when  the 
motor activity of myosin II was impaired 
than when the actin cytoskeleton was dis-
rupted,  most  likely  due  to  the  fact  that 

226 

BioArchitecture 

Volume 1 issue 5

 2012 Landes Bioscience.Do not distribute.Figure 1. Expansion of the acinar canaliculi during regulated exocytosis. (A)the Apm of the Sg acini were imaged upon subcutaneous (Sc) injection of 
iso by intravital confocal microscopy, as previously described.3 A canaliculus (arrows) expanded over time as shown in the micrographs. Arrowheads 
point to a Scgs in the cytoplasm. Scale bar, 2 µm. Lower graph shows the quantification of the diameter of the canaliculi. (B) Fluid expulsion during 
regulated exocytosis. A fluorescently labeled dextran (red) was retro-infused by gravity into the ducts of the Sgs of a live rat. iso (upper panels) or carb 
(lower panels) were injected Sc and the Sgs were imaged by intravital two-photon microscopy.10 the parenchyma of the glands is revealed by the exci-
tation of endogenous fluorescence (cyan). After 40 sec from the injection of the agonists, the dextran was completely cleared from the ductal system 
(arrows). Scale bar, 20 µm. (c) compensatory endocytosis. A fluorescently labeled dextran (red) was retro-infused in the ducts of the Sgs of a live rat. 
the acinar canaliculi (arrowheads) are rapidly filled with the dye. the dotted line delimits an acinus (Ac). iso was injected Sc and the glands were im-
aged by intravital two-photon microscopy.11 As shown in (B), the dextran is cleared from the canaliculi. however, a fraction of it is internalized in small 
vesicles (arrows) generated by compensatory endocytosis from the Apm. Scale bar, 10 µm. (D) membrane folds in the acinar canaliculi. gFp-mice were 
injected Sc with either iso (upper panels) or carb (lower panel). Acinar canaliculi were imaged by intravital confocal microscopy after 30 min from the 
injection. When Scgs exocytosis is elicited with iso, membrane folds appear in the canaliculi (upper panel and enlargement). Scale bar, 2 µm. (E) model 
for the expansion of the canaliculi. After injection of iso, the Scg (blue) fuse with the Apm (red). the hydrostatic pressure generated by fluids secretion 
(light blue arrows) contributes to the initial expansion of the canaliculi. Scgs are absorbed at the Apm and compensatory endocytosis is stimulated 
(light blue vesicles). the excess of membranes that are not retrieved by compensatory endocytosis is accommodated by expanding the diameter of 
the canaliculi and by generating membrane folds. Actin (green) and myosin ii (blue) are localized to the Scgs to counteract the hydrostatic pressure.

www.landesbioscience.com 

BioArchitecture 

227

 2012 Landes Bioscience.Do not distribute.Figure 2. the actomyosin complex provides a scaffold to counteract the effect of the hydrostatic pressure on the secretory granules. (A) mice ex-
pressing the m-tomato probe were pre-treated with cytochalasin D, blebbistatin or the vehicle (DmSO, ctrl) and injected with iso to stimulate Scgs 
exocytosis.3 When the actin cytoskeleton was disrupted with cytochalasin D or the motor activity of myosin ii was inhibited with blebbistatin the Scgs 
expanded in size due to the hydrostatic pressure generated by fluids secretion (light blue arrows). Scale bar, 2 µm. Actin (green) and myosin ii (blue) 
are recruited to the Scgs to counteract the hydrostatic pressure and to facilitate the gradual collapse of the Scgs.3,24 (B) Scgs were imaged after their 
fusion with the Apm by using time-lapse intravital confocal microscopy. the diameter of the Scgs was measured in animals treated with cytochalasin 
D (red circles), blebbistatin (blue circles) or DmSO (black circles). (c) Fluorescently labeled dextran (red) was retro-infused in the ducts of the Sgs of 
a live rat by using a cannula introduced in the major excretory duct as described in legend to Figure 1. the same acinus was imaged before (upper 
panel) and after the Sc injection of iso and the artificial increase of the hydrostatic pressure achieved with a syringe connected to the cannula (lower 
panel). Acinar canaliculi (arrows) were filled with the dye (upper panel). Enlarged Scgs (arrowheads) appeared from the Apm (lower panel). Scale bar, 
10 µm. 

cytochalasin D and latrunculin A did not 
completely  disrupt  filamentous  actin  at 
the APM.3

Our findings emphasize that in vivo the 
APM of the acini in the salivary glands is 
subjected to a continuous remodeling and 
that membrane homeostasis is maintained 
by a series of distinct processes (Fig. 1E).

The Actin Cytoskeleton Provides 
a Scaffold to Counteract the Effect 
of the Hydrostatic Pressure on the 

Secretory Granules

To image the fate of the SCGs after their 
fusion with the APM we used a transgenic 
mouse  expressing  a  membrane-targeted 
peptide fused with the fluorescent protein 
Tomato  (m-tomato).3  We  observed  that 
the diameter of the SCGs slowly decreases 
in  size  after  their  fusion  with  the  APM 
(within 40–60 sec) (Fig. 2A). During this 
process, cargo molecules are released and 
secreted  fluids  have  access  to  the  lumen 
of  the  granules.  When  the  dynamics  of 
the  actin  cytoskeleton  was  disrupted  by 
pharmacological  agents  such  as  cytocha-
lasin D or latrunculin A, SCGs expanded 
in  size  and  their  gradual  collapse  was 
impaired.  The  analysis  of  the  diameters 
of the SCGs showed that there is a linear 
increase  in  their  size  in  the  first  20–30 
sec  after  the  opening  of  the  fusion  pore  

(Fig. 2B). Since during this period we did 
not  detect  any  large  membranous  vesicle 
fusing with the SCGs, we speculated that 
the  expansion  was  driven  by  the  flow  of 
membranes from the APM into the gran-
ule via the fusion pore. This can be facili-
tated by two factors, namely the difference 
in  membrane  tension  (as  discussed  else-
where in ref. 25) and the hydrostatic pres-
sure.  After  this  initial  step,  the  increase 
in  size  of  the  enlarged  SCGs  is  due  to 
membranes delivered by other SCGs that 
fuse  with  the  enlarged  SCGs  that  have 
acquired  the  characteristics  of  the  APM, 
as previously shown.3 Similarly, when the 
activity  of  myosin  II  was  impaired  with 
blebbistatin,  SCGs 
initially  expanded 
in  size,  and  later  resumed  their  gradual 
collapse.  This  suggests  that  the  myosin 
II  contractile  activity  is  also  required  to 
counteract  the  hydrostatic  pressure  after 
the opening of the fusion pore. Under this 
condition, the expanded granules did not 
further  increase  in  size  since  the  fusion 
with the other SCGs was prevented by the 
actin coat recruited around the expanded 
granules (Fig. 2D).3

Overall our data suggests that another 
function of the actomyosin complex is to 
be  recruited  on  the  surface  of  the  fusing 
granules  to  counteract  the  effect  of  the 
hydrostatic  pressure.  This  implies  that 
fused  SCGs  represent  a  weak  spot  at  the 

APM  that  needs  to  be  “patched”  to  pre-
vent  disruptions  in  the  cell  architecture. 
This hypothesis was also supported by the 
fact that an artificial increase of the intra-
ductal pressure during exocytosis induced 
the  expansion  of  the  SCGs  even  when  
the actin cytoskeleton was not perturbed 
(Fig. 2C).

Conclusions

Our observations suggest that protein and 
fluid  secretion  induce  extensive  remodel-
ing  of  the  APM  in  the  SGs.  The  acinar 
canaliculi undergo significant expansions 
that may be due in part to the hydrostatic 
pressure  generated  by  fluid  secretion  and 
in part to the large amount of membranes 
delivered  to  the  APM  during  exocytosis. 
The  homeostasis  of  the  APM  is  main-
tained  by  a  series  of  different  processes 
that  include  compensatory  endocytosis 
and modulations of the surface area of the 
canaliculi, whereas the structural integrity 
of  the  secretory  apparatus  may  be  main-
tained by the recruitment of a functional 
actomyosin  complex  on  the  membranes. 
Notably, this hypothesis can be extended 
to other exocrine glands where protein and 
fluid secretion are coupled, such as lacri-
mal glands and exocrine pancreas, and in 
which exocytosis requires more than few 
seconds to be completed.

228 

BioArchitecture 

Volume 1 issue 5

 2012 Landes Bioscience.Do not distribute.Several  questions  still  need  to  be 
addressed: first, how the contractile activ-
ity  of  myosin  II  regulates  the  gradual 
collapse  of  the  SCGs  and  the  homeosta-
sis  of  the  APM,  and  second,  what  is  the 
role  played  by  each  of  the  two  isoforms 
of myosin II during secretion. As for the 
exocytosis  of  SCGs,  we  would  like  to 
speculate that the forces generated by the 
contractile activity of myosin II may either 
push the membranes of the SCGs toward 
the APM or act at the neck of the SCGs 
by pulling and enlarging the fusion pore. 
One  interesting  possibility  is  that  both 
these processes may contribute to this step 
and that each of them may be controlled 
by one of the myosin II isoforms. As for 
the  homeostasis  of  the  APM,  we  envi-
sion  that  the  myosin  II  contractile  activ-
ity  around  the  APM  may  work  similarly 
to the contractile ring during cytokinesis, 
maintaining  a  continuous  tension  in  the 
membranes that opposes expansive forces, 
such as the hydrostatic pressure.

Our  approach  based  on  IVM  in  live 
rodents has highlighted that some biologi-
cal processes occur with the coordination 
of several cellular events and are strongly 
influenced by the architecture of the exper-
imental  model.  Reductionist  approaches 
based on the use of simplified models offer 
the  advantages  of  a  better  control  of  the 
experimental conditions and the opportu-
nity to study processes at a molecular level. 
However, certain aspects of the physiology 
of an organ, that may have unanticipated 
effects  on  cellular  functions  cannot  be 
recapitulated in vitro systems and require 
the use of in vivo models.

Acknowledgments

This  research  was  supported  by  the 
Intramural  Research  Program  of  the 
NIH,  National  Institute  of  Dental  and 
Craniofacial Research.

References

1.  Cukierman E, Pankov R, Stevens DR, Yamada KM. 
Taking cell-matrix adhesions to the third dimension. 
Science 2001; 294:1708-12.

2.  Green JA, Yamada KM. Three-dimensional microen-
vironments  modulate  fibroblast  signaling  responses. 
Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2007; 59:1293-8.

3.  Masedunskas A, Sramkova M, Parente L, Sales KU, 
Amornphimoltham P, Bugge TH, et al. Role for the 
actomyosin complex in regulated exocytosis revealed 
by intravital microscopy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
2011; 108:13552-7.

4.  Xu  R,  Boudreau  A,  Bissell  MJ.  Tissue  architecture 
and  function:  dynamic  reciprocity  via  extra-  and 
intra-cellular matrices. Cancer Metastasis Rev 2009; 
28:167-76.

5.  Amornphimoltham  P,  Masedunskas  A,  Weigert  R. 
Intravital microscopy as a tool to study drug delivery 
in  preclinical  studies.  Adv  Drug  Deliv  Rev  2011; 
63:119-28.

6.  Beerling E, Ritsma L, Vrisekoop N, Derksen PW, van 
Rheenen  J.  Intravital  microscopy:  new  insights  into 
metastasis of tumors. J Cell Sci; 124:299-310.

7.  Cahalan MD, Parker I. Choreography of cell motil-
ity and interaction dynamics imaged by two-photon 
microscopy in lymphoid organs. Annu Rev Immunol 
2008; 26:585-626.
Svoboda  K,  Yasuda  R.  Principles  of  two-photon 
excitation microscopy and its applications to neuro-
science. Neuron 2006; 50:823-39.

8. 

9.  Weigert  R, 

Sramkova  M, 

L, 
Amornphimoltham  P,  Masedunskas  A.  Intravital 
microscopy: a novel tool to study cell biology in living 
animals. Histochem Cell Biol 2010; 133:481-91.

Parente 

10.  Masedunskas  A,  Weigert  R.  Intravital  two-photon 
microscopy  for  studying  the  uptake  and  trafficking 
of fluorescently conjugated molecules in live rodents. 
Traffic 2008; 9:1801-10.

11.  Sramkova  M,  Masedunskas  A,  Parente  L,  Molinolo 
A,  Weigert  R.  Expression  of  plasmid  DNA  in  the 
salivary gland epithelium: novel approaches to study 
dynamic  cellular  processes  in  live  animals.  Am  J 
Physiol Cell Physiol 2009; 297:C1347-57.

12.  Castle  JD.  Protein  secretion  by  rat  parotid  acinar 
cells.  Pathways  and  regulation.  Ann  N  Y  Acad  Sci 
1998; 842:115-24.

13.  Gorr SU, Venkatesh SG, Darling DS. Parotid secre-
tory  granules:  crossroads  of  secretory  pathways  and 
protein storage. J Dent Res 2005; 84:500-9.

14.  Melvin  JE,  Yule  D,  Shuttleworth  T,  Begenisich 
T.  Regulation  of  fluid  and  electrolyte  secretion  in 
salivary  gland  acinar  cells.  Annu  Rev  Physiol  2005; 
67:445-69.

15.  Turner  RJ,  Sugiya  H.  Understanding  salivary  fluid 

and protein secretion. Oral Dis 2002; 8:3-11.

16.  Eitzen  G.  Actin  remodeling  to  facilitate  membrane 

fusion. Biochim Biophys Acta 2003; 1641:175-81.

17.  Sokac  AM,  Bement  WM.  Kiss-and-coat  and  com-
partment mixing: coupling exocytosis to signal gen-
eration and local actin assembly. Mol Biol Cell 2006; 
17:1495-502.

18.  Muallem  S,  Kwiatkowska  K,  Xu  X,  Yin  HL.  Actin 
filament  disassembly  is  a  sufficient  final  trigger  for 
exocytosis  in  nonexcitable  cells.  J  Cell  Biol  1995; 
128:589-98.

19.  Warner  JD,  Peters  CG,  Saunders  R,  Won  JH, 
Betzenhauser  MJ,  Gunning  WT,  3rd,  et  al. 
Visualizing  form  and  function  in  organotypic  slices 
of  the  adult  mouse  parotid  gland.  Am  J  Physiol 
Gastrointest Liver Physiol 2008; 295:G629-40.

20.  Hadjantonakis  AK,  Gertsenstein  M,  Ikawa  M, 
Okabe  M,  Nagy  A.  Generating  green  fluorescent 
mice  by  germline  transmission  of  green  fluorescent 
ES cells. Mech Dev 1998; 76:79-90.

21.  Segawa  A,  Loffredo  F,  Puxeddu  R,  Yamashina  S, 
Testa  Riva  F,  Riva  A.  Exocytosis  in  human  salivary 
glands  visualized  by  high-resolution  scanning  elec-
tron microscopy. Cell Tissue Res 1998; 291:325-36.

22.  Huang  AY,  Castle  AM,  Hinton  BT,  Castle  JD. 
Resting  (basal)  secretion  of  proteins  is  provided  by 
the  minor  regulated  and  constitutive-like  pathways 
and  not  granule  exocytosis  in  parotid  acinar  cells.  J 
Biol Chem 2001; 276:22296-306.

23.  Khandelwal P, Ruiz WG, Apodaca G. Compensatory 
endocytosis in bladder umbrella cells occurs through 
an  integrin-regulated  and  RhoA-  and  dynamin-
dependent pathway. EMBO J; 29:1961-75.

24.  Sokac  AM,  Co  C,  Taunton  J,  Bement  W.  Cdc42-
dependent  actin  polymerization  during  compensa-
tory  endocytosis  in  Xenopus  eggs.  Nat  Cell  Biol 
2003; 5:727-32.

25.  Masedunskas A, Porat-Shliom N, Weigert R. Linking 
differences  in  membrane  tension  with  the  require-
ment  for  a  contractile  actomyosin  scaffold  during 
exocytosis  in  salivary  glands.  Communicative  and 
Integrative Biology 2011; In press. 

www.landesbioscience.com 

BioArchitecture 

229

 2012 Landes Bioscience.Do not distribute.