BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
24 no.
24 2008, pages 2923 2925  doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn541  Sequence analysis iMapper: a web application for the automated analysis and mapping of insertional mutagenesis sequence data against Ensembl genomes Jun Kong, Fei Zhu, Jim Stalker and David J. Adams   Experimental Cancer Genetics, The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambs, CB10 1HH, UK Received on September 1, 2008  revised on September 30, 2008  accepted on October 16, 2008 Advance Access publication October 30, 2008 Associate Editor: Dmitrij Frishman  ABSTRACT Summary: Insertional mutagenesis is a powerful method for gene discovery.
To identify the location of insertion sites in the genome linker based polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methods (such as splinkerette-PCR) may be employed.
We have developed a web application called iMapper (Insertional Mutagenesis Mapping and Analysis Tool) for the efﬁcient analysis of insertion site sequence reads against vertebrate and invertebrate Ensembl genomes.
Taking iMapper scans and trims the linker based sequences as input, sequence to remove the linker and sequences derived from the insertional mutagen.
The software then identiﬁes and removes contaminating sequences derived from chimeric genomic fragments, vector or the transposon concatamer and then presents the clipped sequence reads to a sequence mapping server which aligns them to an Ensembl genome.
Insertion sites can then be navigated in Ensembl in the context of genomic features such as gene structures.
iMapper also generates test-based format for nucleic acid or protein sequences (FASTA) and generic ﬁle format (GFF) ﬁles of the clipped sequence reads and provides a graphical overview of the mapped insertion sites against a karyotype.
iMapper is designed for high- throughput applications and can efﬁciently process thousands of DNA sequence reads.
Availability: iMapper http://www.sanger.ac.uk/cgi-bin/teams/team113/imapper.cgi.
Contact: da1@sanger.ac.uk  iMapper@sanger.ac.uk Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
is web based and can be accessed at  1 INTRODUCTION Retroviral-based insertional mutagenesis screens in mice have been a valuable tool for the discovery of oncogenes and tumor suppressors in mice (Mikkers and Berns, 2003), and also for gene discovery in cultured cells (Du et al., 2005).
More recently transposon-based approaches such as the use of the Tc1-family transposon Sleeping Beauty (Collier et al., 2005  Dupuy et al., 2005) and the Trichoplusia-derived transposon Piggybac (Wang et al., 2008) have been developed increasing the repertoire of insertional mutagens available as gene discovery tools in mammals.
To determine where in the genome an insertional     To whom correspondence should be addressed.
mutagen has inserted the usual approach is to use a linker based polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method, such as vectorette or splinkerette (Devon et al., 1995).
For any insertional mutagenesis screen to cover a signiﬁcant proportion of the genome, it is desirable to perform a screen using hundred of mice, and hundreds if not thousands of cell clones.
Thus insertional mutagenesis screens may involve the generation and analysis of tens of thousands of DNA sequence reads from insertion sites.
Although linker based PCR methods are generally speciﬁc, non-speciﬁc PCR products, chimeric sequences and sequences derived from transposon concatemeric arrays can all represents contaminating sequences within pools of insertion site PCR products.
Thus without careful processing of DNA sequence data, the direct mapping of insertion site sequence reads to the genome may result in the identiﬁcation of false-positive insertion sites.
To facilitate the analysis of linker mediated insertion site sequences, we have developed a web application called iMapper (Insertional Mutagenesis Mapping and Analysis Tool).
Using linker based PCR sequence reads as input iMapper uses a local sequence alignment algorithm to identify a tag sequence derived from the end of the insertional mutagen (Supplementary Material).
iMapper then scans the downstream sequence for user deﬁned contaminating sequences, processes the sequence to identify the restriction site sequence used for linker ligation during the insertion site PCR, clips out the genomic sequence between the tag and ﬁrst restriction enzyme cutting site and presents this sequence to a rapid mapping algorithm called sequence search and alignment by hashing algorithm (SSAHA) (Ning et al., 2001).
Output is then generated in various formats.
The main features of iMapper include:  (1) Efﬁcient and accurate processing of insertion site sequence data and analysis against Ensembl human, mouse, rat, zebra- ﬁsh, Drosophila and Saccharomyces cerevisiae genomes.
(2) Output of annotated sequence reads in tabular format with links to Ensembl ContigView so that insertion sites can be viewed in the context of gene structures and other genomic features.
(3) Output of processed sequence data in test-based format for nucleic acid or protein sequences (FASTA) and generic ﬁle format (GFF) allowing insertion site sequence data to be analyzed in any sequence analysis package and displayed as a distributed annotation system (DAS) track against an Ensembl genome.
2008 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
J.Kong et al.
(4) Output of a graphical chromosome  KaryoView  showing  insertion sites against an ideogram of each chromosome.
2 METHODS 2.1 Architecture The iMapper interface is web-based (Supplementary Material).
The sequence analysis module within iMapper uses Perl and computer generated imagery (CGI), and for comparison to an Ensembl genome Perl scripts run against the Ensembl application programming interface (Ensembl-API).
Input format  2.2 Sequence is imported into iMapper in FASTA format.
Sequence data in this format can either be pasted into the text box or imported using the ﬁle upload option (Supplementary Material).
2.3 User deﬁned parameters After sequence input, a user can deﬁne the species against which they would like their insertion site data analyzed from human, mouse, rat, zebraﬁsh, Drosophila and S. cerevisiae.
The orientation of the tag in the sequence can then be chosen, and the output option selected.
Selecting  output good sequences  will exclude those sequences that do not contain the tag sequence, sequences that do not map to the genome, and sequences that are identiﬁed to contain contaminating sequences from all output formats.
The sequence of the mutagen  tag  sequence can then be speciﬁed, or a prevalidated tag sequence can be selected from the drop down menu.
We provide tag sequences for the transposons Sleeping Beauty and Piggybac, and for the U3LTR of the MuLV retrovirus.
The sequence of the restriction site can then be speciﬁed.
At this point, the user has deﬁned the boundaries of the sequence which will be mapped to the genome as the sequence between the tag and the restriction site or linker.
Advanced options can then be speciﬁed.
These include the tag alignment parameters and the sequence of contaminating sequences, which will be highlighted in the tabular format (Supplementary Material).
It is also possible to specify the parameters used by the SSAHA algorithm for matching the genomic sequence between the tag and the restriction site or linker, to the genome.
Finally, it is possible to specify the criteria for  gene overlaps .
By specifying  gene overlaps , it is possible to vary the spatial criteria for deﬁning what constitutes an insertion event in or near a gene.
For example, it may be desirable to identify insertion events that mutate in or upstream of a gene, but not downstream.
Sequence processing commences when the  Submit Query  button is selected.
2.4 Sequence processing The procedure used by the code for sequence processing is shown in the Supplementary Material.
2.5 Tabular format The tabular format is an html-based output of the analyzed sequence data (Fig.
1).
Sequences such as the tag sequence, the restriction site and contaminating sequence are highlighted in this view.
Links to Ensembl gene pages and to the Ensembl ContigView are also provided from this page.
2.6 FASTA and GFF formats A FASTA ﬁle of the processed traces and a GFF ﬁle of the data are provided when the analysis run is complete.
2924  Fig.
1. iMapper maps and analyzes insertion site sequence data.
iMapper generates output in several formats including a tabular format with links to Ensembl ContigView and Ensembl gene pages (upper panel), GFF ﬁle format, FASTA format and a KaryoView format (lower panel) which provides a global overview of all insertion site sequences that were mapped to the genome.
Sequence traces displayed in the tabular format are annotated to show the location of the tag sequence (green), the restriction enzyme site (orange) and the mapped genomic sequence (yellow).
An alignment of the tag sequence from the trace and the insertion site mapping location is also shown in the tabular format.
In the KaryoView format, each red triangle indicates an independent insertion site displayed against a genome ideogram.
2.7 KaryoView To obtain a global overview of the sequence data, iMapper has a link to an Ensembl KaryoView providing a graphical view of the data against a chromosomal ideogram (Fig.
1).
2.8 Performance The speciﬁcity of tag identiﬁcation depends on the length of the tag sequence entered, and the predeﬁned thresholds speciﬁed for sequence tag identiﬁcation including the percentage alignment threshold, gap penalty, match and mismatch score.
Longer tag sequences, higher alignment percentages and more stringent gap and mismatch scores will result in more accurate tag sequence identiﬁcation.
We have tested the optimal tag sequence length and percentage threshold using a dataset of 1920 PiggyBac insertion site sequence reads (Wang et al., 2008).
Because PiggyBac integrations invariably occur at  TTAA  sites a precisely identiﬁed tag sequence will always be followed by the sequence TTAA.
As shown in the Supplementary Material, the minimal advisable tag sequence length is 15 bp.
We determined the optimal percentage threshold for sequence tag identiﬁcation, to be used as the default, and determined this to be 80% (Supplementary Material).
Finally, we optimized the SSAHA sequence mapping parameters to be used as the default ﬁnding that for sequences from splinkerette-PCR reactions   containing genomic junction fragments of on average 200 bp in length the optimal SSAHA score is 35.
This score should be ideal for insertion site sequences generated by capillary read sequencing but may need to be lowered to 20 for shorter reads such as those generated by 454 sequencing.
It is advisable to optimize the SSAHA mapping score for each dataset selecting a score that generates the highest number of uniquely mapped reads.
This is important because the default mapping parameters used by iMapper are stringent and will return only those reads that map to unique unambiguous genomic locations.
We have used iMapper to analyze up to 20 000 DNA sequence traces.
It takes, on average, 1 2 s for iMapper to analyze each DNA sequence trace (Supplementary Material) and to return the analyzed data in tabular, ContigView, GFF, FASTA and karyoView formats.
A web application for the automated analysis  Funding: Cancer Research-UK (C20510/A6997) and the Wellcome Trust (76943 to D.J.A.)
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute PhD programme (to J.K. and F.Z.).
Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES Collier,L.S.
et al.
(2005) Cancer gene discovery in solid tumours using transposon-based  somatic mutagenesis in the mouse.
Nature, 436, 272 276.
Devon,R.S.
et al.
(1995) Splinkerettes improved vectorettes for greater efﬁciency in  PCR walking.
Nucleic Acids Res., 23, 1644 1645.
(2005)  Du,Y.
et al.
Insertional mutagenesis identiﬁes genes that promote the immortalization of primary bone marrow progenitor cells.
Blood, 106, 3932 3939.
Dupuy,A.J.
et al.
(2005) Mammalian mutagenesis using a highly mobile somatic  3 SUMMARY iMapper is a web-based freely accessible solution for the analysis of insertional mutagenesis datasets and should facilitate the many insertional mutagenesis screens that are ongoing worldwide.
sleeping beauty transposon system.
Nature, 436, 221 226.
Mikkers,H.
and Berns,A.
(2003) Retroviral insertional mutagenesis: tagging cancer  pathways.
Adv.
Cancer Res., 88, 53 99.
Ning,Z.
et al.
(2001) SSAHA: a fast search method for large DNA databases.
Genome  Res., 11, 1725 1729.
Wang,W.
et al.
(2008) Chromosomal transposition of PiggyBac in mouse embryonic  stem cells.
Proc.
Natl Acad.
Sci.
USA, 105, 9290 9295.
2925
