BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
25 no.
1 2009, pages 128 129  doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn573  Gene expression Selection of oligonucleotides for whole-genome microarrays with semi-automatic update G. Golﬁer1, S. Lemoine2, A. van Miltenberg1, A. Bendjoudi1, J. Rossier1, S. Le Crom2,3 and M.-C. Potier1,  1Neurobiologie et Diversité Cellulaire, CNRS UMR7637, Ecole Supérieure de Physique et de Chimie Industrielles, 10 rue Vauquelin, 75005 Paris, 2IFR36, Plate-forme Transcriptome and 3INSERM U784, École Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d Ulm 75230 Paris Cedex05, France Received on September 03, 2008  revised on October 15, 2008  accepted on October 30, 2008 Advance Access publication November 10, 2008 Associate Editor: Trey Ideker  ABSTRACT Summary: Oligonucleotide microarray probes are designed to match speciﬁc transcripts present in databases that are regularly updated.
As a consequence probes should be checked every new database release.
We thus developed an informatics tool allowing the semi-automatic update of probe collections of long oligonucleotides and applied it to the mouse RefSeq database.
Availability: http://www.bio.espci.fr/sol/ Contact: marie-claude.potier@espci.fr Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at http://www.bio.espci.fr/sol/  1 INTRODUCTION The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Reference Sequence (RefSeq) database provides a curated non- redundant collection of sequences representing genomic data, transcripts and proteins for different species (Pruitt et al., 2007).
Since the ﬁrst release in July 2003, there has been 28 new releases (release 29, September 5, 2008).
With the promise of whole- genome analysis methods, such as microarrays, the challenge now is to design speciﬁc probes for each exon of every single gene.
These whole-genome probe collections will not be exhaustive and totally accurate unless gene databases are stable (Perez-Iratxeta and Andrade, 2005).
In order to address the question of reliability of a probe collection every new database release, we have developed an informatics tool that allows the update of a probe collection.
This tool was applied to the mouse RefSeq database.
The starting probe set was designed on the sixth release of RefSeq using a new algorithm of Selection of OLigonucleotides (SOL), and RefSeq update has been followed until version 29.
2 RESULTS 2.1 SOL algorithm The goal of SOL was to generate a database of all possible long oligonucleotide probes of a given length L that have the    To whom correspondence should be addressed.
speciﬁcity ﬁtted to the microarray hybridization conditions.
For each identiﬁer of mouse RefSeq, all the possible oligonucleotides of length L that did not contain any tetra-nucleotide repeat using a sliding window of L/2 were BLASTed against the mouse RefSeq database ( W = 7  F = F  E = 100).
Thermodynamic analysis of BLAST sequence alignment outputs allowed the selection of gene-speciﬁc probes by eliminating the ones that gave at least one cross-hybridization with a melting temperature Tm below the hybridization temperature (Thyb).
Tms were computed using the nearest neighbour thermodynamic model implemented in the MELTING software (Le Novère, 2001) slightly modiﬁed to include the effect of formamide concentration, a widely used denaturing in the hybridization solution.
Formamide-corrected Tm agent, (Tmf ) = Tm  (0.75  GC%*0.0025)  %formamide.
Finally, the Tm  associated to the more stable non-target probe duplex will deﬁne the MAXTm parameter that will be used to characterize the probe speciﬁcity.
In addition, probe Tm, GC content, probe position on the original RefSeq sequence and  G of the most stable probe secondary structure calculated using MFOLD-software (Zuker et al., 2003).
Among all softwares for DNA microarray probe design, SOL resembles most to OLIGOARRAY2 (Rouillard et al., 2003): the oligonucleotide speciﬁcity is computed by considering the thermodynamic properties of its hybridization to non-speciﬁc targets.
However, OLIGOARRAY2 provides the optimal probe for each transcript based on Tm, length and GC content in a database for distant users only (Le Brigand et al., 2006), while SOL and its interface for probe collection and update gives the list of all speciﬁc probes that are fully accessible on site after installation.
SOL has been used to design a speciﬁc human chromosome 21 oligonucleotide microarray (Ait Yahya-Graison et al., 2007).
Interface to update oligonucleotide collections  2.2 One of the main drawbacks with oligonucleotide design is the difﬁculty to update oligonucleotide collections during time.
We thus developed an interface based on SOL algorithm to follow each new release of the mouse RefSeq library.
This interface is split into two parts: the ﬁrst part is dedicated to administration tasks, such as library modiﬁcations  the second part is dedicated to user queries to update local databases.
2008 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
SOL for whole-genome microarray  concerning oligonucleotide design.
An example is given for the mouse RefSeq database (Supplementary Material).
When a user queries the database interface using a list of RefSeq accession numbers (A), RefSeq status for each identiﬁer is retrieved (B).
For each identiﬁer available in the database, an SQL query retrieves all corresponding oligonucleotides (C).
Next, a list of oligonucleotides that match the experimental parameters entered by the user is sent back to the browser (D).
2.2.2 User interface to follow updates of a custom oligoset of oligonucleotide speciﬁcity against RefSeq library When a user queries the database using a list of RefSeq accession numbers (Fig.
1, arrow A), RefSeq status is retrieved from the database for each submitted identiﬁer (Fig.
1, arrow B).
For replaced sequences, the new accession number is displayed.
For suppressed sequences, the information is available to the user.
For each identiﬁer still present in the database, a SQL query retrieves all corresponding oligonucleotides (Fig.
1, arrow C).
Finally, a list of oligonucleotides that match the experimental parameters entered by the user is sent back to the browser (Fig.
1, arrow D).
This interface can be used to retrieve an updated collection of mouse-speciﬁc oligonucleotides and to follow-up oligonucleotide collections during time.
When testing the latest mouse oligonucleotide probe collections of Illumina, Agilent and the RNG/MRC (Le Brigand et al., 2006), we found that, respectively, 33.4%, 50.3% and 79.2% of oligonucleotides were speciﬁc against Refseq 28 database, demonstrating the need to regularly update the speciﬁcity of probes.
Funding: EEC grant AnEUploidy  Fondation Jérôme Lejeune.
Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES Ait Yahya-Graison,E.
et al.
(2007) Classiﬁcation of human chromosome 21 gene- expression variations in Down syndrome: impact on disease phenotypes.
Am.
J. Hum.
Genet., 81, 475 491.
Le Brigand,K.
et al.
(2006) An open-access long oligonucleotide microarray resource for analysis of the human and mouse transcriptomes.
Nucleic Acids Res., 34, e87.
Le Novère,N.
(2001) MELTING, computing the melting temperature of nucleic acid  duplex.
Bioinformatics, 17, 1226 1227.
Perez-Iratxeta,C.
and Andrade,M.A.
(2005) Inconsistencies over time in 5% of NetAffx  probe-to-gene annotations.
BMC Bioinformatics, 6, 183.
Pruitt,K.D.
et al.
(2007) NCBI Reference Sequence (RefSeq): a curated non-redundant sequence database of genomes, transcripts and proteins.
Nucleic Acids Res., 35, D61 D65.
Rouillard,J.M.
et al.
(2002) OligoArray 2.0: design of oligonucleotide probes for DNA  microarrays using a thermodynamic approach.
Bioinformatics, 18, 486 487.
Zuker,M.
(2003) Mfold web server for nucleic acid folding and hybridization prediction.
Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 3406 3415.
129  Fig.
1.
SOL update functions in action.
This ﬁgure shows how the oligonucleotide database is updated when a new release of RefSeq has been made available and how user can query the local database to follow the evolution of customized oligonucleotide collections.
See text for details on how the SOL algorithm and the update interface are working.
Dashed lines correspond to the update of RefSeq database and solid lines to the probe design and speciﬁcity calculations.
2.2.1 Update of oligonucleotide speciﬁcity against RefSeq library When a new release of the RefSeq library is detected (Fig.
1, arrow 1) as compared with our local database, RefSeq ﬁles are parsed and accession numbers are queried against the local database (Fig.
1, arrow 2).
Four ﬁles containing new, unchanged, suppressed (permanently or temporarily) and replaced sequences are created (Fig.
1, arrow 3).
In the case of replaced sequences, RefSeq FTP site gives the reference of the new sequence that replaces the old one.
The RefSeq version of unchanged sequences is updated and the oligonucleotide status of the suppressed and replaced sequences is modiﬁed.
For new identiﬁers, their corresponding sequences are used as an input to SOL algorithm to design oligonucleotide probes using the latest RefSeq target library for speciﬁcity (Fig.
1, arrow 4).
Speciﬁc oligonucleotides are stored in the database (Fig.
1, arrow 5).
Finally, SOL algorithm is launched using the older oligonucleotide collection (without the new ones) against the new RefSeq library (Fig.
1, arrow 6).
Following these steps, we conﬁrm that all the oligonucleotides found in the local database are speciﬁc against the latest RefSeq release.
In addition, all RefSeq identiﬁer modiﬁcations are followed to keep track of all changes
