BIOINFORMATICS ORIGINAL PAPER Vol.
25 no.
2 2009, pages 230 236  doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn612  Genetics and population analysis Gene disease relationship discovery based on model-driven data integration and database view deﬁnition S. Yilmaz1, P. Jonveaux1, C. Bicep2, L. Pierron2, M. Smaïl-Tabbone2 and M. D. Devignes2,  1Laboratory for Human Genetics, Nancy Medical Faculty, rue du Morvan, 54500 Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy cedex and 2LORIA UMR7503, CNRS, INRIA, Nancy-Université, BP239, 54506 Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy cedex, France Received on July 1, 2008  revised on November 20, 2008  accepted on November 21, 2008 Advance Access publication November 27, 2008 Associate Editor: Alex Bateman  ABSTRACT Motivation: Computational methods are widely used to discover gene disease relationships hidden in vast masses of available genomic and post-genomic data.
In most current methods, a similarity measure is calculated between gene annotations and known disease genes or disease descriptions.
However, more explicit gene disease relationships are required for better insights into the molecular bases of diseases, especially for complex multi-gene diseases.
Results: Explicit relationships between genes and diseases are formulated as candidate gene deﬁnitions that may include intermediary genes, e.g.
orthologous or interacting genes.
These deﬁnitions guide data modelling in our database approach for gene  disease relationship discovery and are expressed as views which ultimately lead to the retrieval of documented sets of candidate genes.
A system called ACGR (Approach for Candidate Gene Retrieval) has been implemented and tested with three case studies including a rare orphan gene disease.
Availability: The ACGR sources are freely available at http:// bioinfo.loria.fr/projects/acgr/acgr-software/.
See especially the ﬁle  disease_description  and the folders  Xcollect_scenarios  and  ACGR_views .
Contact: devignes@loria.fr Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION Understanding the molecular basis of a disease ultimately means correlating disease symptoms with altered gene function(s) thus highlighting gene disease relationships.
Identifying the genes responsible for human diseases is a ﬁrst step towards this goal.
More than 6100 disease phenotypes are described in the OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man) database (DB).
Among these phenotypes, more than 2400 have at least one known molecular basis (entries preﬁxed with #).
Thus, about 3700 disease phenotypes described in the OMIM DB are not yet associated with any responsible gene.
These disease phenotypes are particularly     To whom correspondence should be addressed.
challenging since they include rare syndromes for which limited experimental data are available and complex multi-genic disorders involving various causative and susceptibility genes (Botstein and Risch, 2003).
Integrative genomics approaches are becoming indispensable tools for discovering new gene disease relationships.
These approaches rely on efﬁcient exploitation of functional genomics data sources (Giallourakis et al., 2005) and take advantage of numerous computer-based systems that have been developed in the last 5 years.
These systems can be classiﬁed into three main groups.
First, generalist systems predict disease genes based on their properties or interactions (Adie et al., 2005  Calvo et al., 2007  Lopez-Bigas and Ouzounis, 2004  Lopez-Bigas et al., 2006  Oti et al., 2006  Tu et al., 2006  Xu and Li, 2006).
Consistent features are thus detected among approximately 1600 disease genes listed in the OMIM morbid map and used for these studies.
Indeed, disease genes tend to be longer, are composed of more exons, show a higher degree of interspecies conservation, and are involved in more interactions than other genes.
However, these approaches are unable to establish the correspondence between a given disease and a set of genes.
The second group of systems apply strategies relying on the hypothesis that similar diseases are most likely caused by similar genes.
These strategies are often called prioritization methods since they aim to rank a given list of genes with respect to their probability to cause a disease (Adie et al., 2006  Aerts et al., 2006  Freudenberg and Propping, 2002  George et al., 2006  Perez-Iratxeta et al., 2002, 2005  Rossi et al., 2006  Turner et al., 2003).
Additionally, alternative strategies based on the same similarity hypothesis aim to characterize user-deﬁned groups of genes (Barillot et al., 2004  Chiang et al., 2006  Masseroli et al., 2004, 2005  Sun et al., 2006).
In order to ﬁnd additional responsible genes, prioritization methods are often applied to a single disease whose associated chromosomal loci are known.
A pool of statistical methods is then used to compute similarity measures dealing with various gene features.
Such gene features are particularly well covered in the endeavour system (Aerts et al., 2006), e.g.
sequence similarity, domain composition, tissue expression, Gene Ontology (GO) annotation, interspecies conservation, protein protein interactions, involved pathways and cis-regulatory elements.
However, this type of prioritization strategy requires at least one well-known gene to be used as a reference candidate gene.
2008 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Finally, a third group of methods gathers integrated systems that help users to formulate complex multi-criteria queries to retrieve appropriate collections of relevant genes.
For instance, the GeneSeeker system (van Driel et al., 2005) and the GeneSorter functionality proposed by UCSC Genome Browser (Kent et al., 2005) allow experts to test various hypotheses on criteria that can link genes to diseases.
An example is found in Tifﬁn et al.
(2005), who developed a strategy to identify genes expressed in tissue affected by a disease.
Hence, candidate genes are selected if their corresponding annotations with respect to a controlled vocabulary (i.e.
eVOC, which is used in Ensembl EST annotation) match the disease annotation.
Relevant eVOC annotations for the studied diseases were derived from PubMed abstracts using text-mining techniques.
The Approach for Candidate Gene Retrieval (ACGR) presented in this article is inspired from this last group of methods.
Indeed, we propose four steps to guide the discovery of gene disease relationships.
First, several precise deﬁnitions of candidate genes are formulated.
Next, these deﬁnitions are used to design a relational data model and to populate a dedicated DB with relevant data extracted from various internet resources.
Finally, to retrieve sets of candidate genes, DB views that express candidate gene deﬁnitions are created.
Available experimental data can be included in the disease gene deﬁnitions and thus exploited together with public annotation data.
The approach presented here is tested with three case studies, including a rare orphan gene syndrome.
2 SYSTEMS AND METHODS 2.1 Explicit gene disease relationships The deﬁnition of a candidate gene provided by the Webster Medical Dictionary is  any gene thought likely to cause a disease .
This deﬁnition implies that a candidate gene is a gene which is somehow related to a disease.
However, speciﬁc gene disease relationships that exist between candidate genes and studied diseases can be articulated in more useful ways by considering information that is available in various public DBs as well as wet-lab datasets.
The most obvious relationship between candidate genes and disease, hereafter called  is_co-localized_with  (denoted by l), expresses the inferred relationship between the localization of a candidate gene and a chromosomal region linked to a given disease.
This principle embodied within this statement has guided positional cloning for a long time.
The precision of disease localization on chromosomes is highly variable depending on available data.
Thanks to recent techniques such as array-CGH (Shaw- Smith et al., 2004  Vermeesch et al., 2007  Vissers et al., 2005), available localization data can be reﬁned using experimental data.
Another direct relationship is tissue or developmental co-expression of both genes and disease features.
This relationship has been used in various prioritization methods (Tifﬁn et al., 2005).
A variant of this relationship called  is_dysregulated_in  (denoted by d) considers the dysregulation (over-expression or repression) of candidate genes in transcriptomic studies involving patient samples.
Functional annotation of genes is improving in most available DBs and can be connected to disease descriptions.
Hence a relationship called  has_similar_functional_annotation_with  (denoted by f) is deﬁned on the basis of a similarity measure between functional annotations of a gene and a disease.
One key aspect of our approach is that the relationship between a candidate gene and a disease may also involve an intermediate gene which satisﬁes some relationship with the disease.
Here, we explore two types of intermediate genes, namely orthologous and interacting genes.
Discovery of gene disease relationships  It is noteworthy that the co-localization relationship l only applies to the candidate gene itself  whereas, both dysregulation d and functional similarity f relationships apply to intermediate genes as well.
Complex deﬁnitions are then constructed in the form:  a candidate gene is a gene that is co-localized with the disease and is orthologous to a gene that has similar functional annotation with the disease  and  a candidate gene is a gene that is co-localized with the disease and that interacts with a gene that is dysregulated in patients affected by the disease .
The former deﬁnition assumes the existence of two relationships, namely l and f, which connect the disease with the candidate gene and with one of its orthologs in a model organism, respectively.
The latter deﬁnition assumes the existence of two relationships, namely l and d, which connect the disease with the candidate gene and with one of its interaction partners, respectively.
Further complex deﬁnitions can be formulated similarly, such as  a candidate gene is a gene that is co-localized with the disease and that interacts with a gene which is in turn orthologous to a gene having similar functional annotation with the disease .
Retrieving sets of candidate genes which match such complex deﬁnitions from masses of biological data are the challenge taken up by the ACGR approach described in this article.
2.2 Relevance of functional gene disease relationships In order to assess the relevance of discovered gene disease relationships, we introduce a measure quantifying the functional similarity relationship f between a gene and a disease.
However, to date, no common vocabulary is available to describe functional features of both diseases and genes, hence impeding any straight-forward comparison of disease and gene functional annotations.
Current prioritization methods quantify the functional similarity between test genes and training genes based on their GO annotations (Khatri and Draghici, 2005).
Ideally the disease functional features should be described with GO vocabulary so that the similarity between gene and disease can be obtained by calculating the similarity between their GO annotations.
In practice such disease annotation is performed by an expert of the disease.
This procedure for assessing the relevance of gene disease relationship presents three main advantages.
First, an initial set of training genes is no longer required.
Second, available knowledge about the disease is included in disease description.
Finally, the rich GO annotations that are available for genes from model organisms will be propagated to human genes thanks to candidate gene deﬁnitions involving intermediate orthologous genes.
2.3 Overall presentation of the ACGR approach The following ﬁve steps conceptually describe the proposed in silico methodology for candidate gene retrieval.
(i) Our system takes as input a functional description of a disease, established by an expert using the GO vocabulary (see Section 3.2), as well as available experimental datasets.
The system then collects data from various public DBs.
(ii) It ﬁrst retrieves genes sharing GO annotations with the input disease from either human or model organisms.
(iii) Next, relevant annotations of these genes are added, including cytogenetic localization, functional annotation, interacting genes and human orthologs of genes from model organisms.
(iv) All retrieved genes are then assigned similarity values that are calculated on the basis of their annotation similarity with the input disease.
(v) Finally, sets of candidate genes along with relevant annotation data are built that correspond to various candidate gene deﬁnitions.
Our system s architecture is centred on a DB which is controlled by a DataBase Management System (DBMS).
There are three main features of a DBMS that make it attractive to use: centralized data management, data independence and data integration.
This contrasts with conventional data processing systems in which each application program has direct access to the data it manipulates.
In a DBMS, all data are integrated thereby reducing redundancies and inconsistencies and making data management more efﬁcient.
Finally, the existence of a domain data model ensures global data coherence.
231   S.Yilmaz et al.
The most commonly used conceptual framework for a DBMS is the three-level architecture suggested by the ANSI/SPARC committee (ANSI/X3/SPARC, 1975).
The three levels are considered as three different views on the data: (i) the external level or individual user view  (ii) the conceptual level or community user view  and (iii) the internal level or storage view.
This three-level DB architecture allows a clear separation of the information meaning (conceptual view) from the physical data structure layer.
A DB system that can separate these modelling levels is likely to be ﬂexible and adaptable.
The external level is a restricted view on the data, and the same DB may provide a number of different views for different categories of users or needs.
In our approach, the candidate gene deﬁnitions proposed in Section 2.1 constitute external views on data collected about genes and diseases.
The conceptual level determines the data model of the domain of interest, and includes all the information that will be represented in the DB.
Finally, the physical model will be replaced here with the so- called  logical model  (Teorey et al., 2006) because the latter is independent of any particular commercial DBMS.
3 ALGORITHM 3.1 DB design The detailed deﬁnitions and relationships presented in Section 2.1 lead to a speciﬁcation of the various types of data relevant for the retrieval of candidate genes.
The resulting conceptual data model is presented in Figure 1 in a common entity relationship (ER) format.
Queries corresponding to any candidate gene deﬁnition (Section 2.1) can be addressed to a DB constructed according to the model shown in Figure 1.
For example, the deﬁnition of a candidate gene as  a gene that is co-localized (l gene disease relationship) with a disease and that is orthologous to a gene that has similar functional annotation with that disease (f gene disease relationship)  can be represented using the  Gene ,  Disease ,  GO_term  and  Ranking_Tool  entities that are linked by the  Is_Orthologous_To  and  Is_Ranked As  relationships.
The  Has-Value_in  relationship expresses the d gene disease relationship as a ratio between experimental values measured, for a given gene and a given experiment, in samples from diseased versus healthy patients.
The relational logical data model presented in Table 1 is derived from this conceptual model.
Fig.
1.
Conceptual data model for the ACGR DB.
Entity types are represented as boxes and relationship types as ellipses.
Participation of an entity in a relationship is quantiﬁed as the minimal and maximal number of times each occurrence of the entity can participate in the relationship.
Note that Cytoband in the Gene entity is an abbreviation for  cytogenetic band .
232  3.2 Populating the DB On the basis of the relational data model, it is possible to specify the initialization steps of ACGR DB.
Entering a disease description consists of inserting one row of data, hereafter called a tuple, into the  Disease  table and several tuples in the  GO_Term  and  Disease_GO_Term  tables.
To this aim, an expert of the studied disease has to carefully (i) extract from her knowledge and from OMIM the phenotypes which characterize the disease, (ii) associate keywords to these phenotypes and (iii) retrieve the most relevant GO terms corresponding to these keywords.
The  Author_ID  attribute is useful to distinguish different descriptions of the same disease.
When available, experimental data are entered by inserting one tuple into the  Experiment  table for each performed experiment, and several tuples into the  Gene  and  Gene_In_Experiment  tables, representing all signature genes and their dysregulation ratios.
Finally, the system retrieves from public DBs all human, mouse and ﬂy genes that are annotated by at least one GO term associated with the studied disease.
Only gene identiﬁers are inserted into the  Gene  table at the initialization stage.
The data collection process consists of ﬁrst retrieving identiﬁers of human orthologs for mouse and ﬂy genes and then retrieving all required annotations for all gene identiﬁers present in the  Gene  table.
In particular, interacting genes are retrieved and inserted into the  Interaction  table.
Identiﬁers for interacting genes which are not present in the  Gene  table are then added and undergo their own data collection process.
Nevertheless at this stage, interaction partners are omitted to prevent an explosion of relationships.
The speciﬁcation of data wrappers implies selecting appropriate DBs (see Section 4) and mapping the relevant ﬁelds onto the ACGR relational data model.
Speciﬁc wrappers have been designed to plug in external ranking tools for calculating functional similarity values between genes and diseases.
Such wrappers will insert tuples into the  Gene_Disease_Similarity  table, i.e.
one tuple per gene and per ranking tool.
3.3 Building sets of candidate genes In order to express the candidate gene deﬁnitions, views are deﬁned in Standard Query Language (SQL) at the logical level of our conceptual framework.
A view associates an SQL query with a view name leading to the creation of a virtual table.
We have selected four basic deﬁnitions leading to the four views described below.
Table 1.
Relational logical data model for ACGR DB  Table name  Attribute set  Gene  GO_Term Gene_GO_Term Orthology Interaction Disease Disease_GO_Term Ranking_Tool Gene_Disease_Similarity Experiment  Gene_In_Experiment  Gene_ID, Symbol, Organism, Complete_name, Chromosome, Cytoband, OMIM_ID, Source_ID GO_ID, Term, GO_section, Deﬁnition Gene_ID, GO_ID, Source_ID Gene_ID1, Gene_ID2, Source_ID Gene_ID1, Gene_ID2, Source_ID, Interaction_Type Disease_ID, Synopsis, OMIM_ID Disease_ID, GO_ID, Author_ID Tool_ID, Description, URL Gene_ID, Disease_ID, Author_ID, Tool_ID,Similarity Exp_ID, Type, Date, Platform, Analysis_procedure, Disease_ID Gene_ID, Exp_ID, Ratio  It consists of a set of abbreviated table schemas.
Each table contains a set of attributes including a primary key (in bold face) and one or more foreign keys (in italics).
The corresponding SQL queries can be found in the Supplementary Material.
For the sake of readability, the datasets produced upon view execution are called  Datasets .
Dataset1: genes ranked according to their functional similarity with disease description.
This ﬁrst view retrieves the gene symbol, species, cytogenetic localization and similarity of all ACGR DB genes, sorted by decreasing similarity value.
Human, mouse and ﬂy genes are thus collated according to their similarity with disease description.
Mouse genes are often ranked better than their human orthologs because of the richer annotation in the model organism.
The higher a gene is ranked in Dataset1, the stronger is the functional relationship with the disease.
Dataset2: human orthologs of model organism genes listed in Dataset1.
This second view displays all features of Dataset1 for genes retrieved from model organisms (here, mouse and ﬂy) together with the gene symbol, cytogenetic localization and similarity of their human orthologs.
Good ranking of a mouse gene can pull its human ortholog to the top of Dataset2 when it was formerly at the bottom of Dataset1 because of poor GO annotation in human.
This behaviour is observed, in the CHD7 gene of CHARGE syndrome, for example (see subsequently).
Dataset3: genes interacting with the genes listed in Dataset1.
For each gene in Dataset1, the symbol, cytogenetic localization and similarity of the genes reported as interacting with it (mostly via the gene products but other types of interactions are not excluded) are displayed.
The source of information concerning these interactions is also displayed.
Only intra-species interactions are listed here.
Genes that display proper cytogenetic localization but poor similarity values may reveal good disease candidates because of interactions with well-ranked genes mapped elsewhere in the genome.
Dataset4: human orthologs of model organism genes listed in Dataset3.
Dataset4 is intended to display candidate genes which are human orthologs of model organism genes that interact with well-ranked genes.
When experimental data are available, it can be included into each of the views described above, thereby producing four supplementary views: from Dataset1Exp to Dataset4Exp.
An example of this is presented below in the case study on AICARDI syndrome.
Further queries on the basic ACGR views can then provide customized lists of candidate genes.
Indeed, creating sets of annotated candidate genes as SQL views allow biologists to beneﬁt from the numerous advantages of this powerful approach.
First, writing new queries is simpliﬁed.
Second, the views are automatically refreshed whenever the DB is updated.
Finally, deﬁning views contributes to the integrity and security of the DB because end-users may be given tuned privileges on views rather than on the underlying data tables.
4 IMPLEMENTATION The technical implementation choices described in this work are not mandatory since other techniques are conceivable depending on the target deployment environment.
For example, here wrappers for retrieving and integrating data from various data sources have been implemented as scenarios of the Xcollect software (Devignes et al., 2005).
Xcollect scenarios are conﬁgured to formulate queries automatically, send them to a remote web resource, parse the  Discovery of gene disease relationships  returned document and store the desired data in an XML document.
Capturing the date of last DB update is included in each scenario to help track data quality.
The speciﬁc Xcollect scenarios used here are available in the Supplementary Material.
In this work, data sources were selected according to their updating frequencies, annotation quality and coverage.
Thus, GO terms corresponding to keywords describing the disease were retrieved from AMIGO DB  genes annotated with selected GO terms were retrieved from Entrez-Gene at NCBI as well as all gene annotations.
Symbols of orthologous genes were retrieved from Entrez-HomoloGene.
The storage of the collected data in the ACGR DB was performed with the help of XSL transformations designed to convert each Xcollect session document into appropriate SQL commands.
Besides Xcollect wrappers, we developed a wrapper to invoke the GO-Family program available in the GOToolBox (Martin et al., 2004).
The program was modiﬁed slightly because a list of GO terms rather than a list of reference gene symbols is required as well as the list of genes to be ranked.
Brieﬂy, the program fetches all GO terms annotating a candidate gene as well as their parent terms.
It also fetches all parents of the disease-speciﬁc GO terms.
Then it calculates a similarity percentage taking into account identical and non-identical terms between the set of GO terms associated with the candidate gene and the set of disease-speciﬁc GO terms.
The EasyPHP package was used for data management and user interface development.
This package includes a web server (Apache), a DBMS (mySQL) and a script language (PHP).
The corresponding programs along with a user guide are available at http://bioinfo.loria.fr/projects/acgr/acgr-software/.
5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 5.1 Three case studies The ACGR approach was initially motivated by the need to analyse results obtained for AICARDI syndrome (OMIM %304050) which is currently being investigated experimentally (Yilmaz et al., 2007).
To date, no responsible gene is known for this disease.
Two other rare syndromes, CHARGE (OMIM #214800) and GOLTZ (OMIM #305600), were selected from the literature.
The genes responsible for these two syndromes have recently been reported (Grzeschik et al., 2007  Vissers et al., 2004  Wang et al., 2007b), but this information is not included in the annotations collected in the ACGR DB.
It is therefore relevant to test the ACGR approach on these recently elucidated diseases.
5.2 Populating the DB Table 2 shows for the three case studies the correspondence between disease phenotypes and Biological Process GO terms.
Phenotypes were selected from OMIM notices regarding diagnoses.
Keywords (data not shown, see Supplementary Material) were chosen to characterize each phenotype.
For a given keyword, GO terms were selected at the relevant level of the GO hierarchy.
A GO term is included when all its children are relevant.
In the case of AICARDI syndrome, a third phenotype (infantile spasms) is frequently observed but does not correspond to any speciﬁc GO term.
According to the clinicians, this phenotype is covered by the  Forebrain development  GO term.
233   S.Yilmaz et al.
Experimental data were inserted into the DB for the AICARDI syndrome as explained in Section 3.2.
These data concern 300 genes which ANOVA analysis of several transcriptomic experiments found to be dysregulated (Yilmaz, 2007).
For these genes the ratio attribute was set to 1  whereas, it was set to 0 for any other gene.
Table 3 summarizes the contents of the ACGR DB for the three case studies.
The #GO column displays the number of GO terms speciﬁc to the disease.
The #ﬂy, #mouse and #human columns show the number of genes annotated by at least one of these GO terms for each organism.
The  #dysregulated  column indicates the number of experimentally determined human dysregulated genes stored in the DB.
The last column gives the total number of genes after the inclusion of other orthologous and interacting genes.
5.3 Building sets of annotated candidate genes Dataset1 to Dataset4 were constructed for each case study as described in Section 3.3 to enable queries reﬂecting expert hypotheses about candidate genes to be formulated.
The complete tables are available as Supplementary Material.
Table 4 displays the  Table 2.
List of GO terms deﬁned by the clinicians on August 31, 2007  Syndrome  Phenotype  GO term (Biological Process hierarchy)  Coloboma Choanal atresia  Ear abnormality Deafness Heart anomaly Skin defects Digital anomalies Skeletal defects Corpus callosum agenesis  CHARGE  GOLTZ  AICARDI  Camera-type eye morphogenesis [47] Nose development [2] Embryonic cranial skeleton morphogenesis [16] Ear development [155] Sensory perception of sound [203] Heart morphogenesis [69] Skin development [22] Embryonic digit morphogenesis [28] Embryonic skeletal morphogenesis [25] Forebrain development [191] Corpus callosum development [0] Corpus callosum morphogenesis [0] Neuron migration [139] Neural plate development [117]  Chorioretinal lacunae Camera-type eye morphogenesis [47]  ﬁrst three tuples from CHARGE Dataset2.
The human CHD7 gene that is responsible for this disease (Vissers et al., 2004) appears in second position as orthologous to the mouse Chd7 gene which has a high similarity to disease description (48%).
It is worth noting that the low similarity of the human CHD7 gene annotation to CHARGE GO terms (4%) relegates it to the bottom of Dataset1.
Selecting human genes from chromosome 8 in CHARGE Dataset2 yields the CHD7 gene as the ﬁrst-ranked candidate gene.
The CHARGE case study shows that the ACGR approach would have been able to designate the CHD7 gene as the best candidate gene in the group of nine genes identiﬁed by the authors at 8q12 thus prioritizing its sequencing.
It is worth noting that although the association of CHD7 with CHARGE syndrome was established 3 years ago, the GO annotation of this gene does not reﬂect this association.
Table 5 shows the ﬁrst six tuples from GOLTZ Dataset4.
Despite its low similarity to disease description (7%), the responsible human PORCN gene appears at the ﬁfth position in GOLTZ Dataset4 that contains 51 lines and as the ﬁrst candidate gene located on chromosome X.
This is due to the fact that the mouse Porcn gene is reported as interacting with the mouse Wnt7a gene which has good similarity to the disease description.
Hence the ACGR approach could have pointed to the PORCN gene even before the localization reﬁnement of the disease provided by the CGH array experiment (Grzeschik et al., 2007  Wang et al., 2007b).
In the case of AICARDI syndrome, Dataset1Exp to Dataset4Exp were produced including transcriptomic data.
A ﬁrst query on Dataset1Exp retrieved 71 genes located on human chromosome X.
Table 6 displays the ﬁrst four genes of this list.
The best-ranked PLXNA3 gene seems to be an interesting candidate.
Its annotation is rather similar to the AICARDI GO terms (56%).
However, to date, it has not been associated with any human disease.
The following ARX and SOX3 genes, namely MRX54 (OMIM #300419)  Table 4.
The three top-ranked tuples from CHARGE Dataset2  The number of genes annotated by a GO term is indicated in brackets.
Symbol Organism Cyto-band  Sim Orthol_ Orthol_  Symbol Cytoband  Orthol_ Sim  Table 3.
Numbers of genes stored in the ACGR DB for the three case studies  Disease  #GO #ﬂy  #mouse  #human  #dysregulated  #genes  CHARGE GOLTZ AICARDI  6 3 6  29 0 2  172 55 182  223 272 166  0 0 300  1410 1583 2218  Tmie Chd7 Gjb6  mouse mouse mouse  9 64.0 cM 62 4 1.0 cM 48 14 22.5 cM 48  TMIE CHD7 GJB6  3p21 8q12.2 13q12  62 4 45  The column Sim refers to the values taken by the Similarity attribute of the Gene_Disease_Similarity table.
These values are expressed as percentages owing to the particular ranking tool that was used.
The Orthol_Symbol, Orthol_Cytoband and Orthol_Sim columns display values for the human orthologs of the considered mouse genes.
Table 5.
The six top-ranked tuples from GOLTZ Dataset4  Symbol  Organism  Cytoband  Sim  Interac_ Symbol  Source  Interac_ Cytoband  Interac_Sim  Orthol_ Symbol  Orthol_ Cytoband  Orthol_ Sim  Gna12 Col5a2 Col5a2 Col5a2 Wnt7a Lgals3  mouse mouse mouse mouse mouse mouse  5 82.0 cM 1 C1 1 C1 1 C1 6 39.5 cM 14 C1  35 32 32 32 31 28  Ppp5c Smad2 Smad7 Samd3 Porcn Sufu  BIND BIND BIND BIND BIND BIND  7 4.0 cM 18 48.0 cM 18 unknown 9 unknown X 2.15 cM 19 47.0 cM  4 15 5 15 5 17  PPP5C SMAD2 SMAD7 SMAD3 PORCN SUFU  19q13.3 18q21.1 18q21.1 15q22.33 Xp11.23 10q24.32  4 17 5 16 7 19  Columns Interac_Symbol to Interac_Sim columns refer to the interacting genes of considered mouse genes.
Columns Orthol_Symbol to Orthol_Sim are described in Table 4.
234   Discovery of gene disease relationships  Table 6.
The four top-ranked human genes localized on chromosome X from AICARDI Dataset1Exp  Symbol  PLXNA3 ARX SOX3 DCX  Organism  Human Human Human Human  Sim  56 40 34 26  Cytoband  Xq28 Xp21 Xq27.1 Xq22.3-q23  Ratio  0 0 0 0  Table 7.
The four top-ranked human tuples from AICARDI Dataset3Exp  Symbol  Cytoband  Sim  Ratio  Interac_Symbol  Interac_Cytoband  Interac_Sim  Interac_Ratio  Source  DLX5 UBE3A CXCL10 IGF1  7q22 15q11-q13 4q21 12q22-q23  50 22 21 21  1 1 1 1  MAGED1 UBQLN2 CXCR3 IGSF1  Xp11.23 Xp11.23-p11.1 Xq13 Xq25  3 8 10 6  0 0 0 0  HPRD HPRD HPRD BIND  The columns Symbol to Ratio refer to dysregulated genes, and the columns Interac_Symbol to Interac_Ratio refer to the interacting candidate genes.
The Source column indicates the database where the interaction is documented.
and MRGH (OMIM #300123), are both responsible for diseases involving mental retardation.
The next DCX gene is a good internal control since it is responsible for X-linked lissencephaly (LISX, OMIM #300067), a disease-like AICARDI syndrome involving agenesis of the corpus callosum and multiple heterotopia.
from Dataset3Exp,  Further queries were applied to AICARDI Dataset3Exp to explore possible interactions between dysregulated genes and candidate genes.
Table 7 shows four candidate genes ( Interac_Symbol  column) located on chromosome X and interacting with the four best-ranked dysregulated genes ( Symbol  column).
The MAGED1 gene interacts with the DLX5 gene which is dysregulated in our transcriptomic experiments and its GO annotation displays 50% similarity with the AICARDI-speciﬁc GO terms.
The interaction between these two gene products is based on in vivo experiments (Masuda et al., 2001).
5.4 Discussion Overall, the ACGR approach has received enthusiastic feedback from experimentalists.
Indeed conducted experiments yielded very satisfying results in the CHARGE and GOLTZ case studies.
We have shown that in both cases responsible genes related to the disease are found at the ﬁrst rank position when chromosome localization is taken into account.
Thus, the ACGR approach would have been useful at the time of the discovery of these responsible genes to avoid unnecessary sequencing.
In the case of AICARDI syndrome, the ACGR approach provided several meaningful and promising candidate genes that are currently being analysed further.
For instance, the MAGED1 gene displays several features associated with disease genes (Tu et al., 2006).
It is a 99.3 kb long gene due to a large intron (91 kb) separating the ﬁrst exon from the 12 other exons that are grouped over the remaining 8 kb.
Interestingly, two of the retrieved candidate genes (MAGED1 and UBQLN2) are located in the same cytogenetic band (Xp11.23), which is known to be correlated with several neuro-psychiatric disorders.
It should be noted that for this disease, the small number of recruited patients hampers the application of purely experimental protocols.
In addition to the presented case studies, ongoing investigations indicate that the approach presented here may facilitate future endeavours to identify susceptibility genes for complex diseases.
The robustness and ﬂexibility of our approach makes it possible to explore various alternative approaches or strategies, including varying the ranking procedure and the selection of primary data sources.
For example, data about interaction networks could be retrieved from the protein complexes curated by Lage et al.
(2007).
The GO-Family algorithm used for gene ranking in this study could be replaced by any other similarity measurement between GO terms (Lord et al., 2003  Wang et al., 2007a  Zhang et al., 2006).
The similarity between eVOC terms annotating both gene expression and affected tissues could be used to assess  is_co-expressed  relationships (Tifﬁn et al., 2005), for example.
A possible limitation of the current work may be the low number of case studies analysed.
Since an expert of each studied disease has to be involved in the ﬁrst step of the approach, this clearly hampers automated large-scale evaluation.
Moreover, it should be stressed that success in retrieving at a good rank the gene responsible for a disease strongly depends on both user s expertise and the quality of available data.
Nevertheless, the results presented here clearly demonstrate the explicit querying capabilities of the ACGR system and the originality of this approach for providing explanations on why a certain gene is related to a disease.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Sylvain Lambermont for his contribution at early stage of the work, Dr Leheup for helping in selecting disease-speciﬁc GO terms, Amine Rouhane-Hacène and Dave Ritchie for careful reading of the manuscript.
S.Y.
was supported by the AAL (Amis d Anne-Lorène) association and Région Lorraine.
Funding: Contrat de Plan Etat-Région Lorraine (PRST Intelligence Logicielle).
Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES Adie,E.A.
et al.
(2005) Speeding disease gene discovery by sequence based candidate  prioritization.
BMC Bioinformatics, 6, 55.
235   S.Yilmaz et al.
Adie,E.A.
et al.
(2006) SUSPECTS: enabling fast and effective prioritization of  Masuda,Y.
et al.
(2001) Dlxin-1, a novel protein that binds Dlx5 and regulates its  positional candidates.
Bioinformatics, 22, 773 774.  transcriptional function.
J. Biol.
Chem., 276, 5331 5338.
Aerts,S.
et al.
(2006) Gene prioritization through genomic data fusion.
Nat.
Biotechnol.,  Oti,M.
et al.
(2006) Predicting disease genes using protein protein interactions.
J. Med.
24, 537 544.
Genet., 43, 691 698.
ANSI/X3/SPARC (1975) Study Group on Data Base Management Systems, Interim  Perez-Iratxeta,C.
et al.
(2002) Association of genes to genetically inherited diseases  Report, FDT 7 No.
2.
ACM, New York.
using data mining.
Nat.
Genet., 31, 316 319.
Barillot,R.
et al.
(2004) New strategy for the representation and the integration of  biomolecular knowledge at a cellular scale.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, 3581 3589.
Botstein,D.
and Risch,N.
(2003) Discovering genotypes underlying human phenotypes: past successes for Mendelian disease, future approaches for complex disease.
Nat.
Genet., 33(Suppl), 228 236.
Calvo,B.
et al.
(2007) A partially supervised classiﬁcation approach to dominant and recessive human disease gene prediction.
Comput.
Methods Programs Biomed., 85, 229 237.
Chiang,J.H.
et al.
(2006) GeneLibrarian: an effective gene-information summarization  and visualization system.
BMC Bioinformatics, 7, 392.
Devignes,M.D.
et al.
(2005) User-designed web services to support heterogeneous biological data retrieval.
NETTAB workshop on Workﬂows management: new abilities for the biological information overﬂow, available at http://www.nettab.
org/2005/progr.html (last accessed date December 8, 2008).
Freudenberg,J.
and Propping,P.
(2002) A similarity-based method for genome- wide prediction of disease-relevant human genes.
Bioinformatics, 18 (Suppl.
2), S110 S115.
George,R.A.
et al.
(2006) Analysis of protein sequence and interaction data for candidate  disease gene prediction.
Nucleic Acids Res., 34, e130.
Giallourakis,C.
et al.
(2005) Disease gene discovery through integrative genomics.
Annu.
Rev.
Genomics Hum.
Genet., 6, 381 406.
Grzeschik,K.H.
et al.
(2007) Deﬁciency of PORCN, a regulator of Wnt signaling, is  associated with focal dermal hypoplasia.
Nat.
Genet., 39, 833 835.
Kent,W.J.
et al.
(2005) Exploring relationships and mining data with the UCSC Gene  Sorter.
Genome Res., 15, 737 741.
Khatri,P.
and Draghici,S.
(2005) Ontological analysis of gene expression data: current  tools, limitations, and open problems.
Bioinformatics, 21, 3587 3595.
Lage,K.
et al.
(2007) A human phenome-interactome network of protein complexes  implicated in genetic disorders.
Nat.
Biotechnol., 285, 309 316.
Lopez-Bigas,N.
and Ouzounis,C.A.
(2004) Genome-wide identiﬁcation of genes likely  to be involved in human genetic disease.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, 3108 3114.
Lopez-Bigas,N.
et al.
(2006) Highly consistent patterns for inherited human diseases  at the molecular level.
Bioinformatics, 22, 269 277.
Lord,P.W.
et al.
(2003) Investigating semantic similarity measures across the Gene Ontology: the relationship between sequence and annotation.
Bioinformatics, 19, 1275 1283.
Martin,D.
et al.
(2004) GOToolBox: functional analysis of gene datasets based on Gene  Ontology.
Genome Biol., 5, R101.
Masseroli,M.
et al.
(2004) GFINDer: Genome Function INtegrated Discoverer through dynamic annotation, statistical analysis, and mining.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, W293 W300.
Masseroli,M.
et al.
(2005) GFINDer: genetic disease and phenotype location statistical analysis and mining of dynamically annotated gene lists.
Nucleic Acids Res., 33, W717 W723.
Perez-Iratxeta,C.
et al.
(2005) G2D: a tool for mining genes associated with disease.
BMC Genetics, 6, 45.
Rossi,S.
et al.
(2006) TOM: a web-based integrated approach for identiﬁcation of  candidate disease genes.
Nucleic Acids Res., 34, W285 W292.
Shaw-Smith,C.
et al.
(2004) Microarray based comparative genomic hybridisation (array-CGH) detects submicroscopic chromosomal deletions and duplications in patients with learning disability/mental retardation and dysmorphic features.
J. Med.
Genet., 41, 241 248.
Sun,H.
et al.
(2006) GOFFA: Gene Ontology for functional analysis   a FDA Gene Ontology tool for analysis of genomic and proteomic data.
BMC Bioinformatics, 7 (Suppl.
2), S23.
Teorey,T.J.
et al.
(2006) In Cerra,D.D.
(ed.)
Database Modeling and Design: Logical  Design.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco.
Tifﬁn,N.
et al.
(2005) Integration of text- and data-mining using ontologies successfully  selects disease gene candidates.
Nucleic Acids Res., 33,1544 1552.
Tu,Z.
et al.
(2006) Further understanding human disease genes by comparing with  housekeeping genes and other genes.
BMC Genomics, 7, 31.
Turner,F.S.
et al.
(2003) POCUS: mining genomic sequence annotation to predict  disease genes.
Genome Biol., 4, R75.
van Driel,M.A.
et al.
(2005) GeneSeeker: extraction and integration of human disease- related information from web-based genetic databases.
Nucleic Acids Res., 33, W758 W761.
Vermeesch,J.R.
et al.
(2007) Guidelines for molecular karyotyping in constitutional  genetic diagnosis.
Eur.
J. Hum.
Genet., 15, 1105 1114.
Vissers,L.E.
et al.
(2004) Mutations in a new member of the chromodomain gene family  cause CHARGE syndrome.
Nat.
Genet., 36, 955 957.
Vissers,L.E.
et al.
(2005) Identiﬁcation of disease genes by whole genome CGH arrays.
Hum.
Mol.
Genet., 14, R215 R223.
Wang,J.Z.
et al.
(2007a) A new method to measure the semantic similarity of GO terms.
Bioinformatics, 23, 1274 1281.
Wang,X.
et al.
(2007b) Mutations in X-linked PORCN, a putative regulator of Wnt  signaling, cause focal dermal hypoplasia.
Nat.
Genet., 39, 836 838.
Xu,J.
and Li,Y.
(2006) Discovering disease-genes by topological features in human  protein protein interaction network.
Bioinformatics, 22, 2800 2805.
Yilmaz,S.
(2007) Searching Candidate Genes for AICARDI Syndrome : Combining Experimental Approach and Bioinformatics.
PhD thesis, Université Henri Poincaré, Nancy 1.
Yilmaz,S.
et al.
(2007) Screening of subtle copy number changes in Aicardi syndrome patients with a high resolution X chromosome array-CGH.
Eur.
J. Med.
Genet., 50, 386 391.
Zhang,P.
et al.
(2006) Gene functional similarity search tool  (GFSST).
BMC  Bioinformatics, 7, 135.
236
