BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
25 no.
7 2009, pages 977 978  doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp081  Data and text mining OnTheFly: a tool for automated document-based text annotation, data linking and network generation Georgios A. Pavlopoulos1, , Evangelos Paﬁlis1, M. Kuhn1, Sean D. Hooper2 and Reinhard Schneider1 1Structural and Computational Biology Unit, EMBL Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg, Germany and 2Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute (DOE-JGI), Genome Biology Program, 2800 Mitchell Drive, Walnut Creek, CA 94598, USA Received on November 19, 2008  revised on February 2, 2009  accepted on February 7, 2009 Advance Access publication February 17, 2009 Associate Editor: Jonathan Wren  ABSTRACT OnTheFly is a web-based application that applies biological named entity recognition to enrich Microsoft Ofﬁce, PDF and plain text documents.
The input ﬁles are converted into the HTML format and then sent to the Reﬂect tagging server, which highlights biological entity names like genes, proteins and chemicals, and attaches to them JavaScript code to invoke a summary pop-up window.
The window provides an overview of relevant information about the entity, such as a protein description, the domain composition, a link to the 3D structure and links to other relevant online resources.
OnTheFly is also able to extract the bioentities mentioned in a set of ﬁles and to produce a graphical representation of the networks of the known and predicted associations of these entities by retrieving the information from the STITCH database.
Availability: http://ontheﬂy.embl.de, http://ontheﬂy.embl.de/FAQ.
html Contact: pavlopou@embl.de Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION Finding information about a biological entity is a step tightly bound to molecular biology research.
Despite ongoing efforts, this task is both tedious and time consuming, and tends to become a challenge as the amount of information increases steadily.
Currently available systems like Whatizit (Rebholz-Schuhmann et al., 2008), allow the user to paste a free text section into a web page, which then links the recognized biological entities to existing databases.
Our aim is to assist researchers with an easy-to-use interface which provides them with summary information about the biological entities mentioned in commonly used document types.
In this applications note, we present OnTheFly, a tool that allows automated tagging of proteins, genes and chemicals and interaction network generation from widely used ﬁles like PDF, Microsoft Ofﬁce ﬁles, as well as plain text ﬁles.
In the following sections, we describe the functionality and the architecture of OnTheFly and we comment on its performance.
To whom correspondence should be addressed.
We then demonstrate the functionality using a full text PDF article as an example.
2 FUNCTIONALITY OnTheFly is a service to automatically annotate document ﬁles such as Microsoft Word, Excel, Power Point, PDF or plain text ﬁles.
After submitting the ﬁles to the service, the system returns a tagged HTML version of the documents.
Gene, protein and chemical names are highlighted and by clicking on them the user activates a pop-up window which contains relevant the entity.
The presented information includes domains, sequence, organism, sub-cellular localization for proteins, formula for chemicals and protein chemical and chemical chemical interactions for both entity types.
This functionality is provided by the Reﬂect server (http://reﬂect.ws).
information about  OnTheFly can furthermore generate interaction networks for a set of bioentities (genes, proteins, chemicals) extracted from the STITCH database (Kuhn et al., 2008).
The user can select the preferred organism whose protein aliases will be used for the tagging and network generation  the default organism is set to Homo sapiens.
The size of the network and the number of interactors per recognized entity can be manually deﬁned by the user.
The network generation is not restricted to one document but can be applied to a set of documents simultaneously.
Lists, summarizing the identiﬁed bioentities are also generated.
These lists contain the ID of the bioentities together with the organism and description.
These summary results contain infor- mation about bioentities found in the set of the selected ﬁles.
The performance of the service can be assessed in a number of ways, such as the quality of the document conversion, the time required to tag a document and the accuracy of the annotation.
The used ﬁle converters are able to maintain most of the layout of the documents, including column separation, tables and ﬁgures.
The time to process a full text article of about 15 pages with images and tables ranges typically between 15 to 20 s. This time includes the whole process including the communication with the server.
The name tagging performance of the Reﬂect server is comparable to other available methods.
More information can be found under the FAQ section on the web server.
2009 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
G.A.Pavlopoulos et al.
Fig.
1.
The Figure shows an annotated table (A) of an PDF full text article (Pitre et al., 2006), the generated pop-up window with information about the protein YGL227W (B) and an automatically generated protein protein interaction network (C) of associated entities for the proteins shown in part (A).
For demonstration purposes, we isolated the table from the pdf ﬁle and processed the table separately.
(D) The architecture and the functionality.
Files get uploaded to OnTheFly server and they get converted into HTML.
Reﬂect server annotates the HTML ﬁle and sends back the annotated HTML to OnTheFly server.
A user can drag and drop ﬁles in the OnTheFly applet.
The  GO  button sends the selected documents to the conversion server that converts the according ﬁle formats into HTML pages, which will then be sent to the tagging server.
A URL pointing to the generated HTML document is returned.
The organism selection drop-down list enables users to deﬁne a species protein dictionary to be used by default.
The  Network  and  Summary  option will extract the STITCH derived networks of associations of the recognized entities in the document(s) and produce a summary page listing the recognized entities.
To demonstrate the functionality of OnTheFly a full text article on protein protein interaction predictions (Pitre et al., 2006) stored locally as a PDF ﬁle, has been processed.
Figure 1A below shows a table section of the resulting HTML ﬁle with the tagged protein identiﬁers.
Figure 1C shows the corresponding automatically retrieved association network of these entities using the STITCH database.
4 CONCLUDING REMARKS We hope the OnTheFly service provides a powerful tool for researchers in the life science ﬁeld.
It is an attractive tool, not only for readers of scientiﬁc literature, but also for data annotators and experimentalists who want to link their in-house documents to literature and other biological databases.
Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.
3 METHODS OnTheFly uses the client-server architecture shown in Figure 1.
The front end is an Applet written in Java 1.5.
It can be accessed directly either from the server web page or as a Java desktop application.
The Applet technology was chosen as it allows ﬁle drag-and-drop functionality and thus maximizes the ease of use.
The server side components consist of a set of document converters along with the software modules required to invoke the Reﬂect service for tagging.
The commercially available document converters currently employed (ultrashareware 2008  verypdf 2008) were selected based on their ability to maintain the layout of the original document, availability of a command line modus and their processing speed.
Any data exchange is based on the HTTP protocol.
REFERENCES Kuhn,M.
et al.
(2008) STITCH: interaction networks of chemicals and proteins.
Nucleic  Acids Res., 36, D684 D688.
Pitre,S.
et al.
(2006) PIPE: a protein protein interaction prediction engine based on the re-occurring short polypeptide sequences between known interacting protein pairs.
BMC Bioinformatics, 7, 365.
Rebholz-Schuhmann,D.
et al.
(2008) Text processing through Web services: calling  Whatizit.
Bioinformatics 24, 296 298.  ultrashareware.
(2008) Ultra  PPT To HTML Converter.
Available  at  http://www.ultrashareware.com/Ultra-PPT-To-HTML-Converter.htm.
verypdf.
(2008) PDF to HTML v2.0.
Available at http://www.verypdf.com/pdf2htm.
978
