BIOINFORMATICS  Vol.
25 ISMB 2009, pages i247 i252 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp209  Network-based prediction of metabolic enzymes  subcellular localization Shira Mintz-Oron1, , Asaph Aharoni1, Eytan Ruppin2,3 and Tomer Shlomi4,  1Department of Plant Sciences, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, 2School of Computer Science, 3School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978 and 4Faculty of Computer Science, Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel  ABSTRACT Motivation: Revealing the subcellular localization of proteins within membrane-bound compartments is of a major importance for inferring protein function.
Though current high-throughput localization experiments provide valuable data, they are costly and time-consuming, and due to technical difﬁculties not readily applicable for many Eukaryotes.
Physical characteristics of proteins, such as sequence targeting signals and amino acid composition are commonly used to predict subcellular localizations using computational approaches.
Recently it was shown that protein  protein interaction (PPI) networks can be used to signiﬁcantly improve the prediction accuracy of protein subcellular localization.
However, as high-throughput PPI data depend on costly high- throughput experiments and are currently available for only a few organisms, the scope of such methods is yet limited.
Results: This study presents a novel constraint-based method for predicting subcellular localization of enzymes based on their embedding metabolic network, relying on a parsimony principle of a minimal number of cross-membrane metabolite transporters.
In a cross-validation test of predicting known subcellular localization of yeast enzymes, the method is shown to be markedly robust, providing accurate localization predictions even when only 20% of is shown to outperform pathway enrichment-based methods both in terms of prediction accuracy and in its ability to predict the subcellular localization of entire metabolic pathways when no a-priori pathway-speciﬁc localization data is available (and hence enrichment methods are bound to fail).
With the number of available metabolic networks already reaching more than 600 and growing fast, the new method may signiﬁcantly contribute to the identiﬁcation of enzyme localizations in many different organisms.
Contact: shira.mintz@weizmann.ac.il  tomersh@cs.technion.ac.il  the known enzyme localizations are given as input.
It  1 INTRODUCTION Eukaryotic cells contain several membrane-bound compartments called organelles that perform specialized biological functions.
Subcellular compartmentalization allows the cell to maintain different environments that bring enzymes and substrates into physical proximity, participating in compartment-speciﬁc processes.
Revealing the subcellular localization of proteins is of a major importance for inferring protein functions (Huh et al., 2003) and for the discovery of drug targets (as some compartments are more easily accessible than others for drug molecules).
Systematic protein    To whom correspondence should be addressed.
localization experiments based on green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) tagging have been performed for several microbial species (Kumar et al., 2002  Matsuyama et al., 2006).
Such large-scale experiments are both costly and time-consuming, and due to technical difﬁculties are commonly not applicable to higher Eukaryotes.
Current limitations of experimental procedures for identifying protein subcellular localization have given rise to ongoing development of computational methods for predicting localization data (Bhasin and Raghava, 2004  Emanuelsson et al., 2000  Nakai and Horton, 1999  Scott et al., 2004  Shatkay et al., 2007).
Such methods rely on lists of features that characterize a protein, such as its amino acid composition, their physio-chemical and structural properties, codon-bias, protein motifs and targeting signals (short stretches of amino-acid residues predominantly located at the N-terminus).
The various localization methods apply different supervised classiﬁcation approaches (e.g.
artiﬁcial neural networks, nearest neighbor, SVM, etc.)
to predict protein subcellular localization based on training data of experimentally determined protein localization.
The performance of these methods signiﬁcantly varies between different organisms and compartments, requiring speciﬁc calibration in each context.
Recent studies have investigated a complementary approach for predicting subcellular localization, utilizing large-scale protein protein interaction (PPI) networks (Lee et al., 2008  Scott et al., 2005).
These methods are based on the assumption that two proteins should be localized within the same or adjacent compartments in order to interact.
The work of Lee et al.
has shown that in some cases, utilizing a PPI network may provide accurate localization predictions even without relying on common protein characteristics such as those described above.
This study presents the ﬁrst method that predicts the subcellular localization of enzymes based on a metabolic network.
Relying on a metabolic network rather than a PPI network is highly advantageous as metabolic networks are readily available for hundreds of species based on cross-species enzyme sequence homology (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000), while large-scale PPI networks depend on costly high- throughput experiments that are currently available for only a few organisms.
Metabolic enzymes are also less likely to yield PPI interactions (Uetz et al., 2000)  e.g.
the probability of a PPI between metabolic enzymes in yeast is less than half of the probability of an interaction between other non metabolic proteins (based on data extracted from the DIP database (Salwinski et al., 2004)).
Thus, PPI-based localization methods have far less data to bootstrap upon the localization of metabolic enzymes.
Yet, constraint-based modeling of metabolic networks was previously shown to predict strong functional associations between enzymes (Notebaart et al., 2008  Rokhlenko et al., 2007), and to successfully predict various    2009 The Author(s) This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[10:02 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp209.tex]  Page: i247  i247 i252   S.Mintz-Oron et al.
metabolic phenotypes in microorganisms [see Price et al.
(2004) for a review] and recently in human (Duarte et al., 2007  Shlomi et al., 2008).
Considering a metabolic network view of metabolic processes, the potential activity of an enzyme in a certain compartment depends on the activity of many other enzymes in the compartment synthesizing and degrading its substrate metabolites and on the activity of membrane transporters that move metabolites between compartments.
Indeed, metabolic processes tend to be clustered within various compartments without extensive usage of cross- membrane metabolite transporters.
For example, 36% and 47% of the metabolic pathways in yeast are conﬁned within only one or two compartments, respectively (based on pathway annotation data in the model of (Duarte et al., 2004).
This may be explained by the fact that the cross-membrane exchange of many of the metabolites depends on transporter proteins, imposing an energetic cost (e.g.
demanding an ATP or GTP molecule per each metabolite translocation (Palmieri et al., 2000) or requiring the maintenance of a membrane potential (Wada et al., 1987).
Accordingly, our method predicts the subcellular localization of enzymes relying on a parsimony principle of a minimal number of cross-membrane metabolite transports.
The utility of the method is demonstrated via a cross-validation test of predicting known subcellular localization of yeast enzymes.
2 METHODS We present a new constraint-based modeling (CBM) method for systematically predicting subcellular localization of enzymes in a metabolic network, based on a-priori localization data for a subset of the enzymes, relying on a parsimony principle of minimal number of cross-membrane metabolite exchange.
A schematic representation of the method is presented in Figure 1.
The input data for this method is a metabolic network, representing a set of enzyme-catalyzed reactions, and the known localization of a subset of the enzymes (Fig.
1a).
Enzymatic reactions whose subcellular localization is given as input are referred to as localized reactions.
We refer to the remaining reactions as non-localized reactions.
The ﬁrst step of our method involves the integration of the given metabolic network and the known localization data to construct an initial compartmentalized network (Fig.
1b).
This network consists of several compartments, in which localized reactions may be activated in the corresponding compartments, and non-localized reactions are duplicated to be present in all compartments.
Next, we apply a Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) method to compute a localization score for each pair of non-localized reaction and compartment, reﬂecting the likelihood of this reaction to be present in that compartment (Fig.
1c).
These scores are used to determine the localization of each non-localized reaction, which is the output of the method (Fig.
1d).
Next, we provide a brief overview on constraint-based modeling, followed by a detailed description of the various steps of our compartment prediction method.
2.1 Constraint-based modeling of metabolic networks A metabolic network consisting of n metabolites and m reactions can be represented by a stoichiometric matrix, denoted S, in which the Si,j represents the stoichiometric coefﬁcient of metabolite i in reaction j (Price et al., 2004).
A steady-state ﬂux distribution (i.e.
an assignment of ﬂux rates to all reactions in the network), denoted v, should satisfy the following mass-balance constraint:  S v=0  The exchange of metabolites with the environment is represented as a set of exchange reactions, enabling for a pre-deﬁned set of metabolites to  i248  (b)  Fig.
1.
A schematic representation of the enzyme subcellular localization prediction method.
(a) The input data is a metabolic network, representing a set of enzyme-catalyzed reactions, and the known localization data for a subset of enzymes.
Integrating the given network and localization data yields an initial compartmentalized network, consisting of several compartments.
Localized reactions appear in the corresponding compartments while the non-localized reactions are duplicated to all compartments.
(c) Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) is applied for each pair of non-localized reaction and compartment to calculate a localization score, reﬂecting the likelihood of this reaction to be present in that compartment.
(d) Enzymes are predicted to be localized in compartments achieving the highest localization scores.
be either taken-up or secreted from the growth media.
Available metabolite localization data can be incorporated within S, by considering each row as an instance of a metabolite in a speciﬁc compartment, and each column as a reaction that involves metabolites in speciﬁc compartments (Duarte et al., 2004).
In this case, additional transport reactions (incorporated as additional columns in S) are used to represent metabolite translocation across compartments.
In addition to mass-balance, a-priori data on reaction directionality can be used to enforce ﬂux rates to have positive values for  [10:02 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp209.tex]  Page: i248  i247 i252   Network-based prediction of metabolic enzymes  subcellular localization  non-reversible reactions.
In some cases, additional ﬂux capacity constraints are available and can be further applied.
The stoichiometric mass-balance, directionality and capacity constraints give rise to a space of feasible ﬂux distributions that has been analyzed by various optimization methods (Price et al., 2004).
2.2 Constructing an initial compartmentalized network We construct an initial compartmentalized network model with k compartments, in which (i) all metabolites are present in all k compartments  (ii) transport reactions enable metabolite exchange between cytoplasm and all k compartments.
We denote by  ti the transport reactions between the cytoplasm and compartment i  (iii) all reactions are present in all k compartments.
(iv) localized reactions can be activated (i.e.
carry non-zero ﬂux) only in their associated compartments, while non-localized reactions can be activated in all compartments.
We denote the set of compartments in which a localized reaction i can be activated by Ci.
In this model, a steady- state ﬂux distribution, v=( v1, v2,..., vk ,), should enforce the following stoichiometric mass-balance, ﬂux directionality and capacity constraints:   ti+ e  t1  S  v1= k(cid:2) i=2 S  vi =  ti, vmin   vi   vmax, ,  i,j Ci   0 and vi j  i=2 ... k  i=1...k j /  Ci  (1)  (2)  (3)  (4) where,  v1 denotes the ﬂux distribution in the cytoplasm, and  e denotes the set of enabled exchange reactions (i.e.
all zero, except for ones for exchange reactions) that move cytosolic metabolites across the model boundaries.
Equation (1) enforces mass-balance in the cytosol, where all metabolites may be transported to all other compartments, and a subset of them exchanged with the growth environment.
To enable the activation of a signiﬁcant fraction of the reactions in the network, we considered a rich media in which all exchange reactions in the network model are enabled.
Equation (2) enforces mass-balance for each compartment i.
Equation (3) enforces ﬂux directionality and capacity constraints, once available in the model.
Equation (4) restricts ﬂux activity of localized reactions only to their known compartments (for which the set of associated compartments Ci consists of at least a single compartment, i.e.
Ci   0).
2.3 A MILP optimization for predicting enzyme  localization scores  To predict a subcellular localization of non-localized reactions, we employ MILP to predict a feasible ﬂux distribution v in the initial compartmentalized network, in which: (i) a maximal number of localized reactions are activated (i.e.
carry non-zero ﬂux) in their known compartment, and (ii) a minimal number of transport reactions are activated.
The predicted ﬂux distribution is used to infer the localization score for each reaction and compartment pair, as described below.
To enable counting of the number of localized reactions that are correctly activated in the right compartments, for each localized reaction i and its known compartment j, we deﬁne Boolean auxiliary variables, yi,+ , representing whether reaction i indeed carries non-zero ﬂux in j either the forward or backward directions in compartment j, respectively [following (Shlomi et al., 2008)]:  ,yi,   j  +yi,+ vi j +yi,   (vmin,j ε)  vmin,j,  Ci   0 (vmax,j ε)  vmax,j,  Ci   0  j  vi j  j  (5)  (6)  where ε denotes a minimal ﬂux rate in which a reaction is considered as active.
We used ε=0.1, following previous studies (Shlomi et al., 2008), though other choices provided qualitatively similar results.
Using a similar method to count the number of activated transport reactions is  problematic as it requires k   n additional Boolean auxiliary variables, which is computationally intractable.
Instead, we employ a relaxation based on an L1 metric (Shlomi et al., 2005), minimizing the absolute value of ﬂuxes rate through transport reactions (which requires no additional Boolean variables).
The resulting objective function of our MILP formulation is hence:  max vi , yi,+, yi, , ti  m(cid:2)  j=1  (yi,+  j  +yi,   j  )  n(cid:2) j=1  p ti  j     (7)  where p denotes penalty per unit of ﬂux through a transport reaction.
We choose a penalty value satisfying p    1/(k n) (where k n equals the total number of transport reactions), such that the optimization criteria of maximizing the activity of localized reactions is given a higher priority over the optimization criteria of minimizing the activity of transport reactions.
Using this parameter, to ﬁrst, maximizing the number of localized reactions that are activated and only then, minimizing the ﬂux through transport reactions.
The transport of currency metabolites that participate in a high number of reactions in the network (above 20  e.g.
ATP, NADH, H2O) was not associated with a penalty score, as these metabolites are assumed to be present in all compartments.
The commercial CPLEX solver was used for solving MILP problems, on a Pentium-4 machine running Linux in dozens of seconds per problem.
the optimization problem is equivalent  Once an optimal ﬂux distribution is computed via our MILP formulation, the localization of enzymes can be predicted based on their ﬂux activity in various compartments.
However, due to the existence of alternative pathways in the network, alternative optimal ﬂux distributions may exist, resulting in different localization predictions in each case.
To handle such alternative MILP solutions we employ a method similar to ﬂux variability analysis (FVA) (Mahadevan and Schilling, 2003).
Speciﬁcally, for each non-localized reaction i and compartment j, we compute an optimal ﬂux distribution using the above MILP method, while forcing the reaction to have non-zero ﬂux speciﬁcally in that compartment.
The resulting optimization value is referred to as the localization score.
In the cross-validation tests described below, we predict for each non-localized enzyme either one or two compartments (based on the actual number of compartments the reaction is known to be localized to), by considering the compartments achieving the highest localization scores.
In case of an enzyme having the same optimal localization score for both cytoplasm and another compartment, the enzyme is predicted to be localized in the other compartment (to avoid bias due to the large size of the cytoplasm in which reaction activation is a-priori more likely to require a lower number of transporters).
When the same localization score is obtained for more than two compartments, we provide no localization prediction for that enzyme (lowering the prediction coverage).
2.4 An illustrative example of enzyme subcellular  localization predictions  An illustrative example of the prediction method is depicted in Figure 2.
In this example, the metabolic network contains 11 metabolites, 8 enzymatic reactions and 4 exchange reactions.
The initial compartmentalized network is shown in the ﬁgure, depicting three compartments (cytoplasm, compartment- A, compartment-B), and transport reactions for metabolites between cytoplasm and the two other compartments.
Localized reactions, given as input, are marked with thick edges (R2, R4, R6 and R8), while non-localized reactions (R1, R3, R5 and R7), whose localizations we wish to predict, appear in all three compartments.
We applied our MILP method to predict an optimal ﬂux distribution for this example, and show the derived ﬂux distribution within the network (i.e.
marking activated, non-zero ﬂux, reactions).
As shown, the ﬂux distribution spans all three compartments, starting from the uptake of metabolite M1 and M10 from the growth environment, and ending with the secretion of metabolites M5 and M9.
Reactions R1 and R5 are predicted to be localized to compartment-A, as the transport of a single metabolite M1 into the compartment enables the production of metabolites M2 and M7, required for activating reactions R2 and R6 in this compartment.
Reaction R7 is predicted  i249  [10:02 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp209.tex]  Page: i249  i247 i252   S.Mintz-Oron et al.
Fig.
2.
An illustrative example of our method for enzyme subcellular compartment prediction.
The initial compartmentalized network consists of three compartments, with instances of 11 metabolites and 8 reactions in each compartment.
Thin edges connecting different instances of a metabolite in various compartments represent transport reactions that move metabolites across membrane boundaries.
Wide arrows represent localized reactions whose known localization is given as input to the prediction method.
Solid arrows represent reactions that are predicted to have non-zero ﬂux by our method reﬂecting their predicted localization.
Dashed arrows represent reactions predicted to have zero ﬂux.
to be localized in the cytoplasm, as its substrate M11 is produced by R8 solely in the cytoplasm, and hence activating R7 in a different compartment would require an unnecessary transport of M11 out of the cytoplasm.
An example in which the method cannot uniquely predict the localization of a certain reaction is in the case of reaction R3 that produces metabolite M4 from M3.
Activation of the localized reaction R4 in compartment-B requires that its substrate metabolite M4 would be present in this compartment.
Metabolite M3 is produced solely in compartment-A, and hence reaction R3 can be activated in compartment-A (with M4 being transported via two transporters to compartment-B), or M3 can be transported to the cytoplasm or to compartment-B and R3 activated in the cytoplasm or compartment-B, respectively.
In all three cases, the activation of R4 in compartment-B would have the same total cost of activating two transport reactions.
3 RESULTS 3.1 Validating the localization prediction via a  metabolic network of Saccharomyces cerevisiae  To evaluate the performance of our method, we applied it to predict enzyme localization for metabolic enzymes in the yeast S.cerevisiae.
Both the metabolic network and subcellular localization data for S.cerevisiae are available within the genome-scale, fully compartmentalized metabolic network model of (Duarte et al., 2004).
This network model accounts for 750 genes, 1062 metabolites and 1149 reactions, acting in seven compartments: cytosol, mitochondrion, peroxisome, nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, golgi apparatus, and vacuole.
The cytosol is the largest compartment, consisting of 65% of the total metabolic reactions, followed by the mitochondrion, consisting of 16% of the reactions.
i250  Fig.
3.
Accuracy (a) and coverage (b) of enzyme subcellular localization predictions in a cross-validation test in the yeast S.cerevisiae.
The average and standard error of the accuracy and coverage measures were calculated based on 10 applications of the prediction methods over randomly sampled sets of localized enzymes of similar size that are used as input.
To evaluate our method, we ﬁrst removed all existing localization data from the network model of Duarte et al., forming a new stochiometric matrix with a single merged compartment that can be given as input to our prediction method.
Then, we applied a cross-validation test, in which we randomly partitioned the enzymes to localized and non-localized sets and applied our method to predict the localization of the non-localized enzymes, given the localized enzymes and the metabolic network.
For the non-localized enzymes, we assumed that prior knowledge (obtained for example, via sequence-based prediction methods such as those described above) narrows down the list of potential localizations of enzymes to one out of four compartments, and hence restricts the activity of non-localized reactions in the model to three randomly chosen compartments in addition to the correct compartment.
The speciﬁc choice of restricting non-localized reactions to four compartments was made based on a comprehensive analysis of ten prediction methods applied to Arabidopsis thaliana, which showed that over 90% of its enzymes are predicted to be localized to no more than four compartments (Heazlewood et al., 2007).
To further evaluate the performance of our method, we compare it with an enrichment-based method that predicts subcellular localization based on an assumption that pathways are coherently localized in various compartments.
Speciﬁcally, for each non-localized reaction participating in a certain pathway we compute a hyper-geometric p-value reﬂecting the pathway s enrichment with enzymes localized within each compartment.
The localization of the reaction is predicted based on the compartment that yields the lowest p-value.
The metabolic pathway data was also obtained from the metabolic network model of Duarte et al.
The accuracy and coverage of our method in comparison with the enrichment-based method, for various fractions of localized enzymes input sets, are shown in Figure 3.
Since the known distribution of enzyme compartment localization is signiﬁcantly skewed towards the cytoplasm, we present the accuracy and coverage statistics separately for cytosolic reactions and non- cytosolic reactions (showing that our method correctly predicts localization in both cases).
The accuracy of our method is markedly  [10:02 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp209.tex]  Page: i250  i247 i252   Network-based prediction of metabolic enzymes  subcellular localization  robust, remaining above 78% for both cytosolic and non-cytosolic reactions when the percentage of given localized reactions is as low as 20%.
The coverage shows a moderate decline from 88% and 79% for cytosolic and non-cytosolic reactions, respectively, given the 80% localized reactions as input, towards 78% and 63% in the case of 20% localized reactions.
This decline in coverage is quite expected, as when the set of localized reactions used as input is small, many reactions have the same likelihood of being active in various compartments.
The pathway enrichment-based method constantly achieves a markedly lower accuracy (except for the case in which only 20% localized reactions are used as input in which its coverage is minute), especially for the prediction of cytosolic enzymes.
The coverage of this method shows a slight advantage over our network-based approach for high fractions of localized reactions used as input.
However, the pathway enrichment-based method is shown to be highly non-robust when the fraction of given localized reactions decreases when it reaches 20% its coverage signiﬁcantly drops to below 10%.
The failure of the pathway enrichment-based method to match our network-based approach is somewhat expected, considering that many metabolic pathways do cross compartmental boundaries (as discussed above) and as it does not account for pathways intersection as shown below.
3.2 An example of predicting the subcellular  localization of complete pathways  We further tested our method in predicting subcellular localization for a set of enzymes with unknown localization that covers two complete pathways.
In such cases, a-priori localization data is not available for any enzyme in a certain pathway, and hence pathway enrichment-based methods are bound to fail, requiring a network- based view of pathways connectivity.
Speciﬁcally, we aim to predict the localization of a group of enzymes composing the TCA cycle and the glyoxylate cycle, given the known localization all of the remaining enzymes in the network (Fig.
4).
The set of enzymes to predict consist of 12 reactions: three ethanol fermentation reactions (with isozymes localized to both cytoplasm and mitochondria), four TCA cycle reactions (only in mitochondria  referred to as mitochondria-speciﬁc TCA cycle reactions), two glyoxylate cycle reactions [one in both peroxisome and cytosol and another only in cytosol) and three reactions involving both gloxylate and TCA (with isozymes localized in all three compartments  (Regev-Rudzki et al., 2005)].
The three reactions involved in the ethanol oxidation pathway are correctly predicted to be localized both in the cytosol and mitochondria.
The four mitochondria-speciﬁc TCA cycle reactions are correctly predicted to be localized in mitochondria and the three reactions involving both gloxylate and TCA pathways are correctly predicted to be localized in all three compartments.
The glyoxylate reaction localized to both peroxisome and cytosol is correctly predicted to be localized in the cytosol, though its second most likely localization is falsely predicted to be mitochondria, while only its third predicted localization is peroxisome.
A similar problem arises with the localization prediction of the glyoxylate reaction that is known to be localized only in the cytosol, where the method predicts a most likely mitochondrial localization.
The two false predictions for these reactions result from the utilization of their substrate metabolites also in mitochondria.
However, in both cases, the next most likely localization prediction given by our method is the correct one.
localization prediction of  Fig.
4.
Enzyme subcellular two complete metabolic pathways, including the TCA cycle (black rectangles) and glyoxylate cycle (grey rectangles), and a subset of the ethanol oxidation pathway (white rectangles), given localization data for enzymes in other connected pathways (white ellipses) as input.
Transport reactions are marked by dotted arrows.
3.3 Validating emergent subcellular localization  predictions via GO annotation  Following the cross-validation test, we turned to predict novel subcellular localizations of enzymes in the metabolic network.
Towards this goal, we re-ran our method on the same network in a leave-one-out cross validation setup, in which localization data for all reactions but one was used to predict the localization of that single reaction.
We found that our method predicts a non- cytosolic localization for 22 reactions in the model although they are localized in the model to the cytosol.
Inspecting the GO cellular localization annotation for these reactions revealed that the localization of 10 out of the 22 was correctly predicted.
This prediction accuracy is statistically signiﬁcant (p   0.05) compared with a random assignment of genes to compartments (with an assignment probability for each compartment relative to its size in GO).
(dihydrosphingosine C-4  hydroxylase), catalyze  An example of such emergent  localization predictions that are not accounted for in the model is the case of enzymes SUR2 and TSC10 (3-ketosphinganine reductase), which consecutive reactions in the ceramide biosynthesis pathway.
Ceramides are formed as the key intermediates in the biosynthesis of sphingolipids, essential components of the plasma membrane.
This pathway is known to be accomplished by ER enzymes, some of which can also be localized to the cytosol (Natter et al., 2005).
SUR2 is known to be localized exclusively to the ER, although mistakenly it in the model.
TSC10 is experimentally localized to both the ER and the cytosol, though again, mistakenly it is localized in the model only to the cytosol.
Our method predicts the correct localization of both enzymes in the ER.
is localized strictly to the cytosol  4 DISCUSSION This study presents a novel constraint-based modeling method for predicting subcellular localization of enzymes embedded in a  i251  [10:02 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp209.tex]  Page: i251  i247 i252   S.Mintz-Oron et al.
metabolic network.
While constraint-based modeling was previously employed to predict many different metabolic phenotypes, this is the ﬁrst application of this approach to predict subcellular localization.
The method is based on a parsimonious principle of minimal number of metabolite transports across compartments a novel concept in the context of metabolic network analysis, which enables the prediction of plausible ﬂux distributions that are clustered within various compartments, but does not strictly enforce such a clustering in a  hard-wired  manner.
relying on metabolic networks  While previous methods have used PPI networks to improve is localization predictions, advantageous as metabolic networks are readily available for hundreds of species.
Another advantage is in regard to the prediction of metabolic enzyme localization, as metabolic enzymes are less likely to yield PPIs.
However, an evaluation of the performance of PPI-based localization prediction methods when applied strictly to metabolic enzymes has yet to be performed.
An inherent limitation of metabolic network-based localization prediction is that it is strictly limited to metabolic enzymes.
Furthermore, we note that our method is computationally more demanding than common methods that rely on standard supervised classiﬁcation approaches, requiring multiple mixed integer optimizations.
We intend to apply this method to predict subcellular localizations in other organisms in which the true localization is unknown.
For example, in the plant model organism A.thaliana for which experimentally determined localization data is available for only 50% of the metabolic enzymes (Heazlewood et al., 2007).
Different aspects of protein s localization can be explored using this method, such as the dependency of localization on various growth media (John et al., 2006).
While here we rely on this principle of minimal metabolite exchange to partition a network to its subcellular compartments, future research may employ the same principle to partition metabolic networks into different subsystems.
For example, with the availability of a genome-scale human metabolic network model, a similar approach may be used to partition it to various tissue-speciﬁc subsystems.
Or in the realm of meta-genomics, similar approaches may be used to partition a metabolic network of population of species to species-speciﬁc subsystems.
Funding: Israeli Science Foundation grant (to E.R.)
A.A. is the incumbent of the Adolpho and Evelyn Blum Career Development Chair of Cancer Research  the work in the Aharoni laboratory was supported by Mrs Louise Gartner, Dallas, TX and Mr and Mrs Mordechai Segal, Israel.
Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES Bhasin,M.
and Raghava,G.P.
(2004) ESLpred: SVM-based method for subcellular localization of eukaryotic proteins using dipeptide composition and PSI-BLAST.
Nucleic Acids Res., 32, W414 W419.
Duarte,N.C.
et al.
(2007) Global reconstruction of the human metabolic network based on genomic and bibliomic data.
Proc.
Natl Acad.
Sci.
USA, 104, 1777 1782.
Duarte,N.C.
et al.
(2004) Reconstruction and validation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae iND750, a fully compartmentalized genome-scale metabolic model.
Genome Res., 14, 1298 1309.
Emanuelsson,O.
et al.
(2000) Predicting subcellular localization of proteins based on  their N-terminal amino acid sequence.
J. Mol.
Biol., 300, 1005 1016.
Heazlewood,J.L.
et al.
(2007) SUBA: the Arabidopsis Subcellular Database.
Nucleic  Acids Res., 35, D213 D218.
Huh,W.K.
et al.
(2003) Global analysis of protein localization in budding yeast.
Nature,  425, 686 691.
John,M.
et al.
(2006) Growth substrate dependent localization of tetrachloroethene reductive dehalogenase in Sulfurospirillum multivorans.
Arch.
Microbiol., 186, 99 106.
Kanehisa,M.
and Goto,S.
(2000) KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 27 30.
Kumar,A.
et al.
(2002) Subcellular localization of the yeast proteome.
Genes Dev., 16,  707 719.
Lee,K.
et al.
(2008) Protein networks markedly improve prediction of subcellular  localization in multiple eukaryotic species.
Nucleic Acids Res, 36, e136.
Mahadevan,R.
and Schilling,C.H.
(2003) The effects of alternate optimal solutions in  constraint-based genome-scale metabolic models.
Metab.
Eng., 5, 264 276.
Matsuyama,A.
et al.
(2006) ORFeome cloning and global analysis of protein localization in the ﬁssion yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
Nat.
Biotechnol., 24, 841 847.
Nakai,K.
and Horton,P.
(1999) PSORT: a program for detecting sorting signals in proteins and predicting their subcellular localization.
Trends Biochem.
Sci., 24, 34 36.
Natter,K.
et al.
(2005) The spatial organization of lipid synthesis in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae derived from large scale green ﬂuorescent protein tagging and high resolution microscopy.
Mol.
Cell Proteomics, 4, 662 672.
Notebaart,R.A.
et al.
(2008) Co-regulation of metabolic genes is better explained by  ﬂux coupling than by network distance.
PLoS Comput.
Biol., 4, e26.
Palmieri,L.
et al.
(2000) Yeast mitochondrial carriers: bacterial expression, biochemical identiﬁcation and metabolic signiﬁcance.
J. Bioenerg.
Biomembr., 32, 67 77.
Price,N.D.
et al.
(2004) Genome-scale models of microbial cells: evaluating the  consequences of constraints.
Nat.
Rev.
Microbiol., 2, 886 897.
Regev-Rudzki,N.
et al.
(2005) Yeast aconitase in two locations and two metabolic pathways: seeing small amounts is believing.
Mol.
Biol.
Cell, 16, 4163 4171.
Rokhlenko,O.
et al.
(2007) Constraint-based functional similarity of metabolic genes:  going beyond network topology.
Bioinformatics, 23, 2139 2146.
Salwinski,L.
et al.
(2004) The Database of Interacting Proteins: 2004 update.
Nucleic  Acids Res., 32, D449 D451.
Scott,M.S.
et al.
(2004) Predicting subcellular  localization via protein motif  co-occurrence.
Genome Res., 14, 1957 1966.
Scott,M.S.
et al.
(2005) Reﬁning protein subcellular localization.
PLoS Comput.
Biol.,  1, e66.
Shatkay,H.
et al.
(2007) SherLoc: high-accuracy prediction of protein subcellular localization by integrating text and protein sequence data.
Bioinformatics, 23, 1410 1417.
Shlomi,T.
et al.
(2005) Regulatory on/off minimization of metabolic ﬂux changes after  genetic perturbations.
Proc.
Natl Acad.
Sci.
USA, 102, 7695 7700.
Shlomi,T.
et al.
(2008) Network-based prediction of human tissue-speciﬁc metabolism.
Nat.
Biotechnol., 26, 1003 1010.
Uetz,P.
et al.
(2000) A comprehensive analysis of protein-protein interactions in  Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Nature, 403, 623 627.
Wada,Y.
et al.
(1987) Vacuolar ion channel of the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
J. Biol.
Chem., 262, 17260 17263.  i252  [10:02 15/5/2009 Bioinformatics-btp209.tex]  Page: i252  i247 i252
