BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
25 no.
19 2009, pages 2607 2608  doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp450  Sequence analysis ShortRead: a bioconductor package for input, quality assessment and exploration of high-throughput sequence data Martin Morgan1, , Simon Anders2, Michael Lawrence1, Patrick Aboyoun1, Hervé Pagès1 and Robert Gentleman1 1Program in Computational Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA and 2European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Hinxton, Cambridge, UK Received on April 16, 2009  revised on June 23, 2009  accepted on July 15, 2009 Advance Access publication August 3, 2009 Associate Editor: Dmitrij Frishman  ABSTRACT Summary: ShortRead is a package for input, quality assessment, manipulation and output of high-throughput sequencing data.
ShortRead is provided in the R and Bioconductor environments, allowing ready access to additional facilities for advanced statistical analysis, data transformation, visualization and integration with diverse genomic resources.
Availability and Implementation: This package is implemented in R and available at the Bioconductor web site  the package contains a  vignette  outlining typical work ﬂows.
Contact: mtmorgan@fhcrc.org  High-throughput DNA sequencing technologies include Illumina (Solexa) (Bentley et al., 2008), Roche 454 (Torres et al., 2008) and other platforms.
These technologies produce millions of DNA sequences of tens to hundreds of nucleotides each.
Biological questions addressed with this data include SNP calling, ChIP- seq (Mardis, 2007), and RNA-seq (Mortazavi et al., 2008).
of  We  part  introduce  the ShortRead package,  the Bioconductor (Gentleman et al., 2004) project.
ShortRead extends Bioconductor with tools useful in the initial stages of short-read DNA sequence analysis.
Main functionalities include data input, quality assessment, data transformation and access to downstream analysis opportunities.
ShortRead is an important gateway to use of Bioconductor for processing high-throughput DNA sequence data.
1 AVAILABLE FUNCTIONALITY 1.1 Input and output ShortRead provides mechanisms for input of diverse high- throughput sequence data.
A major starting point is reads aligned to references, as from manufacturer software or aligners such as MAQ (Li et al., 2008) and Bowtie (Langmead et al., 2009).
ShortRead parses additional formats (e.g.
fasta, fastq and arbitrary column-oriented text ﬁles).
Resulting R data structures allow manipulation of sequence, quality, alignment and other information.
Input functions transparently parse compressed (.gz) ﬁles  most ﬁle types can be read as  chunks , to allow processing of data     To whom correspondence should be addressed.
subsets.
ShortRead inputs but does not specially represent ﬁne- grained alignment descriptions (e.g.
in Stockholm format).
Facilities for data output include fasta and fastq text formats, arbitrary column- oriented output of reads and auxiliary information, serialization of objects in native R format, and through use of additional R packages such as rtracklayer export to common genome browser formats such as wiggle, bed and gff (Kuhn et al., 2008).
(QA) of  1.2 Quality assessment ShortRead includes facilities for assessment read quality, sample processing and sequencing artifacts, and alignment characteristics.
The QA pipeline can start with base calls and their quality scores (e.g.
fastq or qseq ﬁles), as well as aligned data formats from special-purpose aligners.
The result is an HTML report with embedded narrative to facilitate interpretation  a sample report is included with the package.
Illustrative results are shown in Figure 1.
Highlights include: (i) The number of raw, ﬁltered and aligned reads  (ii) Base call frequencies.
(iii) Cycle-speciﬁc base calls and read qualities (e.g.
Fig.
1A).
(iv) Tabulation of read occurrences twice,  , n times).
For (how often reads are represented once, instance, reads occurring once or a few times (to the left in Fig.
1B) may be unique due to base call errors, whereas reads occurring very frequently (at the extreme right in Fig.
1B) typically reﬂect PCR or resequencing issues.
(v) Preliminary alignment quality score summaries.
Technology-speciﬁc quality measures are also generated, especially for Illumina s Genome Analyzer (e.g.
tile-speciﬁc read counts and qualities).
1.3 Transformation and downstream analysis ShortRead provides facilities for data exploration, transformation, and down-stream analysis.
For example, alphabetByCycle summarizes cycle-speciﬁc nucleotide counts (Fig.
1A) and base qualities.
The alphabetFrequency function summarizes nucleotide use over all cycles, on a per-read basis or over the entire set of reads.
The tables summarizes commonly occurring sequences, as illustrated in Figure 1B.
ShortRead contains facilities for sorting reads, ﬁnding duplicates, trimming left and right ends and for exploiting the extensive string pattern matching functions of Biostrings.
The features described here are generally fast, operating on tens of millions of short reads in a few seconds  input of large text ﬁles    The Author(s) 2009.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.5/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[15:12 31/8/2009 Bioinformatics-btp450.tex]  Page: 2607  2607 2608   M.Morgan et al.
A  A  C  G  T  B  SRR001985  ϕX174  ) t  n u o C  (     0 1  g o  l  6.0  5.5  n o  i t r o p o r p     e v i t  l  a u m u C  1.0  0.8  0.6  0.4  0.2  0.0  0  30  10  20 Cycle  0  1  2  3  4  Occurrences (log10)  Fig.
1.
Quality assessment.
(A) Unlikely directional nucleotide change and base calls (cycle 26) from a Short Read Archive accession.
(B) Left and right  tails  correspond to infrequently and highly repeated reads, respectively, in a ϕX174 control lane.
can be slow, taking 3 5 min for 50 million 36mers.
Sixty-four bit platforms with 4 8 GB of memory are typically sufﬁcient.
ShortRead provides extensible  ﬁlter  functions for removing short reads satisfying predeﬁned or ad hoc criteria.
For instance, the dustyFilter identiﬁes and removes low-complexity reads.
Filters can be composed to formulate complex criteria.
Additional ShortRead functionality is a starting point for downstream analysis.
The function coverage summarizes [possibly  extended , see Kharchenko et al.
(2008)] alignments as vectors tallying the number of reads over each nucleotide in the reference.
ShortRead is one of several Bioconductor packages for sequence analysis.
Biostrings has ﬂexible tools for pattern matching, sequence alignment and manipulation.
BSgenome provides facilities for representing and efﬁciently manipulating whole genomes.
range-based and other expressive representations.
rtracklayer provides an interface to genome browsers from within R sessions.
IRanges provides  1.4 Advanced features The ShortRead package includes advanced features for handling large resequencing data.
In particular the large volume of data and generation in  lanes  encourages a  block  processing style.
For instance much of the QA functionality of ShortRead can be conducted on a per-lane basis.
The srapply function exploits this work ﬂow.
A typical use takes a list of ﬁle names and a function to be applied to the ﬁle.
srapply applies the function to each ﬁle.
Usually the function reduces the data volume in the ﬁle, e.g.
from  a large collection of reads to a compact summary of lane quality.
The distinguishing feature of srapply is that the calculation is distributed across processors or nodes in a computer cluster, if such resources exist.
2 CONCLUSIONS This note introduces the Bioconductor ShortRead package for analysis of resequencing data.
The package allows input into R of diverse sequence-related ﬁles, and output of common data formats.
It provides quality assessment tools and HTML-based report-generating functionality.
ShortRead data structures allow convenient manipulation of data, such as ﬁltering reads based on sequence characteristics.
The package work ﬂow represents an entry point for down-stream analysis using Bioconductor or other software.
Future plans include improved support for longer and paired-end reads, and development of additional quantitative measures of quality  the challenge of incorporating the SOLiD color space model into standard work ﬂows precludes support for this format beyond that available from data transformed to sequence and Phred-like quality scores.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We are grateful participants for their helpful input.
to early adopters and Bioconductor course  Funding: National Human Genome Research Institute (grant P41HG004059 R.G.)
EU (Research and Training Network  Chromatin Plasticity  to S.A).
Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES Bentley,D.R.
et al.
(2008) Accurate whole human genome sequencing using reversible  terminator chemistry.
Nature, 456, 53 59.
Gentleman,R.C.
et al.
(2004) Bioconductor: open software development  for  computational biology and bioinformatics.
Genome Biol., 5, R80.
Kharchenko,P.V.
et al.
(2008) Design and analysis of chip-seq experiments for DNA-  binding protiens.
Nat.
Biotechnol., 12, 1351 1359.
Kuhn,R.M.
et al.
(2008) The UCSC genome browser database: update 2009.
Nucleic  Acids Res., 37, D755 D761.
Langmead,B.
et al.
(2009) Ultrafast and memory-efﬁcient alignment of short DNA  sequences to the human genome.
Genome Biol., 10, R25.
Li,H.
et al.
(2008) Mapping short DNA sequencing reads and calling variants using  mapping quality scores.
Genome Res., 18, 1851 1858.
Mardis,E.R.
(2007) ChIP-seq: welcome to the new frontier.
Nat.
Methods, 4, 613 614.
Mortazavi,A.
et al.
(2008) Mapping and quantifying mammalian transcriptomes by  RNA-Seq.
Nat.
Methods, 5, 621 628.
Torres,T.T.
et al.
(2008) Gene expression proﬁling by massively parallel sequencing.
Genome Res., 18, 172 177.
2608  [15:12 31/8/2009 Bioinformatics-btp450.tex]  Page: 2608  2607 2608
