BIOINFORMATICS  Vol.
26 ISMB 2010, pages i399 i406 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq185  Open MS/MS spectral library search to identify unanticipated post-translational modiﬁcations and increase spectral identiﬁcation rate Ding Ye1,2, Yan Fu1, , Rui-Xiang Sun1, , Hai-Peng Wang1,2, Zuo-Fei Yuan1,2, Hao Chi1,2 and Si-Min He1 1Institute of Computing Technology and Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190 and 2Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China  In this article, we present an open spectral  ABSTRACT Motivation: Identiﬁcation of post-translationally modiﬁed proteins has become one of the central issues of current proteomics.
Spectral library search is a new and promising computational approach to mass spectrometry-based protein identiﬁcation.
However, its potential in identiﬁcation of unanticipated post-translational modiﬁcations has rarely been explored.
The existing spectral library search tools are designed to match the query spectrum to the reference library spectra with the same peptide mass.
Thus, spectra of peptides with unanticipated modiﬁcations cannot be identiﬁed.
Results: library search tool, named pMatch.
It extends the existing library search algorithms in at least three aspects to support the identiﬁcation of unanticipated modiﬁcations.
First, the spectra in library are optimized with the full peptide sequence information to better tolerate the peptide fragmentation pattern variations caused by some modiﬁcation(s).
Second, a new scoring system is devised, which uses charge-dependent mass shifts for peak matching and combines a probability-based model with the general spectral dot-product for scoring.
Third, a target-decoy strategy is used for false discovery rate control.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of pMatch, a library search experiment was conducted on a public dataset with over 40 000 spectra in comparison with SpectraST, the most popular library search engine.
Additional validations were done on four published datasets including over 150 000 spectra.
The results showed that pMatch can effectively identify unanticipated modiﬁcations and signiﬁcantly increase spectral identiﬁcation rate.
Availability: http://pﬁnd.ict.ac.cn/pmatch/ Contact: yfu@ict.ac.cn  rxsun@ict.ac.cn Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION Liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is the key experimental method for large-scale protein identiﬁcation.
In this method, proteins are digested into peptides, which are then ionized and dissociated in a mass spectrometer.
The mass-to-charge ratios (m/z) and the intensities of the resulting product ions are measured to produce MS/MS spectra.
To identify the peptides and proteins, sequence database search has achieved great success in the past years, and a variety of search tools have been developed, e.g.
SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994), Mascot (Perkins et al.,    To whom correspondence should be addressed.
1999) and pFind (Fu et al., 2004).
Such an approach is implemented by comparing the similarities between the experimental spectra and the theoretical spectra predicted from peptide sequences in a database.
Unfortunately, due to insufﬁcient understanding of the factors that determine peptide fragmentation, most current search tools employ simpliﬁed fragmentation models, such as the uniform backbone dissociation model, leading to many unidentiﬁed or misidentiﬁed spectra.
In recent years, with the availability of millions of conﬁdently identiﬁed MS/MS spectra, an alternative as well as complementary approach called spectral library search has emerged.
Its essential idea is to build a library of experimental reference spectra rather than theoretically predicted ones.
Since this approach was ﬁrst introduced to the ﬁeld of protein identiﬁcation by Yates et al.
(1998), the last decade has witnessed a group of mass spectral library search tools, such as SpectraST (Lam et al., 2007, 2008), NIST MSPepSearch (http://peptide.nist.gov/), BiblioSpec (Frewen et al., 2006), X!Hunter (Craig et al., 2006), ProMEX (Hummel et al., 2007), HMMatch (Wu et al., 2007) and MSDash (Wu et al., 2008).
Compared to the sequence database search, the spectral library search takes advantage of the previously obtained knowledge and has three obvious merits.
First, improved sensitivity.
Spectral library search takes into account the fragmentation pattern individually for each experimental spectrum.
It yields more discriminative match scores than does the sequence database search.
Second, high search speed.
Experiments show that in shotgun proteomics some peptides are detected all the time while some are never (Lam et al., 2008).
Thus a well-organized spectral library consisting of empirically observed experimental spectra permits a smaller and more accurate search space.
Third, convenient identiﬁcation of extraordinary spectra, such as those produced from peptides with unusual post- translational modiﬁcations (PTMs).
These spectra are big challenges to sequence database search engines, but could be identiﬁed as easily as the ordinary ones by spectral library search (Craig et al., 2006  Hummel et al., 2007  Lam et al., 2007  Wu et al., 2007).
Apparently, the above merits are based on reliable and comprehensive spectral libraries.
One of the main obstacles is library coverage (Lam et al., 2007  Yates et al., 1998).
Many efforts have been made on library constructions, such as NIST (http://peptide.nist.gov/) and PeptideAtlas (http://www.peptideatlas.org/speclib/).
However, it remains difﬁcult considering that PTMs may generate substantial modiﬁed forms of a peptide.
Note that there have been hundreds of known modiﬁcations (e.g.
512 entries recorded in the RESID modiﬁcation database by February 26, 2010) and only a few of them, e.g.
phosphorylation, were extensively studied in the past.
The Author(s) 2010.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[12:21 12/5/2010 Bioinformatics-btq185.tex]  Page: i399 i399 i406   D.Ye et al.
In fact, PTM mapping has become the central issue of current proteomics.
The conventional sequence database search approach meets inevitable difﬁculties in PTM-centric data analysis, since the PTM types have to be explicitly speciﬁed by users.
In this case, not only are some possible unanticipated PTMs missed, but also the number of the PTMs considered has to be restricted to avoid combinatorial explosion of theoretical peptides in all possible modiﬁed forms.
To solve these problems, the mode of open search has been proposed, in which the peptide precursor ion mass tolerance is largely expanded and one or more modiﬁcation masses are inferred to compensate for the peptide mass difference (Chen et al., 2009  Tsur et al., 2005).
Such an approach does not require specifying PTM types and is able to identify spectra from peptides with unanticipated PTMs, though it still has some defects to overcome (e.g.
low search speed).
Also, Bandeira et al.
(2007) developed a database- independent algorithm, named Spectral-Networks, to detect spectral pairs produced from modiﬁed and unmodiﬁed versions of the same peptide and identify the unanticipated modiﬁcations by propagating spectral annotations in the networks of related spectral pairs.
However, the potential of applying the same idea to the spectral library search had not been explored until very recently.
Ahrne et al.
(2009) proposed a workﬂow to combine open library search with sequence database search to increase spectral identiﬁcation rate, but the library search engine they used was not deliberately designed for the open search mode.
Besides, a spectral matching algorithm Bonanza is sometimes considered as an open library search tool (Falkner et al., 2008  Menschaert et al., 2009), but it was actually devised in a clustering framework and it is unknown whether the methods in it are directly applicable to general library search, such as the method for false discovery rate (FDR) control.
There are three key issues that have to be addressed when designing an open library search tool.
The ﬁrst one is the shifted m/z values of the product ions carrying PTMs.
One solution to this issue lies in the proper use of precursor ion mass differences between the spectral pairs to be matched  that is, the mass differences should be considered as the potential PTM masses, as done by some open sequence database search engines, e.g.
PTMap (Chen et al., 2009).
However, none of the current library search algorithms has considered it.
Although Bonanza does allow a mass shift equal to the mass difference when matching product ion peaks, the mass shift value is roughly determined without considering the charge states of product ions.
The second issue is how to use the sequence information behind library spectra.
Although some of the current library search algorithms have tried some ways to use the sequence information by annotating the explained peaks in library spectra, they do not make the best of it, especially for scoring.
Usually, only a proportion of the theoretical product ions are observed in an experimental spectrum.
However, the omitted proportion may also be valuable, in particular for the open search where the changes of peptide fragmentation patterns caused by some unanticipated PTM(s) should be considered.
The third issue is FDR control of search results.
The FDR control methods used in current library search engines are not as mature as those used in sequence database search, e.g.
the widely adopted target-decoy database search strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2007).
In this article, we present a dedicated open spectral library search tool, named pMatch, to identify unanticipated PTMs from MS/MS data.
It is the ﬁrst time, to our knowledge, that the issues mentioned above are comprehensively addressed.
First, the library  i400  is constructed with spectra optimized by the full peptide sequence information to better tolerate the peptide fragmentation pattern variations caused by some PTMs.
Second, a new scoring system is devised, which uses charge-dependent mass shifts for peak matching and combines a probability-based model with the general spectral dot-product for scoring.
Third, a target-decoy strategy is used for FDR control.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of pMatch, a library search experiment was conducted on a public dataset of standard proteins with over 40 000 spectra.
Since no open library search tool is currently available, comparison was made with SpectraST, the most popular library search engine.
As expected, pMatch signiﬁcantly outperformed SpectraST in detecting unanticipated PTMs and increasing the number of identiﬁed spectra.
Additional validations were done on four published datasets including over 150 000 spectra  a variety of PTMs were found and the spectral identiﬁcation rates were increased to a large extent.
2 METHODS As an integrated library search engine, pMatch supports an entire workﬂow including library construction, spectral matching and result evaluation.
2.1 Library construction pMatch enrolls the identiﬁed raw spectra and makes full use of their corresponding sequence information to construct the library of  optimized  consensus spectra.
At the beginning, consensus spectra are generated from duplicate spectra for redundancy removal.
Here, the credibly identiﬁed raw spectra with the same peptide sequence, charge and modiﬁcation states are assumed as duplicate spectra.
To produce a consensus spectrum, the peaks from each raw spectrum have their intensities normalized such that the top intensity value is one.
The common peaks (peaks from different spectra but with small differences in m/z according to the instrument precision, e.g.
0.5 Th for ion trap) in duplicate spectra are combined into a consensus peak, with the averaged m/z and intensity values.
Only those consensus peaks occurring in the majority of the duplicate spectra are retained.
All the peak intensities are then rescaled by taking their square roots.
This strategy has been demonstrated to lead to better performance in spectral similarity comparison (Liu et al., 2007  Stein and Scott, 1994).
Next, consensus spectra are optimized by incorporating the peptide sequence information to make theoretical peaks  bud  (including those unobserved ones).
As is shown in Figure 1, for each consensus (experimental) spectrum, a theoretical spectrum is generated with theoretical ion peaks (the b/y series product ions for collision-induced dissociation (CID) in this study) in the observed m/z range, with a uniform intensity value one.
In  Fig.
1.
An optimized spectrum holds the duality of experimental and theoretical spectra.
The parameter θ spanning from 0 to 1 can be considered as the tendency towards the theoretical spectrum.
The optimized spectrum equals the experimental spectrum when θ is 0, and is shaped the same as the theoretical spectrum when θ reaches 1.
[12:21 12/5/2010 Bioinformatics-btq185.tex]  Page: i400 i399 i406   each consensus spectrum, peak intensities are normalized making the top intensity value be one.
Then, the intensities of the peaks in the theoretical and consensus spectra are, respectively, multiplied by the factor of θ(0  θ   1) and 1 θ, and the two spectra are merged by superimposing their common peaks.
Thus, the optimized consensus spectra are generated, with each explained peak annotated by its ion type, fragmentation position and charge state.
This  budding  strategy regains a part of sequence information that was lost in the experimental spectra.
The optimized spectra emerge as a theoretical and experimental duality and are expected to tolerate the variations in peptide fragmentation patterns introduced by some PTMs.
The last procedure is to generate a group of decoy spectra with the same volume as the optimized consensus spectra, since pMatch uses a target- decoy strategy to evaluate its search results.
The details of decoy spectrum generation scheme will be described later in this article.
2.2 Spectral matching Given a query spectrum, those library spectra with their precursor ion mass differences within a user-set tolerance and with the same charge state are selected as candidates for comparison.
The precursor ion mass tolerance may be very large for the open search, e.g.
300 Da.
Finally, the candidate spectrum with the highest match score is assigned as the identiﬁcation result of the query one.
2.2.1 Preprocessing Before matching, each query spectrum undergoes a simple preprocessing procedure.
Isotopic peaks are removed and the peak intensities are rescaled by taking their square roots.
At most the top 6 peaks per 100 Th are reserved for later matching.
To determine peak hits when matching two 2.2.2 Peak hit determination spectra, the precursor ion mass difference (which we call  M in the following parts of this article) is used to compute the allowed mass shifts for peak matching.
Since the charge states of the explained peaks in library spectra are already known, the mass shifts could be accurately determined.
The speciﬁc rules to ﬁnd out peak hits are exhibited as follows.
Peaks from the query spectrum are examined in the descending order of their intensities.
If the query peak being examined has its m/z value mQ, and the user-set product ion m/z tolerance is Tp, then two sets of library peaks are selected: S1= library peak with m/z value mL : mQ mL    Tp , S2= explained library peak with m/z value mL and charge state chrL :   mQ mL  M/chrL    Tp .
The peaks from either S1 or S2 are chosen as candidate peaks if the  M is big enough to cause a PTM (say beyond  0.5 Da)  otherwise, only peaks from S1 are chosen.
The most intensive candidate peak is ﬁnally determined as the hit peak to the query peak.
Each peak can only be hit at most once.
2.2.3 Similarity scoring As for spectral similarity scoring, pMatch employs two sub-scores: a spectral dot-product score and a probability-based score.
The spectral dot-product score (SDP_Score) is calculated as:  SDP_Score=  (cid:2)(cid:1)  (cid:1)  peak_hits IQ IL (cid:2)(cid:1)     query_peaks I2 Q  library_peaks I2 Q  ,  (1)  where IL and IQ denote the intensities of the library peak and the query peak, respectively.
For a query spectrum, there are usually several candidate library spectra (here we let the number be W).
To determine whether one match  stands out  from the remaining candidates, we use a probability-based score.
A peak in a query spectrum is deﬁned as a capital peak if its intensity is no less than 5% of the most intensive peak and is ranked in the top 10 in this spectrum.
A hit between a capital peak and an explained library peak is called a mighty hit.
Let n be the number of the capital peaks in the query spectrum, ki be the  Open MS/MS spectral library search  number of mighty hits in the match between the query and the i-th candidate spectrum, and mi be the number of explained peaks of the i-th candidate (the value of mi is doubled if mass shifts are triggered in the i-th match).
Then the global average probability (p) that a capital query peak and an explained library peak make a peak hit can be calculated as follows:  p=  (cid:1) W i=1 ki/n (cid:1) W i=1 mi  .
(2)  For each capital peak in the query spectrum, the probability (P) that a mighty hit occurs by chance between it and one of the explained peaks in the i-th candidate library spectrum is:  P=1 (1 p)mi =1 [1 C1   p+   +Cmi   ( p)mi]  p mi.
mi  mi  (3)  The probability (P_value) that ki or more mighty hits occur by chance between the query and the i-th candidate library spectrum is:  P_value= n(cid:3) j=ki   Pj (1 P)n j.  Cj n  (4)  The probability-based score, denoted by P_Score, is then calculated according to Equation (5).
It evaluates the signiﬁcance of a certain match on the basis of the statistic background of all candidate matches.
P_Score=(cid:4) log(P_value).
The ﬁnal score of a match between a library spectrum and the query spectrum, as we call  pMatch_Score , is the product of SDP_Score and P_Score:  pMatch_Score=SDP_Score P_Score  (5)  (6)  2.2.4 PTM locating After the library spectrum with the highest pMatch_Score is found, the location of the PTM on the peptide is assigned as follows.
Each amino acid residue is assumed as the PTM site and a theoretical spectrum is predicted from the peptide with the PTM-containing product ion peaks shifted accordingly.
Then this series of theoretical spectra are scored against the query spectrum using the common spectral dot-product.
The highest scored site is accepted as the PTM location.
2.3 Control of false discovery rate If a large set of query spectra are searched, then the control of FDR is necessary.
Since the target-decoy search strategy has been the leading way to estimate the FDR of the sequence database search results, a natural idea is to extend it to the spectral library search.
Yen et al.
(2009) and Lam et al.
(2010) have demonstrated the feasibility of using decoy spectra for FDR estimation in the spectral library search.
Here, we extend this idea into the open search mode, and employ a similar approach for decoy spectra generation.
For each optimized consensus spectrum in the library, a decoy spectrum is generated with the same precursor ion mass and charge state.
Since the amino acid sequence is already known, a  pseudo-reversed  (Elias and Gygi, 2007) sequence is made from the original peptide sequence  that is, the sequence of all the amino acid residues is reversed except the C-term one, by which means the enzyme digestion feature is reserved.
Then, the corresponding decoy spectrum is born with explained peaks moved to the new m/z positions determined by their annotations and the pseudo-revered sequence.
pMatch ﬁlters search results by their pMatch_Scores and estimates FDR using the formula FDR = FP/TP, where FP and TP represent the numbers of matches to the decoy and original spectra, respectively.
Importantly, for the open search mode, an issue that could produce considerable impact on spectral identiﬁcation rate is the result ﬁltration rule.
The normal rule is to rank the whole result list by score and then calculate the estimated FDR.
Because of the mass shifting strategy used in the open search, however, a pair of spectra with signiﬁcant  M (where mass shifting works) raises the chance of peak hits, and thus are likely to produce a higher score compared to the pairs with insigniﬁcant  M. Obviously, the false positive identiﬁcations  i401  [12:21 12/5/2010 Bioinformatics-btq185.tex]  Page: i401 i399 i406   D.Ye et al.
with signiﬁcant  M would have higher chance to pass a uniform score cutoff.
Therefore, a more reasonable ﬁltration rule that we advocate is to group all the results into two lists according to their  M values, i.e.
those with insigniﬁcant  M and those with signiﬁcant  M. Afterwards, the results in the two groups are ranked separately for FDR estimation.
This separate ﬁltration rule is expected to increase the spectral identiﬁcation rate compared to the normal rule.
3 RESULTS In this study, a comparison experiment on a public dataset was carried out with detailed analysis between pMatch and SpectraST in both the conventional and the open search modes.
To further validate pMatch, four additional published datasets were analyzed in the open search mode.
The ﬁve datasets including  200 000 spectra in total were all engaged in the same experimental workﬂow.
3.1 Datasets and library construction The ﬁve published datasets chosen in this study were from different species.
The MS spectra were derived from high- or medium- precision instruments, as the use of high-precision instruments becomes the trend of proteomics development (Mann and Kelleher, 2008), and it is practical to gain more accurate PTM masses determined by the precursor ion mass differences.
The brief summaries of the datasets are given below:    ISB-18mix is designed deliberately for the purpose of testing peptide and protein identiﬁcation software tools (Klimek et al., 2008).
Eighteen puriﬁed recombinant proteins were mixed and digested by trypsin into peptide mixtures, which were then analyzed by LC-MS/MS on diverse mass spectrometers under various conditions.
In this study, the Mixture 3 on a LTQ-FT mass spectrometer with all 10 LC-MS/MS runs was chosen for our experiment.
We focused on the analysis of this data for comparison between pMatch and SpectraST.
TAP-PSD95 refers to the samples from the mice with proteins in gene-targeted TAP tagging.
The samples were puriﬁed in four replicates, which were then analyzed by LTQ-FT mass spectrometer (Fernandez et al., 2009).
Replicate_2 was randomly chosen for our experiment.
HUPO-14 is from a study in which 20 highly puriﬁed recombinant human proteins were distributed to 27 laboratories for mass spectrometry-based analysis (Bell et al., 2009).
The data from Lab 14 was chosen in our study and the instrument they used was LTQ-FT.    Haas-Data refers to a yeast sample digested by trypsin, from which the collision activated dissociation (CAD) MS/MS spectra were produced by different mass spectrometers (Haas et al., 2006).
Only the dataset from the LTQ-FT instrument was used here.
Gygi-Qstar refers to the yeast proteome digested by trypsin which was analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q-STAR mass spectrometer (Elias et al., 2005).
The way to construct the spectral libraries is similar to that proposed by Ahrne et al.
(2009).
This way has been demonstrated to be very effective in increasing the spectral identiﬁcation rate of a dataset.
First, the spectra in a dataset are searched against a protein sequence database.
Then, the credibly identiﬁed spectra are accumulated to  i402  construct a spectral library, against which the remaining spectra are afterwards searched.
3.2 Results on the ISB-18mix dataset To identify some of the spectra for library construction, the pFind search engine (Fu et al., 2004  Li et al., 2005  Wang et al., 2007) (version 2.3) was used to search a target-decoy sequence database including the standard, pollution and background proteins (see Supplementary Data for the detailed description of the database).
During searching, the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to  50 ppm, and the product ion m/z tolerance was  0.5 Th.
Full tryptic speciﬁcity was applied, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites.
Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was speciﬁed as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation, and oxidation of methionine as a variable one.
After sequence database search, we observed that most of the identiﬁed spectra with high conﬁdence had their precursor ion mass biases of around +2 ppm.
The search results were then ﬁltered with precursor ion mass deviation from  2 to +6 ppm at 1% FDR.
Additionally, only those spectra from the proteins containing at least two unique detected peptides were reserved.
Finally, a total of 12 032 identiﬁed spectra, including 577 unique peptides (with distinct amino acid sequences and PTMs) and 963 unique precursor ions (with distinct sequences, PTMs and charge states), were obtained and used to construct a spectral library.
In terms of the library search, pMatch (version 1.0) and SpectraST (version 3.1) were engaged with the same spectral source for library constructions and searches, and both the conventional and the open searches were carried out.
For SpectraST, the precursor ion m/z tolerances were set to  2 and  150 Th, respectively, for the conventional and the open searches.
The parameter to control the production m/z tolerance was 1 bin/Th (equal to  0.5 Th).
The search results were post-processed by PeptideProphet (Keller et al., 2002) for FDR estimation, as suggested by Lam et al.
(2007, 2008).
While for pMatch, in library construction, the θ in the  budding  step was set to zero for conventional search to reduce spectral distortion and was set to 0.2 for open search to increase the robustness of the library.
Given that the lowest charge state of the spectra in this dataset was 2+, the precursor ion mass tolerances were set to  4 and  300 Da, respectively, for the conventional and the open searches.
The product ion m/z tolerance was  0.5 Th.
The FDRs of the search results were controlled by the target-decoy strategy with the normal ﬁltration rule (not the separate ﬁltration rule for a fair comparison).
The number of identiﬁed spectra from both engines at different FDR cutoffs are illustrated in Figure 2.
It can be seen that compared to the conventional search, the open search signiﬁcantly increased the number of identiﬁed spectra for both search engines.
pMatch and SpectraST comparably performed in the conventional search.
When it comes to the open search, however, pMatch identiﬁed nearly twice as many spectra as SpectraST through the whole FDR range considered.
In order to explore the differences between the two engines, a careful analysis was conducted on the results under 1% FDR.
In the conventional search, as shown in Figure 3a, there were 2462 spectra identiﬁed by both engines, among which 2451 had agreeable matches and 11 conﬂicted.
After manually validating the 11 spectra by taking a close-up view of their MS/MS spectra and tracing back to the corresponding MS spectra, we found all of the 11 query spectra  [12:21 12/5/2010 Bioinformatics-btq185.tex]  Page: i402 i399 i406   were co-eluted spectra and their identiﬁcations by the two engines caught different components.
Supplementary Figure S1 gives a typical example of a co-eluted spectrum.
Unlike the conventional search where the two engines showed over 80% overlap between their results, in the open search, as revealed by Figure 3b, only  40% of the pMatch s identiﬁcations could be found in SpectraST s results, although the 13 disagreements all came from co-eluted spectra also.
Fig.
2.
FDR curves for pMatch (solid lines) and SpectraST (dashed lines) search engines.
The x-axis denotes the FDR value and the y-axis denotes the number of identiﬁed spectra.
The thin and thick lines represent the results of the conventional and the open searches, respectively.
Fig.
3.
Venn diagrams of the number of identiﬁed spectra at 1% FDR from pMatch and SpectraST in the conventional (a) and open (b) search modes.
The ashen regions denote the spectra with inconsistent identiﬁcations from the two engines.
Open MS/MS spectral library search  As is discussed previously, each identiﬁcation has the precursor ion  M as the potential PTM mass in the open search.
The histograms of the  M values detected by the two engines are exhibited in Figure 4.
As shown, some intensive  M detected by pMatch were not or rarely detected by SpectraST, for example,  128 Da (lysine loss), 22 Da (sodium adduct), 38 Da (calcium adduct) and 152 Da (carbamidomethylDTT).
The crucial reasons should be that some modiﬁed spectra have a considerable percent of the observed peaks with their m/z values shifted and that some special PTMs might largely vary the fragmentation pattern of a peptide (see Supplementary Figure S2 for a spectrum with a sodium adduct and Supplementary Figure S3 for the inﬂuence of the  budding  strategy on PTM detecting).
However, neither did SpectraST consider the mass shifts caused by unanticipated PTMs during peak matching, nor made use of the sequence information to tolerate the peptide fragmentation pattern variations.
On the contrary, SpectraST identiﬁed more spectra with very small absolute  M values (within  5 Da), which mainly resulted from duplicate spectra, co-eluted spectra and spectra from deamidated peptides.
Then, we concentrated on the abundant  M (with  20 spectra for either engine) and manually validated some representative spectra.
Nearly all of the abundant  M were explained (see Supplementary Table S1 for their frequencies and explanations).
Among these  M, many PTMs were found (shown in Table 1)  for example, a disulﬁde bridge was detected (shown in Figure 5).
Additionally, some  M were caused by amino acid substitutions, or missed cleavages, or semi-digestions, while some corresponded to the combinations of two or more other  M values.
Only two  M were not explained using our current knowledge.
One of them had evidence supporting that there was indeed something happened on the peptides (see Supplementary Figure S4), while the other one might be a false positive.
In addition to those abundant  M, low-abundance ones also provided a wealth of information.
Some of them corresponded to important PTMs, such as phosphorylation.
pMatch and SpectraST identiﬁed 13 and eight spectra, respectively, with  M of 79.97 Da.
These spectra are supposed to be derived from phosphorylated peptides.
Figure 6 gives an example of such spectra.
Fig.
4.
Histograms of  M detected by pMatch (top) and SpectraST (bottom).
The intensive peaks are annotated by their  M values in integer accuracy.
i403  [12:21 12/5/2010 Bioinformatics-btq185.tex]  Page: i403 i399 i406   D.Ye et al.
Table 1.
The open search results of pMatch on all datasets  Dataset  Total MS/MS  Identiﬁed spectra  Identiﬁcation rate raised by Spec Lib  Abundant modiﬁcations (Da)  Seq DB  Spec Lib  ISB-18mix  40 376  12 032  +8025  29.80%   49.68%  TAP-PSD95  36 387  3575  +1882  9.82%   15.00%  HUPO-14  15 221  7281  +2418  Haas-Data  56 599  9172  +2558  Gygi-Qstar  46 195  9255  +4357  47.84%   63.72%  16.21%   20.74% 20.03%   29.40%   116 (a disulﬁde bridge)   18 (dehydration)   17 (ammonia loss)   16 (ammonia loss and deamidation)  1 (deamidation)  2 (two deamidations)  16 (oxidation)  22 (sodium)  23 (sodium and deamidation)  26 (acetaldehyde +26)  38 (calcium)  39 (calcium and deamidation)  152 (carbamidomethylDTT)  153 (carbamidomethylDTT and deamidatoin)  174 (carbamidomethylDTT and sodium)  18 (dehydration)   17 (ammonia loss)  1 (deamidation)  14 (methylation)  16 (oxidation)  22 (sodium)  26 (acetaldehyde +26)  28 (formylation)  32 (dioxidation)  42 (acetylation)  54 (acetaldehyde +26 and formylation)  70 (formylation and acetylation)  80 (phosphorylation)  17 (ammonia loss)  1 (deamidation)  12 (formaldehyde induced modiﬁcation)  71 (propionamide)  26 (acetaldehyde +26)  42 (acetylation)  17 (ammonia loss)  1 (deamidation)  43 (carbamylation)  171 (carbamylation and lysine added)  1 (deamidation)  12 (formaldehyde induced modiﬁcation)   22 (sodium)  28 (formylation)  Fig.
5.
An example of a disulﬁde bridge.
(a and b) are the tandem mass spectra of a same peptide sequence IVSNASCTTNCLAPLAK, but the former one is with two carbamidomethylated cysteines, while the latter one has a disulﬁde bridge across the two cysteines.
The spectrum in (a) has several product ions indicating the CID fragmentations between the two cysteines, while in (b) no noticeable ions supporting such fragmentations can be found in the query spectrum identiﬁed with the  M of  116.06 Da.
Most of intensive peaks are explained with low m/z errors.
i404  [12:21 12/5/2010 Bioinformatics-btq185.tex]  Page: i404 i399 i406   Open MS/MS spectral library search  Fig.
6.
A spectrum from a phosphorylated peptide.
This sequence of TGKPDYVTDSAASATAWSTGVK, with a  M of 79.97 Da that implies a phosphorylation.
The modiﬁed site is the 10th amino acid residue (the ﬁrst serine) from the N-term.
The neutral loss peaks of precursor ions by masses of  98 and  116 Da are obvious, and there are also many neutral loss peaks of product ions by  98 Da.
These features are typical for spectra of phosphorylated peptides.
Most of intensive peaks are explained with low m/z errors.
triply charged spectrum was  identiﬁed to have  the peptide  3.3 Results on four additional datasets For further validations, four additional published datasets were analyzed by pMatch in the open search mode, obeying the same workﬂow as above.
The detailed search parameters are listed in Supplementary Table S2.
To explore how much in the end pMatch could help to increase the spectral identiﬁcation rate, here we used the separate ﬁltration rule for FDR estimation.
Table 1 shows the analysis results.
For completeness, the result of the ISB-18mix dataset is also listed.
We can see that the spectral identiﬁcation rates signiﬁcantly grew after library search and some interesting modiﬁcations were detected.
For example, the  M of 12 Da detected in two datasets all occurred on peptide N-terms or basic amino acids.
This modiﬁcation is induced by formaldehyde (Toews et al., 2008), and has been recently detected in other datasets (Menschaert et al., 2009).
Other detected PTMs include formylation (28 Da), acetylation (42 Da), methylation (14 Da), etc.
Interestingly, in the Gygi-Qstar dataset, a number of spectra are identiﬁed with  M distributed from  20 to  3 Da.
Many of them show no mass shift in product ions, compared with their matched library spectra (see Supplementary Figure S5), indicating that their precursor ion masses might have been incorrectly judged.
4 CONCLUSION We have presented a novel spectral library search tool, pMatch, deliberately designed for the open search mode.
Its ability to identify spectra with unanticipated PTMs was demonstrated on several datasets.
In cooperation with traditional sequence database search, pMatch is able to push up the spectral identiﬁcation rate to a large extent.
The key points to contributing the success of this method lie in three aspects: the consideration of accurate mass shifts for peak matching  the use of full peptide sequence information for consensus spectral optimization  a new scoring function that combines the general intensity-based dot-product with a probabilistic model of peak matching.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The authors thank Dr Wilhelm Haas (Harvard Medical School) for providing the dataset Haas-Data in RAW format, and thank Dr Henry H.N.
Lam (Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, HKUST) and Dr Stephen E. Stein (National Institute of Standards and Technology) for valuable discussions.
Funding: This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant no.
30900262  the CAS Knowledge Innovation Program under grant no.
KGGX1-YW-13  the National Key Basic Research and Development Program (973) of China under grant no.
2010CB912701  and the National High Technology Research and Development Program (863) of China under grant nos.
2007AA02Z315, 2008AA02Z309.
Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES Ahrne,E.
et al.
(2009) A simple workﬂow to increase MS2 identiﬁcation rate by  subsequent spectral library search.
Proteomics, 9, 1731 1736.
Bandeira,N.
et al.
(2007) Protein identiﬁcation by spectral networks analysis.
Proc.
Natl  Acad.
Sci.
USA, 104, 6140 6145.
Bell,A.W.
et al.
(2009) A HUPO test sample study reveals common problems in mass  spectrometry-based proteomics.
Nature Methods, 6, 423 440.
Chen,Y.
et al.
(2009) PTMap-A sequence alignment software for unrestricted, accurate, and full-spectrum identiﬁcation of post-translational modiﬁcation sites.
Proc.
Natl Acad.
Sci.
USA, 106, 761 766.
Craig,R.
et al.
(2006) Using annotated peptide mass spectrum libraries for protein  identiﬁcation.
J. Proteome Res., 5, 1843 1849.
Elias,J.E.
and Gygi,S.P.
(2007) Target-decoy search strategy for increased conﬁdence in large-scale protein identiﬁcations by mass spectrometry.
Nat.
Methods, 4, 207 214.
Elias,J.E.
et al.
(2005) Comparative evaluation of mass spectrometry platforms used in  large-scale proteomics investigations.
Nature Methods, 2, 667 675.
Eng,J.K.
et al.
(1994) An approach to correlate tandem mass-spectral data of peptides with amino-acid-sequences in a protein database.
J.
Am.
Soc.
Mass Spectrometry, 5, 976 989.
Falkner,J.A.
et al.
(2008) A spectral clustering approach to MS/MS identiﬁcation of  post-translational modiﬁcations.
J. Proteome Res., 7, 4614 4622.  i405  [12:21 12/5/2010 Bioinformatics-btq185.tex]  Page: i405 i399 i406   D.Ye et al.
Fernandez,E.
et al.
(2009) Targeted tandem afﬁnity puriﬁcation of PSD-95 recovers core postsynaptic complexes and schizophrenia susceptibility proteins.
Mol.
Syst.
Biol., 5, 269.
Frewen,B.E.
et al.
(2006) Analysis of peptide MS/MS spectra from large-scale  proteomics experiments using spectrum libraries.
Anal.
Chem., 78, 5678 5684.
Fu,Y.
et al.
(2004) Exploiting the kernel trick to correlate fragment ions for peptide  identiﬁcation via tandem mass spectrometry.
Bioinformatics, 20, 1948 1954.
Haas,W.
et al.
(2006) Optimization and use of peptide mass measurement accuracy in  shotgun proteomics.
Mol.
Cell.
Proteomics, 5, 1326 1337.
Hummel,J.
et al.
(2007) ProMEX: a mass spectral reference database for proteins and  protein phosphorylation sites.
BMC Bioinformatics, 8, 216.
Keller,A.
et al.
(2002) Empirical statistical model to estimate the accuracy of peptide identiﬁcations made by MS/MS and database search.
Anal.
Chem., 74, 5383 5392.
Klimek,J.
et al.
(2008) The standard protein mix database: a diverse data set to assist in the production of improved peptide and protein identiﬁcation software tools.
J. Proteome Res., 7, 96 103.
Lam,H.
et al.
(2007) Development and validation of a spectral library searching method  for peptide identiﬁcation from MS/MS.
Proteomics, 7, 655 667.
Mann,M.
and Kelleher,N.L.
(2008) Precision proteomics: the case for high resolution  and high mass accuracy, Proc.
Natl Acad.
Sci.
USA, 105, 18132 18138.
Menschaert,G.
et al.
(2009) Spectral clustering in peptidomics studies helps to unravel modiﬁcation proﬁle of biologically active peptides and enhances peptide identiﬁcation rate.
Proteomics, 9, 4381 4388.
Perkins,D.N.
et al.
(1999) Probability-based protein identiﬁcation by searching sequence databases using mass spectrometry data.
Electrophoresis, 20, 3551 3567.
Stein,S.E.
and Scott,D.R.
(1994) Optimization and testing of mass-spectral library search algorithms for compound identiﬁcation.
J.
Am.
Soc.
Mass Spectrometry, 5, 859 866.
Toews,J.
et al.
(2008) Mass spectrometric identiﬁcation of formaldehyde-induced peptide modiﬁcations under in vivo protein cross-linking conditions.
Anal.
Chim.
Acta, 618, 168 183.
Tsur,D.
et al.
(2005) Identiﬁcation of post-translational modiﬁcations by blind search  of mass spectra.
Nature Biotechnology, 23, 1562 1567.
Yates,J.R.
et al.
(1998) Method to compare collision-induced dissociation spectra of peptides: potential for library searching and subtractive analysis.
Anal.
Chem., 70, 3557 3565.
Lam,H.
et al.
(2008) Building consensus spectral libraries for peptide identiﬁcation in  Yen,C.Y.
et al.
(2009) A simulated MS/MS library for spectrum-to-spectrum searching  proteomics.
Nature Methods, 5, 873 875.
Lam,H.
et al.
(2010) Artiﬁcial decoy spectral libraries for false discovery rate estimation  in spectral library searching in proteomics.
J. Proteome Res., 9, 605 610.
Li,D.Q.
et al.
(2005) pFind: a novel database-searching software system for automated peptide and protein identiﬁcation via tandem mass spectrometry.
Bioinformatics, 21, 3049 3050.  in large scale identiﬁcation of proteins.
Mol.
Cell.
Proteomics, 8, 857 869.
Wang,L.H.
et al.
(2007) pFind 2.0: a software package for peptide and protein identiﬁcation via tandem mass spectrometry.
Rapid Commun.
Mass Spectrometry, 21, 2985 2991.
Wu,X.
et al.
(2007) HMMatch: peptide identiﬁcation by spectral matching of tandem  mass spectra using hidden Markov models.
J. Comput.
Biol., 14, 1025 1043.
Liu,J.
et al.
(2007) Methods for peptide identiﬁcation by spectral comparison.
Proteome  Wu,Z.
et al.
(2008) MSDash: mass spectrometry database and search.
Comput.
Syst.
Science, 5, 3.
Bioinformatics Conf., 7, 63 71.  i406  [12:21 12/5/2010 Bioinformatics-btq185.tex]  Page: i406 i399 i406
