BIOINFORMATICS  Vol.
26 ECCB 2010, pages i603 i610 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq387  Efﬁcient parameter search for qualitative models of regulatory networks using symbolic model checking Gregory Batt1, , Michel Page2,3, Irene Cantone4, Gregor Goessler2, Pedro Monteiro2,5 and Hidde de Jong2 1INRIA Paris - Rocquencourt, Le Chesnay, 2INRIA Grenoble - Rhône-Alpes, Montbonnot, 3IAE, Université Pierre Mendès France, Grenoble, France, 4Clinical Sciences Center, Imperial College, London, UK and 5INESC/Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal  ABSTRACT Motivation: Investigating the relation between the structure and behavior of complex biological networks often involves posing the question if the hypothesized structure of a regulatory network is consistent with the observed behavior, or if a proposed structure can generate a desired behavior.
Results: The above questions can be cast into a parameter search problem for qualitative models of regulatory networks.
We develop a method based on symbolic model checking that avoids enumerating all possible parametrizations, and show that this method performs well on real biological problems, using the IRMA synthetic network and benchmark datasets.
We test the consistency between IRMA and time-series expression proﬁles, and search for parameter modiﬁcations that would make the external control of the system behavior more robust.
Availability: GNA and the IRMA model are available at http://ibis.inrialpes.fr/ Contact: gregory.batt@inria.fr Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION A central problem in the analysis of biological regulatory networks concerns the relation between their structure and dynamics.
This problem can be narrowed down to the following two questions: (a) Is a hypothesized structure of the network consistent with the observed behavior  (b) Can a proposed structure generate a desired behavior   Qualitative models of regulatory networks, such as (synchronous or asynchronous) Boolean models and piecewise-afﬁne differential equation (PADE) models, have been proven useful for addressing the above questions.
The models are coarse-grained, in the sense that they do not explicitly specify the biochemical mechanisms.
However, they include the logic of gene regulation and allow different expression levels of the genes to be distinguished.
They are interesting in their own right, as a way to capture in a simple manner the complex dynamics of a large regulatory network (Chaves et al., 2009  Fauré et al., 2006  Monteiro et al., 2008  Saez-Rodriguez et al., 2009).
They can also be used as a ﬁrst step to orient the development of more detailed quantitative ODE models.
Qualitative models bring speciﬁc advantages when studying the relation between structure and dynamics.
In order to answer     To whom correspondence should be addressed.
questions (a) and (b), one has to search the parameter space to check if for some parameter values the network is consistent with the data or can attain a desired control objective.
In qualitative models, the number of different parametrizations is ﬁnite and the number of possible values for each parameter is usually rather low.
This makes parameter search easier to handle than in quantitative models, where exhaustive search of the continuous parameter space is in general not feasible.
Moreover, qualitative models are concerned with trends rather than with precise quantitative values, which corresponds to the nature of much of the available biological data (Cantone et al., 2009).
Nevertheless, the parametrization of qualitative models remains a complex problem.
For most models of networks of biological interest the state and parameter spaces are too large to exhaustively test all combinations of parameter values.
The aim of this article is to address this search problem for PADE models by treating it in the context of formal veriﬁcation and symbolic model checking (Clarke et al., 1999  Fisher and Henzinger, 2007).
Our contributions are twofold.
On the methodological side, we develop a method that in comparison with our previous work (Batt et al., 2005) makes it possible to efﬁciently analyze large and possibly incompletely parametrized PADE models.
This is achieved by a symbolic encoding of the model structure, constraints on parameter values and transition rules describing the qualitative dynamics of the system.
We can thus take full advantage of symbolic model checkers for testing the consistency of the network structure with dynamic properties expressed in temporal logics.
The computer tool GNA has been extended to export the symbolic encoding of PADE models in the NuSMV language (Cimatti et al., 2002).
In comparison with related work (Barnat et al., 2009  Bernot et al., 2004  Corblin et al., 2009  Fromentin et al., 2007), our method applies to incompletely instead of fully parametrized models, provides more precise results and the encoding is efﬁcient without (strongly) simplifying the PADE dynamics.
On the application side, we show that the method performs well on real problems, by means of the IRMA synthetic network and benchmark experimental datasets (Cantone et al., 2009).
More precisely, we are able to ﬁnd parameter values for which the network satisﬁes temporal-logic properties describing observed expression proﬁles, both on the level of individual and averaged time series.
The method is selective in the sense that only a small part of the parameter space is found to be compatible with the observations.
Analysis of these parameter values reveals that biologically relevant constraints have been identiﬁed.
Moreover, we make suggestions to improve the robustness of the external control of the IRMA behavior by proposing a rewiring of the network.
The Author(s) 2010.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/2.5), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[11:07 28/8/2010 Bioinformatics-btq387.tex]  Page: i603 i603 i610   G.Batt et al.
(a)  (b)  Fig.
1.
Synthetic IRMA network in yeast.
(a) Schematic representation of the network constructed in Cantone et al.
(2009).
The green and blue boxes are promoter and genes, and the yellow and red ovals are proteins and metabolites.
(b) PADE model of IRMA, with state variables x, protein synthesis constants κ, decay constants γ and thresholds θ.
The input variable ugal refers to the presence of galactose ( ugal =0).
The subscripts Gal4, Swi5, Ash1, Cbf1, Gal80 refer to the proteins.
IRMA network  2 QUALITATIVE MODEL OF IRMA NETWORK 2.1 IRMA is a synthetic network constructed in yeast and proposed as a benchmark for modeling and identiﬁcation approaches (Cantone et al., 2009).
The network consists of ﬁve well-characterized genes that have been chosen such that different kinds of interactions are included, notably transcription regulation and protein protein interactions.
The endogenous copies of the genes were deleted to reduce crosstalk of IRMA with the regulatory networks of the host cell.
In order to further isolate the synthetic network from its cellular environment, the genes belong to distinct, non-redundant pathways.
The structure of the IRMA network is shown in Figure 1a.
The expression of the CBF1 gene is under the control of the HO promoter, which is positively regulated by Swi5 and negatively regulated by Ash1.
CBF1 encodes the transcription factor Cbf1 that activates expression of the GAL4 gene.
The GAL10 promoter is activated by Gal4, but only in the absence of Gal80 or in the presence of galactose.
Gal80 binds to the Gal4 activation domain, but galactose releases this inhibition of transcription.
The GAL10 promoter controls the expression of SWI5, whose product not only activates the above- mentioned HO promoter, but also the ASH1 promoter controlling the expression of the GAL80 and ASH1 genes.
The network contains one positive (Swi5/Cbf1/Gal4/Swi5) and two negative (Swi5/Gal80/Swi5  Swi5/Ash1/Cbf1/Gal4/Swi5) feedback loops.
Negative feedback loops are a necessary condition for the occurrence of oscillations (Thomas and d Ari, 1990), while the addition of positive feedback is believed to increase the robustness of the oscillations (Tsai et al., 2008).
Consequently, for suitable parameter values IRMA might function as a synthetic oscillator.
2.2 Measurements of IRMA dynamics The behavior of the network has been monitored in response to two different perturbations (Cantone et al., 2009): shifting cells from glucose to galactose medium (switch-on experiments), and from galactose to glucose medium (switch-off experiments).
The terms  switch-on  ( switch-off ) refer to the activation (inhibition) of SWI5 expression during growth on galactose (glucose).
For these two perturbations, the temporal evolution of the expression of all the genes in the network was monitored by qRT-PCR with good time resolution.
i604  Figure 2a represents the expression of all genes, averaged over ﬁve (switch-on) or four (switch-off) independent experiments.
In the switch-off experiments (galactose to glucose), the transcription of all genes is shut off.
In the switch-on experiments, a seemingly oscillatory behavior is present with Swi5 peaks at 40 and 180 min, and Swi5, Cbf1 and Ash1 expressed at moderate to high levels (Cantone et al., 2009).
The analysis of the individual time series reveals that in some cases the gene expression proﬁles are indeed similar, at least qualitatively, whereas in other cases notable differences exist (e.g.
the oscillatory behavior is not present in all switch-on time series, see Fig.
2c).
In the latter case, averaged expression levels may be a misleading representation of the network behavior.
2.3 PADE model of IRMA network We built a qualitative model of the IRMA dynamics using PADE models of genetic regulatory networks.
PADE models, originally introduced in Glass and Kauffman (1973), provide a coarse-grained picture of the network dynamics.
They have the following general form:   xi= fi(x)(cid:1)  i(x) γi xi, i [1,n] i bl κl  (1)  (cid:1) l Li  i, each modulated by a regulation function bl  where x     Rn 0 represents a vector of n protein (or RNA) concentrations.
The synthesis rate is composed of a sum of synthesis i(x)  0,1 , constants κl with l in an index set Li.
A regulation function is an algebraic expression of step functions s (xj,θj) which formalizes the regulatory logic of gene expression.
θj is a so-called threshold + for the concentration xj.
The step function s (xj,θj) evaluates to 1 if xj   θj, and to 0 if xj   θj, thus capturing the switch-like character of gene regulation (s (xj,θj)).
The degradation of a gene product is a ﬁrst-order term, with a degradation constant γi.
(xj,θj)=1 s  (xj,θj) or s  +        +  In the case of IRMA, we deﬁne ﬁve variables, each corresponding to the total concentration of a protein, and an input variable denoting the concentration of galactose.
Notice that the measurements of the network dynamics concern mRNA and not protein levels.
We assume that the variations in mRNA and protein levels are the same, even though this may not always be the case.
A similar approximation is made in Cantone et al.
(2009), where protein and mRNA levels are assumed to be proportional.
[11:07 28/8/2010 Bioinformatics-btq387.tex]  Page: i604 i603 i610   Parameter search for qualitative models using symbolic model checking  (c)  (a)  (b)  Fig.
2.
Dynamic behavior of the IRMA network in response to medium shift perturbations.
(a) Temporal proﬁles of averaged gene expression measured with qRT-PCR during switch-off (left) and switch-on (right) experiments (data from Cantone et al., 2009).
(b) Temporal logic encoding of the switch-off and switch-on behaviors.
The operator EFφ expresses the possibility to reach a future state satisfying φ, whereas the operator EXφ is used to require the existence of an initial state satisfying φ. ugal low and ugal high denote the absence and presence of galactose, respectively.
See Clarke et al.
(1999) for more details on the temporal logic CTL.
Only changes greater than 5  10  3 units are considered signiﬁcant.
(c) Temporal gene expression proﬁle in an individual switch-on experiment showing a switch-off-like behavior.
Gal4  The PADE model of the IRMA network is shown in Figure 1b.
Consider the equation for the protein Gal4.
κ0 Gal4 is its basal +κGal4 its maximal synthesis rate when the synthesis rate, and κ0 GAL4 activator Cbf1 is present (i.e.
xCbf1   θCbf1).
Swi5 is regulated in a more complex way.
The expression of its gene is activated by Gal4, but only when not both Gal80 is present and galactose absent (which would lead to Gal4 inactivation by Gal80).
The step-function expression in Figure 1b mathematically describes this condition.
The IRMA PADE model is described in more detail in Section 1 of the Supplementary Material.
The model resembles the ODE model in Cantone et al.
(2009), but notably approximates the Hill-type kinetic rate laws by step functions.
It thus makes the implicit assumption that important qualitative dynamical properties of the network are intimately connected with the network structure and the regulatory logic, independently from the details of the kinetic mechanisms and precise parameter values.
Several studies have shown this assumption to be valid in a number of model systems (Chaves et al., 2009  Davidich and Bornholdt, 2008), although care should be exercised in deciding exactly when modeling approximations are valid (Polynikis et al., 2009).
To investigate for the possible existence of unknown interactions between the synthetic network and the host, we would like to test by means of the PADE model if the network structure and the regulatory logic alone can fully account for the trends in the gene expression proﬁles observed in Cantone et al.
(2009).
Because the addition of galactose does not always lead to an effective activation of the IRMA genes, we also search for parameter modiﬁcations that would render the network response to galactose more robust.
3 SEARCH OF PARAMETER SPACE USING  SYMBOLIC MODEL CHECKING  3.1 Qualitative analysis of PADE models The advantage of PADE models is that the qualitative dynamics of high-dimensional systems are relatively easy to analyze, using  only the total order on parameter values rather than exact numerical values (Batt et al., 2008  Edwards and Glass, 2006).
The main difﬁculty lies in treating the discontinuities in the right-hand side of the differential equations, at the threshold values of the step functions.
Following Gouzé and Sari (2002), the use of differential inclusions based on Filippov solutions has been proposed in Batt et al.
(2008) and implemented in the computer tool GNA (Batt et al., 2005).
Here, we recast this analysis in a form that underlies the symbolic encoding of the dynamics below.
The key to our reformulation of the qualitative analysis of the to interval-  PADE dynamics is the extension of step functions s valued functions S  , where  +  +  +  S  (xj,θj)=        [0,0] if xj   θj [0,1] if xj = θj [1,1] if xj   θj  (2)  Because the step functions are not deﬁned at their thresholds, we conservatively assume that they can take any value between 0 and 1 [see Chaves et al.
(2009) for a similar idea].
When replacing the step functions by their extensions, the regulation functions bl i(x)   [0,0],[0,1],[1,1] , become interval-valued functions Bl i and Equation (1) generalizes to the following differential inclusion using interval arithmetic (Moore, 1979):  : Rn 0   xi  Fi(x)(cid:1)  i(x) γi xi, i [1,n] i Bl κl  (3)  (cid:1) l Li  The solutions of (3) are for practical purposes the same as the solutions of the differential inclusions deﬁned in Batt et al.
(2008) (see Section 2 of the Supplementary Material).
The starting point for our qualitative analysis is the introduction of a rectangular partition D of the state space  .
This partition is a rectangular grid deﬁned by the threshold parameters  i= θj   j  Ji , where Ji is an index set, and the so-called focal parameters  i= (cid:5) /γi  B  Li , i [1,n].
Focal parameters are steady- state concentrations towards which the system locally converges in a monotonic way (Glass and Kauffman, 1973).
For Gal4,  l B κl i  i  [11:07 28/8/2010 Bioinformatics-btq387.tex]  Page: i605 i603 i610  i605   G.Batt et al.
+  Gal4  Gal4  /γGal4,(κ0  i(y)(cid:1) Bl  i(x)= Bl  we have  Gal4= θGal4  and  Gal4= 0,κ0 κGal4)/γGal4 .
Interestingly, the partition has the property that in each domain D D, the protein production rates are identical: for all x,y  D, it holds that Bl i(D).
As a consequence, the derivatives of the concentration variables have a unique sign pattern: for all x,y  D, it holds that sign(Fi(x))=sign(Fi(y))   1,0,1 , where sign(A)(cid:1) sign(a)  a  A  denotes the signs of the elements in A (Batt et al., 2008).
Notice that this property is not obtained for less ﬁne- grained partitions used in related work (Barnat et al., 2009  Bernot et al., 2004  Chaves et al., 2009  Corblin et al., 2009  Fauré et al., 2006  Fromentin et al., 2007).
It will be found critical for the search of parametrized models of IRMA that satisfy the time-series data.
The above considerations motivate a discrete abstraction, resulting in a state transition graph.
In this graph, the states are the domains D D, and there is a transition from a domain D to another domain D , if there exists a solution of the differential inclusion (3) that starts in D and reaches D .
The state transition graph deﬁnes the qualitative dynamics of the system, in the sense that paths in this graph describe how the qualitative state of the system evolves over time (Batt et al., 2008).
, without leaving D D  (cid:7)  (cid:7)  (cid:7)  (cid:7)  (cid:7)  (D  In Batt et al.
(2008), three different types of transitions are deﬁned: internal, from a domain D to itself  dimension-increasing, (cid:7) from a domain D to another, higher dimensional domain D (D   D )  and dimension-decreasing, from a domain D to a (cid:7)   D), where  D denotes the lower dimensional domain D boundary of D in its supporting hyperplane.
We reformulate here the transition rules using the interval extensions of the regulation functions.
We introduce an interval-valued function Fi: (cid:7) (cid:7)  D D 2R, where Fi(D,D i, for D,D (cid:7) D. Fi(D,D .
In (cid:7) order to evaluate Fi(D,D ), we use interval arithmetic (Moore, Swi5 and xAsh1= 1979).
For instance, in a domain in which xSwi5   θc   (xAsh1,θAsh1)= Swi5)=[1,1] and S θAsh1, we have S [0,1], so that the differential inclusion for xCbf1 becomes [κ1    γCbf1 xCbf1].
We obtain the following γCbf1 xCbf1, κ1 transition rule:  ) represents the ﬂow in D inﬁnitely close to D  i(D) γi D i Bl κl  )=(cid:5)  (xSwi5,θc  +κ2  l Li  Cbf1  Cbf1  Cbf1  +  (cid:7)  (cid:7)  (cid:7)  Proposition 1 (Dimension-increasing transition).
Let D,D D   D increasing transition iff  , that is, D lies in the boundary of D  .
D  D  (cid:7)  (cid:7)  (cid:7) D and is a dimension-  (cid:7) i coincide with a value in  i  (1)  i [1,n], such that Di and D (cid:7) (2)  i [1,n], such that Di(cid:10)= D i, it holds that  α  0 such that   i, it holds that 0  Fi(D α  Fi(D  (cid:7),D), and  (cid:7),D)(D   Di)  (cid:7) i  Condition 1 guarantees that solutions can remain in domains located in threshold and focal planes, while Condition 2 expresses (cid:7),D)) agrees that the direction of the ﬂow in the domains (Fi(D  Di).
The proof of the rule and the with their relative position (D rules for other types of transition can be found in Section 3 of the Supplementary Material.
(cid:7) i  It can be shown that exact parameter values are not needed for the analysis of the qualitative dynamics of a PADE model: it is sufﬁcient to know the ordering of the threshold and focal parameters (Batt et al., 2008).
This comes from the fact that the sign of Fi, and hence the transitions and the state transition graph, are invariant for regions  i606  of the parameter space deﬁned by a total order on  i  i.
We call each such total order a parametrization of the PADE model.
3.2 A model-checking approach for parameter search For large graphs like that obtained for IRMA (which has about 50 000 states), verifying the compatibility of the network structure with an observed or desired behavioral property is impossible to do by hand.
This has motivated the use of model-checking tools (e.g.
Barnat et al., 2009  Batt et al., 2005  Bernot et al., 2004  Fisher and Henzinger, 2007).
For PADE models, each state in the graph is described by atomic propositions whose truth values are preserved under the discrete abstraction, such as the above- mentioned derivative sign patterns.
The atomic propositions are used to formulate properties in a temporal-logic formula φ and model checkers automatically test if the state transition graph T satisﬁes the formula (T  = φ).
Because the number of possible parametrizations and the size of state transition graphs rapidly grow with the number of genes, the naive approach consisting in enumerating all parametrizations of a PADE model, and for each of these generating the state transition graph and testing T  = φ, is only feasible for the simplest networks.
We therefore propose an alternative approach, based on the symbolic encoding of the above search problem, without explicitly generating the possible parametrizations of the PADE models and the corresponding state transition graphs.
This enables one to exploit the capability of symbolic model checkers to efﬁciently manipulate implicit descriptions of the state and parameter space.
3.3 Symbolic encoding of PADE model and dynamics We summarize the main features of the encoding.
We particularly focus on the discretization of the state space, which connects the symbolic encoding to the mathematical analysis of PADE models, (cid:7),D), and the use of the discretization for the computation of Fi(D which is essential for determining state transitions.
We call C a discretization function that maps D D to a set of unique integer coordinates, and C(D)=C(D1)     C(Dn).
Let mi be the number of non-zero parameters in  i  i, i  [1,n].
Then C(Di)  0,1,...,2mi+1 , and more speciﬁcally, C(Di)   0,2,...,2mi  if Di coincides with a threshold or focal plane, and C(Di)  1,3,...,2mi+1  otherwise.
More generally, C(S)= C(D)  D  S , for any set of domains S. Obviously, C can also be used for the discretization of parameter values.
Given the following total order on the threshold and focal parameters of variable xGal4, +κGal4)/γGal4, we ﬁnd C(0)=0 0   κ0 + (by deﬁnition), C(κ0 κGal4)/γGal4)=6.
ˆD (cid:7) i,  The above discretization motivates the introduction of symbolic ˆθj ˆλj i ), C(λj i encoding C(Di), C(D variables i), i ,    i.
The different conditions    i and λj respectively, with θj i in Proposition 1 can be expressed in terms of these variables.
ˆDi).
In the case of  Di) becomes sign( ˆD (cid:7) For instance, sign(D (cid:7),D), multiplication by 1/γi does not change the sign, but gives i Fi(D the more convenient expression (cid:1) )/γi= l Li  /γGal4)=2, C(θGal4)=4 and C(κ0  /γGal4   θGal4  (κ0  i(D) D  (cid:7) i), C(θj  /γi) Bl  Fi(D,D  ˆDi,  (κl i  Gal4  Gal4  Gal4  Gal4  (4)  (cid:7) i  (cid:7) i  (cid:7)  i  [11:07 28/8/2010 Bioinformatics-btq387.tex]  Page: i606 i603 i610   Parameter search for qualitative models using symbolic model checking  The ﬁrst term in the right-hand side is simply an interval whose upper and lower bounds are focal parameters, determined by the regulation functions Bl i(D).
By redeﬁning the step functions in terms of the symbolic variables:  +  S  (Dj,θj)=        [0,0] iff ˆDj  ˆθj [0,1] iff ˆDj =ˆθj [1,1] iff ˆDj  ˆθj (cid:5)  (5)  i(D) can be simply computed using interval arithmetic.
This i(D) to be computed, (cid:7) i allows the to  each Bl (κl /γi) Bl allows the interval bounds of i.
Subtracting ˆD which are simply given by variables ˆλj i sign of Fi(D be evaluated.
(cid:7),D) and thus the conditions for a transition D  D  l Li  (cid:7)  The speciﬁcation of transitions in a symbolic way is the main stumble block for the efﬁcient encoding of the PADE dynamics, especially when D is located on a threshold plane.
In our previous work (Batt et al., 2008), the computation of transitions required the enumeration of an exponential number of domains surrounding D (Barnat et al., 2009).
The interval-based formulation proposed here allows (the sign of) Fi(D,D  ) to be computed in one stroke.
(cid:7)  (cid:7)  i , ˆλj  i, ˆθj (cid:7) (cid:7)  all valuations of ˆDi, ˆD  The implementation in a model checker such as NuSMV (Cimatti et al., 2002) is straightforward with the above encoding.
We apply invariant constraints on the symbolic variables to exclude i that do not correspond to a valid transition from D to D .
We apply three types of invariants.
The ﬁrst ones constrain parameters to remain constant.
The second ones (cid:7) to be neighbors in the state space (e.g.
D   D constrain D and D for dimension-increasing transitions).
The last ones constrain the (cid:7) relative position of Di and D i and the parameter order as stated in the transitions conditions.
For comparison with experimental data, we also need to know the variations of concentrations of gene products in each state.
These correspond to the derivative sign pattern, sign(Fi(D,D parametrization, that is, all possible values for ˆθj  The initial states of our symbolic description include each possible i, and transition towards all states D. In CTL, a temporal logic property φ holds if all initial states satisfy φ.
Therefore, by testing whether  φ holds, we verify the absence of a parametrization satisfying φ.
A counterexample to  φ thus directly returns a valid parametrization.
The current version 8 of GNA has been extended with export functionalities to generate the symbolic encoding of PADE models in the NuSMV language.
i and ˆλj  )).
(cid:7)  4 VALIDATION: CONSISTENCY OF IRMA  NETWORK WITH EXPERIMENTAL DATA  4.1 Temporal-logic encoding of observations Even when genetic constructs are tested separately and assembled with care, it is not obvious that a synthetic network will function in its cellular context as initially planned.
Here, we test the consistency between the IRMA network and the experimental data by expressing that for each condition, switch-on and switch-off, there must exist an initial state of the system and a path starting from this state along which the gene expression changes correspond to the observed time-series data.
For example, for the switch-off time-series we encode that there exists an initial state where in absence of galactose the expression of SWI5, CBF1, GAL4 and ASH1 decreases (in  the interval [0,10] min), and from which a state can be reached where the expression of SWI5 decreases and the expression of CBF1 increases (in the interval [10,20] min), etc.
The generation of this property φ1 from the experimental data leads to the temporal- logic formula shown in Figure 2b.
To disregard small ﬂuctuations due to biological and experimental noise, we considered changes  3 units not signiﬁcant.
Moreover, of magnitude less than 5 10 we ignore in our speciﬁcation the very ﬁrst measurements (in the interval [ 10,0]), just before shifting cells to a new medium, as they probably reﬂect network-independent effects (Cantone et al., 2009).
The data presented in Cantone et al.
(2009) for switch-on and switch-off conditions are the average of 5 and 4 individual experiments, respectively.
As noticed in Section 2.2, considering the averaged gene expression proﬁle may be misleading.
Asking for consistency between our model and the result of each individual experiment might therefore be more appropriate.
This leads us to deﬁne a second property φ2 similar to φ1 but requiring the existence of nine paths in the graph, one for each of the observed behaviors in the nine individual experiments.
Although the information we extract from the experimental data only concerns trends in gene product levels, the accumulation of these simple observations leads to fairly complex constraints.
Property φ2 involves nearly 160 constraints on derivative signs.
4.2 Testing consistency of network with observations We use our symbolic encoding of the PADE dynamics to test  φ1.
/γAsh1   θAsh1  (κ0  NuSMV returns false, meaning that a parametrization satisfying the averaged time-series data exists (Section 3.3).
The result was obtained in 49 s on a laptop (PC, 2.2 GHz, 1 core, 2 GB RAM), with an additional 100 s to provide the counterexample (Table 1).
When analyzing the corresponding parametrization, the thresholds are mostly greater than the focal parameter for basal expression and smaller than the focal parameter for upregulated expression, e.g.
κ0 Ash1 as the focal parameters correspond to the lowest and highest possible expression levels.
The threshold at which Ash1 controls CBF1 expression is expected to lie between the two extremes.
The only +κGal80)/γGal80   exception is Gal80, for which it holds (κ0 θGal80.
According to this constraint, Gal80 plays no role in the system, since it cannot exceed the threshold concentration above which it inhibits Swi5.
This is interesting because it suggests that the switch-off behavior may occur even without any inhibition by Gal80, and consequently, in a galactose-independent manner.
+κAsh1)/γAsh1.
This is not surprising  Gal80  Ash1  The dynamic properties of the PADE model can be analyzed in more detail by means of GNA.
This shows the existence of an asymptotically stable steady state corresponding to switch- off conditions, with low Swi5, Gal4, Cbf1, Ash1 and Gal80 concentrations.
strongly connected components consistent with the observed damped oscillations in galactose media.
However, the attractors co-exist irrespectively of the presence or absence of galactose, revealing that galactose does not necessarily drive the system to a single attractor for this particular parametrization.
In addition, GNA ﬁnds  (SCCs)  We also tested whether the above parametrization is consistent with time-series data from the individual experiments.
The model checker shows that it does not satisfy the more constraining property φ2.
However, we do ﬁnd another parametrization for which φ2 holds.
i607  [11:07 28/8/2010 Bioinformatics-btq387.tex]  Page: i607 i603 i610   G.Batt et al.
Table 1.
Summary of parametrizations found by checking the consistency of the IRMA structure with the observed and desired behaviors, expressed as temporal-logic properties φ1, φ2 and φ3.
The table shows the parametrization returned when testing the truth value of the property on the symbolically encoded PADE model and gene expression proﬁles (left) and summarizes all parametrizations satisfying the properties (right).
Symbolic state space and symbolic parameter space  Symbolic state space and fully parametrized models  Property  Existence of  parametrization  Parametrizationa  Number of  parametrizations  Parametrizationa  φ1: averaged time-series  φ2: individual  time-series  φ3: single attractor  Yes  (49 s)  Yes  (131 s)  Yes  (126 s)  κ0 Swi5 γSwi5  κ0 Swi5 γSwi5    θg   κ0  Swi5  Gal80 γGal80    θc Swi5 κ0 Gal80     Swi5    θa +κGal80 γGal80     κ0 Swi5  +κSwi5 γSwi5   θGal80    θa  Swi5  Swi5    θc   κ0  Gal80 γGal80    θGal80      θg Swi5 κ0 Gal80  +κSwi5 κ0   Swi5 γSwi5 +κGal80 γGal80  θc Swi5     κ0 Swi5 γSwi5    θg Swi5   θGal80   κ0 Gal80 γGal80    θa Swi5 κ0 Gal80     +κSwi5 κ0   Swi5 γSwi5 +κGal80 γGal80  64  (885 s)  4  (2021 s)  7  (1300 s)  See Section 4 of Supplementary Material  κ0 Swi5 γSwi5    θc Swi5   ( κ0 Gal80 γGal80   (θa  Swi5  ,θg  ,θGal80)    Swi5)   κ0 Gal80  +κSwi5 κ0 Swi5 γSwi5 +κGal80 γGal80  θc Swi5     κ0 Swi5 γSwi5    θGal80      (θg  Swi5     κ0 Swi5 γSwi5    θa Swi5 κ0 Gal80  +κSwi5 κ0   Swi5 γSwi5 +κGal80 γGal80  θGal80   κ0 Gal80 γGal80  )  aAll parametrizations shown additionally include [κ1 (κ0  +κAsh1)/γAsh1].
Ash1  Cbf1  /γCbf1   θCbf1  (κ1  Cbf1  +κ2  Cbf1)/γCbf1]   [κ0  Gal4  /γGal4   θGal4  (κ0  Gal4  +κGal4)/γGal4]   [κ0  Ash1  /γAsh1   θAsh1    In this case, all thresholds are situated between the basal and upregulated focal parameters.
4.3 Detailed analysis of valid parameter set Our consistency tests only conﬁrm that a parametrization exists for which the structure of the network is consistent with the observed behavior.
However, it does not say if this is trivially the case (for most parametrizations) or if the properties are selective (for only a few parametrizations).
To investigate this we exhaustively generated all parametrizations, and tested for each of them properties φ1 and φ2.
Although the total number of parameter orderings is fairly large, the exhaustive analysis is still manageable for networks of this size.
Out of the 4860 completely parametrized PADE models, we found that only a surprisingly small subset is consistent with the observations.
For the averaged time series, only 64 parametrizations are consistent, while for the individual time series this subset is further reduced to 4 (Table 1).
The properties extracted from the data are thus quite selective.
The results for individual time series indicate that to be consistent with the experimental data, the activation threshold of CBF1 by Swi5 (θc Swi5), must be smaller than the activation thresholds of ASH1 and GAL80 by Swi5 (θa Swi5).
Interestingly, this result is corroborated by independent measurements of promoter activities, which show that the activation threshold for the ASH1 promoter, controlling ASH1 and GAL80 expression, is nearly twice as high as the one for the HO promoter controlling CBF1 expression (Table S1 of Cantone et al., 2009).
Swi5 and θg  A second ﬁnding is that the dynamics of the system is consistent with the experimental data even if θGal80   κ0 /γGal80, that is when GAL80 is constitutively expressed above its inhibition threshold.
This indicates that an effective regulation of GAL80 expression by Swi5 is of little importance for the functioning of the network.
Indeed, it was found that GAL80 is not much responsive to  Gal80  i608  changes in Swi5 availability: Cantone et al.
observed that a 6-fold increase of SWI5 expression leads to only a negligible (1.08-fold) increase in GAL80 expression levels (Fig.
4A in Cantone et al., 2009).
5 RE-ENGINEERING: IMPROVING EXTERNAL  CONTROL BY GALACTOSE  least,  In one experiment at the addition of galactose does not signiﬁcantly change the system s behavior: a switch-off-like response is observed in switch-on conditions.
To obtain a more robust external control of the system, we would like to ensure that the addition of galactose drives the system out of the low-Swi5 state.
Swi5  5.1 Temporal-logic speciﬁcation of design objective We start by specifying that in switch-off conditions the Swi5 concentration must eventually remain low, that is, equal to its basal expression level κ0 /γSwi5.
This is expressed in CTL as AFAG xSwi5 low.
In switch-on conditions, an oscillatory behavior in the concentration of Swi5 is expected.
It can be formulated by means of the formula AGAF(xSwi5 inc  AF xSwi5 dec), requiring that an increase in xSwi5 is observed inﬁnitely often and necessarily followed by a decrease in xSwi5.
In addition to these two basic requirements, we impose that in presence of galactose, the Swi5 concentration cannot indeﬁnitely stay low: ugal high  AF xSwi5 low.
We preﬁx these speciﬁcations so as to express the possibility (EX) to reach the appropriate attractor from at least one initial state, and the necessity (AX) to leave the switch-off steady state for all initial states in switch-on conditions:  φ3 (cid:1) EX(ugal high AGAF(xSwi5 inc  AF xSwi5 dec))   EX(ugal low AFAG xSwi5 low)  AX(ugal high AF xSwi5 low)  [11:07 28/8/2010 Bioinformatics-btq387.tex]  Page: i608 i603 i610   Parameter search for qualitative models using symbolic model checking  5.2 Parametrizations consistent with design objective Using symbolic model checking, we test the feasibility of φ3.
In about 2 min, we ﬁnd a valid parametrization (Table 1).
For this parametrization, in the presence of galactose GNA ﬁnds two terminal SCCs attracting the major part of the state space, and notably the switch-off state.
In the absence of galactose, although SCCs are present, they are non-terminal and one can show that a unique stable steady state with all genes off (i.e.
corresponding to switch-off conditions) is eventually always reached.
A ﬁrst surprising feature is that θc  Recall that one of the time series in the switch-on conditions contradicts our speciﬁcation.
It is consequently not surprising that none of the parametrizations consistent with the experimental data satisﬁes φ3.
We searched for all valid parametrizations and found that only 7 out of 4860 are consistent with our speciﬁcation (Table 1).
/γSwi5: Swi5 must always activate CBF1.
Stated differently, this constraint simply suggests to remove the regulation of CBF1 by Swi5.
This can be explained by a qualitative analysis of the system dynamics.
In the presence of galactose, we expect oscillations for Swi5.
However, the presence of Swi5 is required for the expression of CBF1 since the HO promoter functions like an AND gate: HO is on if and only if Swi5 is present and Ash1 is absent.
So, if Swi5 is not permanently present, Cbf1 and then Gal4 might disappear, causing the system to converge to the switch-off state.
κ0  Swi5  Swi5  Swi5  Gal80    κ0  A second surprising feature is that the regulation of GAL80 by Swi5 should not be effective.
Indeed θg /γSwi5 or θGal80   κ0 /γGal80 means that either the GAL80 promoter is always activated, or that the Gal80 concentration is always sufﬁcient to repress SWI5.
As above, this suggests to remove an interaction, namely the regulation of GAL80 by Swi5.
Interestingly, the demand for increased external control of the system leads us to a simpliﬁed design in which two out of the three feedback loops (Swi5/Cbf1/Gal4/Swi5 and Swi5/Gal80/Swi5) are removed.
Swi5  6 DISCUSSION We propose a method for efﬁcient search of the parameter space of qualitative models of regulatory networks, to investigate the relation between structural and behavioral properties of these systems.
On the methodological side, the main novelty is that we develop a symbolic encoding of the dynamics of PADE models, enabling the use of highly efﬁcient model-checking tools for analyzing incompletely parametrized models.
The symbolic encoding avoids explicit state space generation and the enumeration of possible parametrizations.
We demonstrate that the proposed approach scales up to relatively complex synthetic networks.
Although developed for PADE models, the main ideas underlying the approach carry over to logical models (Thomas and d Ari, 1990).
On the biological side, we show the practical relevance of the approach by means of an application to the IRMA network.
The parameter constraints we obtained are precise, have a clear biological interpretation, and are consistent with independent experimental observations.
Even when considering complex dynamical properties, the search of the parameter space takes at most a few minutes.
Our results seem to conﬁrm the intended separation of IRMA from the host network, and suggest that to obtain a more robust response to the addition of galactose, an effective rewiring of the network would be needed.
In comparison with traditional quantitative approaches, the results we obtain are quite general, since they do not depend on speciﬁc molecular mechanisms or parameter values.
Moreover, the analysis is exhaustive in the sense that the entire parameter space is scanned.
These two features are particularly interesting for  negative results , such as showing that a given design is not likely to show a desired behavior.
In contrast, quantitative ODE models like those developed in Cantone et al.
(2009) do not predict a range of possible behaviors but rather single out one likely behavior with quantitative precision.
Qualitative and quantitative approaches provide complementary information on system dynamics.
in two respects.
First,  In comparison with other analysis and veriﬁcation methods developed for similar modeling formalisms (Barnat et al., 2009  Bernot et al., 2004  Corblin et al., 2009  Fromentin et al., 2007), our approach is original it applies to incompletely parametrized models and can handle any dynamical property expressible in temporal logics supported by the model checker.
Second, we reason at a ﬁner abstraction level, in that we take into account dynamics on the thresholds and work with a partition of the state space preserving derivative sign patterns.
The latter feature is particularly well-suited for the comparison of model predictions with time-series data in IRMA.
An interesting direction for further research is to consider more general problems in which not only parameters but also regulation functions are incompletely speciﬁed.
This would make a connection with work on the reverse engineering of Boolean models (Martin et al., 2007  Perkins et al., 2004).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank Delphine Ropers, Maria Pia Cosma and Diego di Bernardo for helpful discussions and contributions.
Funding: The European Commission COBIOS FP6-2005-NEST- PATH-COM/043379  the French ANR Calamar ANR-08-SYSC- 003.
Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES Barnat,J.
et al.
(2009) On algorithmic analysis of transcriptional regulation by LTL  model checking.
Theor.
Comput.
Sci., 410, 3128 3148.
Batt,G.
et al.
(2008) Symbolic reachability analysis of genetic regulatory networks using  discrete abstractions.
Automatica, 44, 982 989.
Batt,G.
et al.
(2005) Validation of qualitative models of genetic regulatory networks by  model checking.
Bioinformatics, 21 (Suppl.
1), i19 i28.
Bernot,G.
et al.
(2004) Application of formal methods to biological regulatory networks.
J. Theor.
Biol., 229, 339 348.
Cantone,I.
et al.
(2009) A yeast synthetic network for in vivo assessment of reverse-  engineering and modeling approaches.
Cell, 137, 172 181.
Chaves,M.
et al.
(2009) Geometry and topology of parameter space: investigating  measures of robustness in regulatory networks.
J.
Math.
Biol., 59, 315 358.
Cimatti,A.
et al.
(2002) NuSMV2: an opensource tool for symbolic model checking.
In  CAV 02, Vol.
2404 of LNCS.
Springer, pp.
359 364.
Clarke,E.M.
et al.
(1999) Model Checking.
MIT Press, Cambridge, USA.
Corblin,F.
et al.
(2009) A declarative constraint-based method for analyzing discrete  genetic regulatory networks.
Biosystems, 98, 91 104.
Davidich,M.
and Bornholdt,S.
(2008) The transition from differential equations to Boolean networks: a case study in simplifying a regulatory network model.
J. Theor.
Biol., 255, 269 277.
Edwards,R.
and Glass,L.
(2006) A calculus for relating the dynamics and structure of complex biological networks.
In Berry,R.S.
and Jortner,J.
(eds) Adventures in Chemical Physics, Vol.
132.
Wiley, Hobeken, USA, pp.
151 178.  i609  [11:07 28/8/2010 Bioinformatics-btq387.tex]  Page: i609 i603 i610   G.Batt et al.
Fauré,A.
et al.
(2006) Dynamical analysis of a generic Boolean model for the control  Moore,R.E.
(1979) Methods and Applications of Interval Analysis.
SIAM, Philadelphia,  of the mammalian cell cycle.
Bioinformatics, 22, e124 e131.
USA.
Fisher,J.
and Henzinger,T.A.
(2007) Executable cell biology.
Nat.
Biotechnol., 25,  Perkins,T.J.
et al.
(2004) Inferring models of gene expression dynamics.
J.Theor.
Biol.,  1239 1250.
230, 289 299.
Fromentin,J.
et al.
(2007) Analysing gene regulatory networks by both constraint  Polynikis,A.
et al.
(2009) Comparing different ODE modelling approaches for gene  programming and model-checking.
In IEEE EMBC07, pp.
4595 4598.  regulatory networks.
J. Theor.
Biol., 261, 511 530.
Glass,L.
and Kauffman,S.A.
(1973) The logical analysis of continuous non-linear  biochemical control networks.
J. Theor.
Biol., 39, 103 129.
Gouzé,J.-L. and Sari,T.
(2002) A class of piecewise linear differential equations arising  in biological models.
Dyn.
Syst., 17, 299 316.
Martin,S.
et al.
(2007) Boolean dynamics of genetic regulatory networks inferred from  microarray time series data.
Bioinformatics, 23, 866 874.
Monteiro,P.T.
et al.
(2008) Temporal logic patterns for querying dynamic models of  cellular interaction networks.
Bioinformatics, 24, i227 i233.
Saez-Rodriguez,J.
et al.
(2009) Discrete logic modelling as a means to link protein signalling networks with functional analysis of mammalian signal transduction.
Mol.
Syst.
Biol., 5, 331.
Thomas,R.
and d Ari,R.
(1990) Biological Feedback.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA.
Tsai,T.Y.-C. et al.
(2008) Robust, tunable biological oscillations from interlinked  positive and negative feedback loops.
Science, 321, 126 129.  i610  [11:07 28/8/2010 Bioinformatics-btq387.tex]  Page: i610 i603 i610
