ABSTRACT Motivation: Most anatomical ontologies are species-specific, whereas a framework for comparative studies is needed.
We describe the vertebrate Homologous Organs Groups ontology, vHOG, used to compare expression patterns between species.
Results: vHOG is a multispecies anatomical ontology for the vertebrate lineage.
It is based on the HOGs used in the Bgee database of gene expression evolution.
vHOG version 1.4 includes 1184 terms, follows OBO principles and is based on the Common Anatomy Reference Ontology (CARO).
vHOG only describes structures with historical homology relations between model vertebrate species.
The mapping to species-specific anatomical ontologies is provided as a separate file, so that no homology hypothesis is stated within the ontology itself.
Each mapping has been manually reviewed, and we provide support codes and references when available.
Availability and implementation: vHOG is available from the Bgee download site (http://bgee.unil.ch/), as well as from the OBO Foundry and the NCBO Bioportal websites.
Contact: bgee@isb-sib.ch; frederic.bastian@unil.ch Received on September 9, 2011; revised on January 13, 2012; accepted on January 23, 2012 1 INTRODUCTION One of the main approaches to understand biological objects has long been comparative studies, from comparative anatomy in the 18th century to comparative genomics in the last decade.
Comparative analysis can notably help identify adaptation, as well as functional or structural constraints (Harvey and Pagel, 1991).
Many of the data which we would like to compare, such as gene expression or phenotypes, need to be mapped to anatomy and development of organisms to be of use.
To facilitate the automatic manipulation of this data, there has been an important effort to build ontologies, which describe the anatomy of human and of animal model organisms (Bard, 2008).
These ontologies have tended to be species-specific, resulting in an increasing number of ontologies corresponding to different projects (see the OBO Foundry and the NCBO Bioportal, Noy et al., 2009; Smith et al., 2007).
This makes To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Present address: Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Cummings Life Science Center, 920 East 58th Street-CLSC 325C Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
the comparison between species difficult, since differences in representational schemes and in vocabulary are added to the differences in biology.
Yet automatic comparisons are increasingly necessary, with large amounts of functional data generated in diverse model organisms.
An integrated view is advantageous both for a fundamental understanding of animal biology and evolution, and for the efficient transfer of information from model organisms to human or veterinary medicine.
Multispecies integration within anatomical ontologies poses a number of challenges.
One is the criterion of comparison.
While comparative studies can be performed in diverse frameworks, homology is the most widely recognized criterion (Hall, 1994).
This raises further problems.
First, homology is always a hypothesis (Haendel et al., 2008), which according to the principle of reality followed by the OBO Foundry should not be included within an ontology (Smith and Ceusters, 2010) (although see Merrill, 2010).
Second, there exist structures which will not be included in a homology comparison between a given pair of species, because they are specific to one or the other, and have no homolog.
Third, the exclusion of analogous structures might be limiting for some studies (e.g.
comparing insect and vertebrate eye development).
Fourth, homologous structures can diverge in function or structure, to an extent that representing them together in an ontology might be difficult.
Finally, there can be differences between species in the relationships among structures (Haendel et al., 2008).
There are several ongoing efforts to create multispecies ontologies for animal groups, which have chosen different answers to the challenges outlined above.
The Teleost Anatomy Ontology (TAO) (Dahdul et al., 2010) is a multispecies ontology for teleost fishes.
The TAO is based on the Zebrafish Anatomy Ontology (ZFA) (from the ZFIN database, Bradford et al., 2011), and uses general (higher level) terms from the Common Anatomy Reference Ontology (CARO) (Haendel et al., 2008).
The CARO was created to provide a common basis for all future anatomy ontologies and facilitate their interoperability.
Several other efforts follow the same model as the TAO, and include the Amphibian Anatomy Ontology and the Hymenoptera Anatomy Ontology.
In each of these cases, there is an effort to describe the morphological diversity of the clade.
Consequently, each ontology will include terms that are found in several species of the clade.
The use of a term for several species in the TAO does not imply homology (Dahdul et al., 2010).
A species-specific ontology (e.g.
ZFA) is considered a subset of the multispecies ontology (e.g.
TAO).
The Author(s) 2012.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Copyedited by: ES MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: ORIGINAL PAPER [13:05 12/3/2012 Bioinformatics-bts048.tex] Page: 1018 10171020 A.Niknejad et al.
A different approach is taken by the Uberon project (Mungall et al.
2012), which maps terms from several animal anatomy ontologies, but also anatomy-related terms from the Gene Ontology or medical ontologies, and other multispecies ontologies such as the TAO or our organs groups (Bastian et al., 2008).
Uberon aims to provide anatomical information in relation to the Gene Ontology and the Cell Ontology, and is neutral relative to the criterion of homology (C.Mungall, personal communication).
Uberon thus groups structures based on a criterion of similarity (Dahdul et al., 2010; C.Mungall, personal communication) that is the parent concept of homology, and also of homoplasy or of functional similarity (Roux and Robinson-Rechavi, 2010).
Despite the issues raised by the use of the criterion of homology, we feel that it also presents important advantages.
First, restricting to one criterion allows a clear interpretation of the ontology when used in a database; it especially allows a clear use of automatic reasoning.
Second, homology is transitive, which allows us to form an ontology of organs groups, rather than encode all pairwise relations between terms.
Finally, it is the one criterion that permits correct formulation of hypotheses of adaptation or constraints in evolution (Harvey and Pagel, 1991).
Our software Homolonto to align ontologies (Parmentier et al., 2010) generates a multispecies ontology of Homologous Organs Groups (HOGs).
These HOGs are used in our database of gene expression evolution, Bgee (Bastian et al., 2008), as well as in Uberon.
Mappings in the HOGs are restricted to manually curated relations of homology.
We use a strict definition of historical homology: Homology that is defined by common descent (HOM:0000007, Roux and Robinson-Rechavi, 2010).
The homology in Bgee has allowed the comparison of expression patterns between species in several applications, such as the characterization of gene interactions in development (Comte et al., 2010), the study of orthologs and paralogs (Huerta-Cepas et al., 2011) (Bastian,F.B.
et al., unpublished data) or the study of microRNA evolution (Roux et al., unpublished data).
The HOGs used in Bgee are part of the database schema, are constrained according to the database optimization, and are not formatted for easy external use.
Yet, it is also desirable to provide an ontology which is optimized for inter-operability and reuse by the community.
Thus, we present here a CARO-compliant version of the HOG ontology, with all terms and relations carefully curated.
The present version of this ontology is limited to vertebrates.
Based on the alignment of two mammals, one frog and one fish, it covers many of the morphological terms needed to describe most vertebrates.
Thus, we present both the first large and high-quality ontology of vertebrate anatomy, and the first ontology strictly limited to homologous structures: vHOG.
2 RESULTS All terms of the vHOG ontology were manually curated, to verify that they correspond to groups of homologous organs between vertebrate species, linked by relations of strict historical homology, as defined in the HOM ontology (Roux and Robinson-Rechavi, 2010).
When the structures are homologous but divergent, we use a combination of terms, such as limb-fin bud (VHOG:000125).
Relations between the terms were also manually curated (see algorithm in Parmentier et al., 2010), and set either to is_a or to part_of.
We aim to provide exactly one is_a relation for each term, according to OBO Foundry guidelines.
As noted in the TAO publication (Dahdul et al., 2010), it is at present difficult to implement this guideline in practice for anatomical ontologies.
In future versions of the vHOG, we will continue working toward this aim.
The terms and relations thus generated were incorporated into the framework of the CARO (Haendel et al., 2008).
We were careful to implement this in a manner consistent with other anatomical ontologies using CARO: TAO, XAO and ZFA.
This especially concerns the relations between vHOG terms derived from species-specific ontology alignments and higher level CARO terms, e.g.
digit is_a anatomical cluster.
The vHOG ontology version 1.4 (December 2011) has 1184 terms, 506 is_a relations and 1181 part_of relations.
There are 664 synonyms; 547 terms have definitions; 67% of terms have only one parent, 25% have two parents, and the others have three or more.
There are 493 cross-references (xref) to other multispecies OBO ontologies.
These do not include the mappings to species-specific ontologies, as we consider that mappings from multispecies ontologies to species-specific ontologies should not be treated as xrefs, but should be encoded separately in an association file, similar to the Gene Ontology Annotation mapping (Barrell et al., 2009).
This differs from the approach of Uberon, which includes cross-references to the source ontologies in the multispecies ontology itself (Dahdul et al., 2010).
All mappings of terms from the species-specific ontologies to the vHOG terms were manually curated.
There are 5129 terms from species-specific ontologies mapped to 1169 vHOG terms, which represent 2259 hypotheses of homology between vertebrates (i.e.
2259 pair-wise relations between structures in different species).
There are 15 vHOG terms with no mappings, which correspond to higher level CARO terms (e.g.
material anatomical entity).
The semantics of the mapping is treat-xrefs-as-equivalent for CARO, and equivalent to treat-xref-as-genus-differentia for the mapping to species-specific ontologies.
The mappings were annotated with support codes to provide confidence information (Table 1).
Means to provide confidence metadata information in support of annotations are currently being discussed in the framework of the Evidence Code Ontology (ECO) (Gene Ontology Consortium, 2010) and of the International Society for Biocuration.
Our objective is to rely on the use of the ECO, once a standard to address the issue of confidence has emerged in the biocuration and ontology communities.
In practice, the support codes obvious and inferred are essentially used for homology between the two mammals considered in our ontology: 97% of all mappings with the code inferred are for human and mouse.
All mappings with the code obvious are for human and mouse, except whole organism which has the code obvious for all ontologies.
Among the vHOG groups noted debated, several concern bones and the skeletal system, due to citations such as the following: Whether this biomineralization toolkit of genes reflects a parallel co-option of a common suite of genes or the inheritance of a skeletogenic gene regulatory network from a biomineralizing common ancestor remains an open debate (Murdock and Donoghue, 2011) (more references in the association file).
Another case of debate is the vomeronasal organ (VHOG:0000665).
None of the three bibliographical references cited in the association file is conclusive concerning the existence and homology of this 1018 Copyedited by: ES MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: ORIGINAL PAPER [13:05 12/3/2012 Bioinformatics-bts048.tex] Page: 1019 10171020 vHOG Table 1.
Support for mapping of species-specific anatomical ontologies to vHOG Support code Meaning
