Summary: Iterative similarity searches with PSI-BLAST positionspecific score matrices (PSSMs) find many more homologs than single searches, but PSSMs can be contaminated when homologous alignments are extended into unrelated protein domainshomologous over-extension (HOE).
PSI-Search combines an optimal SmithWaterman local alignment sequence search, using SSEARCH, with the PSI-BLAST profile construction strategy.
An optional sequence boundary-masking procedure, which prevents alignments from being extended after they are initially included, can reduce HOE errors in the PSSM profile.
Preventing HOE improves selectivity for both PSI-BLAST and PSI-Search, but PSI-Search has 4-fold better selectivity than PSI-BLAST and similar sensitivity at 50% and 60% family coverage.
PSI-Search is also produces 2-for 4-fold fewer false-positives than JackHMMER, but is 5% less sensitive.
Availability and implementation: PSI-Search is available from the authors as a standalone implementation written in Perl for Linux-compatible platforms.
It is also available through a web interface (www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/sss/psisearch) and SOAP and REST Web Services (www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/webservices).
Contact: pearson@virginia.edu; rodrigo.lopez@ebi.ac.uk Received on March 29, 2012; revised on March 29, 2012; accepted on April 17, 2012 1 INTRODUCTION PSI-BLAST (Altschul et al., 1997) uses an iterative strategy to construct a protein profile, in the form of a position-specific score matrix (PSSM), which dramatically improves homology detection in diverse protein families.
Improved versions of PSI-BLAST have more accurate statistics and more sensitive consensus profiles (Agrawal et al., 2009; Altschul et al., 2005, 2009; Bhadra et al., 2006; Li et al., 2011; Przybylski and Rost, 2008; Stojmirovic et al., 2008), but the most common cause of PSI-BLAST errors is contamination of the PSSM by extension of an homologous domain into a non-homologous region (homologous over-extension, HOE) (Gonzalez and Pearson, 2010a).
Even searches with a single welldefined domain do not guarantee uncontaminated profiles (Kim et al., 2010).
Some HOE errors can be reduced by profile cleaning; HangOut (Kim et al., 2010) focuses on long insertions, but requires insertion boundaries to be specified by the user, thus assuming a priori knowledge of the domain structure of the query protein.
To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Here we present PSI-Search, an iterated profile search application for identifying distantly related protein sequences.
PSI-Search is similar to PSI-BLAST, but substitutes a rigorous SmithWaterman local alignment (Smith and Waterman, 1981) search strategy (SSEARCH, Pearson, 1991) to produce optimal local alignment scores from the profile PSSM.
PSI-Search includes an optional alignment boundary-masking procedure that reduces HOE errors in the PSSM profile.
SCANPS (Walsh et al., 2008) implements a similar iterative search strategy using SmithWaterman alignments; however, it does not currently scale to large protein databases and does not include boundary masking.
2 METHODS In PSI-Search, library searches are performed with ssearch, selected hit sequences from the result are processed with an automated sequence boundary-masking procedure, and PSSM profiles are built using blastpgp.
The PSI-Search iteration workflow (Fig.1a) iterates through search and alignment/PSSM construction steps: (1) The initial iteration is a normal ssearch run with a sequence input.
(2) During the second iteration, aligned sequences with statistically significant scores from the previous search are retrieved using fastacmd; details of the alignment boundaries are stored; sequence regions outside the boundaries are masked with Xs to remove potential HOE regions; masked sequences are formatted into BLAST indexes using formatdb with an additional 10 000 random protein sequences created by makeprotseq (Rice et al., 2000); and a PSSM checkpoint constructed with a blastpgp search; finally ssearch is run with the input sequence, using the generated PSSM, to complete the second iteration and output alignments.
(3) Further iterations repeat Step (2).
To avoid HOEs, PSI-Search always uses the alignment boundary information from the first significant alignment in which a library sequence appears.
Thus, if the first significant alignment with a library sequence aligns residues 25125 at iteration i, later alignment boundaries at iteration i+1 and beyond are ignored; only the initially aligned region (25125) is used to form the PSSM.
3 RESULTS Five iterative search strategiesPSI-BLAST (standard and HOE-reduced), PSI-Search (standard and HOE-reduced) and JackHMMER (Eddy, 2011)were evaluated on the RefProtDom (Gonzalez and Pearson, 2010b) benchmark queries (500 sampled domain-embedded sequences) against the RefProtDom benchmark database using an E-value threshold of 0.001.
JackHMMER is another iterative search tool that uses Hidden Markov Models The Author(s) 2012.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Copyedited by: AH MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: APPLICATIONS NOTE [20:34 17/5/2012 Bioinformatics-bts240.tex] Page: 1651 16501651 PSI-Search (a) (b) Fig.1.
(a) HOE-reduced PSI-Search iteration workflow.
(b) Fraction of true-positives versus false-positives found by PSI-BLAST, PSI-BLAST HOE-reduced, PSI-Search, PSI-Search HOE-reduced, and JackHMMER.
Weighted true-positives and false-positives are calculated as 1/500 500 1 tpf (or fpf )/totalf where tpf (or fpf ) is the number of true positives (or false positives) at iteration 5 and totalf is the total number of homologs for query f in the RefProtDom benchmark database.
Alignments containing HOEs with >50% of the alignment outside the homologous boundary are counted as both true and false positives (HMMs) (Johnson et al., 2010) rather than a PSSM.
The output alignments from the fifth iteration were classified into true positives (TPs) and false positives (FPs, Fig.1b).
At 50% family coverage, PSI-Search reduces the weighted fraction of errors from 4.5% (PSI-BLAST) to 2.9% (PSI-Search).
Reducing HOE improves sensitivity even more, to 1.7% for HOE-reduced PSIBLAST and 0.5% for HOE-reduced PSI-Search.
At 50% coverage, JackHMMER performs very well using its statistical alignment envelope, producing only 1% weighted FPs, but its selectivity is worse than PSI-Search or HOE-reduced PSI-Search at 60% and 75% coverage.
Overall, HOE-reduced PSI-Search is 9-fold more selective than PSI-BLAST.
At the end of iteration 5, 78.3, 79.5, 77.3, 78.8 and 82.5% of weighted homologs are found by PSI-BLAST, PSI-Search, HOE-reduced PSI-BLAST, HOE-reduced PSI-Search and JackHMMER respectively.
Thus, (i) HOE-reduction greatly improves search selectivity with a small cost in sensitivity in both PSI-BLAST and PSI-Search; (ii) Both PSI-Search and JackHMMER are more sensitive and selective than PSI-BLAST; (iii) HOEreduced PSI-Search is more selective, but slightly less sensitive, than JackHMMER.
JackHMMER is the most sensitive tool, but HOE-reduced PSI-Search is the most selective iterative tool.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Funding: This research was supported by the National Library of Medicine (NIH grant LM04969 to W.R.P.
); European Molecular Biology Laboratory; and European Commission Research Infrastructures of the FP7 [grant agreement number 226073 SLING (Integrating Activity)].
Conflict of Interest: none declared.
