Copyedited by: TRJ  MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: APPLICATIONS NOTE  BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol.
28 no.
14 2012, pages 1943 1944  doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts278  Systems biology Mosaic: making biological sense of complex networks Chao Zhang1, Kristina Hanspers2, Allan Kuchinsky3, Nathan Salomonis2, Dong Xu1 and Alexander R. Pico2,  1Department of Computer Science and Christopher S. Bond Life Sciences Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 65211, 2Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA, 94158 and 3Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, 95051 Associate Editor: Trey Ideker  Advance Access publication May 9, 2012  ABSTRACT Summary: We present a Cytoscape plugin called Mosaic to support interactive network annotation, partitioning, layout and coloring based on gene ontology or other relevant annotations.
Availability: Mosaic is distributed for free under the Apache v2.0 open source license and can be downloaded via the Cytoscape plugin manager.
A detailed user manual is available on the Mosaic web site (http://nrnb.org/tools/mosaic).
Contact: apico@gladstone.ucsf.edu  Received on February 15, 2012  revised on April 26, 2012  accepted on May 1, 2012  1 INTRODUCTION The increasing throughput and quality of molecular measurements in the domains of genomics, proteomics and metabolomics continue to fuel the understanding of biological processes.
Collected per molecule, the scope of these data extends to physical, genetic and biochemical interactions that in turn comprise extensive networks.
There are software tools available to visualize and analyze data- derived biological networks (Smoot et al., 2011).
One challenge faced by these tools is how to make sense of such networks often represented as massive  hairballs .
Many network analysis algorithms ﬁlter or partition networks based on topological features, optionally weighted by orthogonal node or edge data (Bader and Hogue, 2003  Royer et al., 2008).
Another approach is to mathematically model networks and rely on their statistical properties to make associations with other networks, phenotypes and drug effects, sidestepping the issue of making sense of the network itself altogether (Machado et al., 2011).
Acknowledging that there is still great value in engaging the minds of researchers in exploratory data analysis at the level of networks (Kelder et al., 2010), we have produced a Cytoscape plugin called Mosaic to support interactive network annotation and visualization that includes partitioning, layout and coloring based on biologically relevant ontologies (Fig.
1).
Mosaic shows slices of a given network in the visual language of biological pathways, which are familiar to any biologist and are ideal frameworks for integrating knowledge.
Cytoscape is a free and open source network visualization platform that actively supports independent plugin development (Smoot et al., 2011).
For annotation, Mosaic relies primarily on the full gene ontology (GO) or simpliﬁed  slim  versions (http://     To whom correspondence should be addressed.
www.geneontology.org/GO.slims.shtml).
The cellular layout of partitioned subnetworks strictly depends on the cellular component branch of GO, but the other two functions, partitioning and coloring, can be driven by any annotation associated with a major gene or protein identiﬁer system.
2 METHODS 2.1 Annotation Although Mosaic uses practically any annotation, its primary usage relies on GO (for best results, a reduced subset of GO-slim).
GO provides a controlled vocabulary of terms describing key characteristics of gene products (i.e., process, location and function).
Currently, Mosaic supports seven species and we provide four different varieties of GO annotations for each species, including three  slimmed  ontologies.
The Mosaic package does not contain any data ﬁles.
All necessary data for each species are stored on the Mosaic web server where it will be periodically updated.
Users can download the corresponding data for their species of interest prior to running Mosaic for the ﬁrst time.
Once the data for one species are successfully downloaded to the local machine, Mosaic can be executed for this species in both ofﬂine and online modes.
Each time a user starts Mosaic with an Internet connection, Mosaic can synchronize local data information with the server automatically.
These data are parsed from Ensembl and GO.
Ensembl ID is recommended as the unifying identiﬁer for user networks, although several other identiﬁer systems are also supported in Mosaic.
2.2 Partition The network is partitioned into a set of subnetworks based on the GO Biological Process annotation of the nodes.
For example, all nodes annotated with the GO term  translation  are placed in a new subnetwork entitled  Translation .
Subnetworks are hierarchically organized to reﬂect the parent  child relationships between GO terms, and Mosaic only displays those subnetworks with node counts between minimum and maximum thresholds deﬁned in the settings panel.
When a given node is annotated with more than one Biological Process term, it is replicated and placed into each corresponding subnetwork.
An overview network is also created, with each node representing a Biological Process subnetwork.
Node size reﬂects the number of genes in the corresponding subnetwork and edge weight represents the number of edges (connections) between the nodes in two subnetworks.
In the Mosaic Control Panel (Fig.
1), all subnetworks are listed hierarchically, including subnetworks that fall outside deﬁned thresholds for display.
Selecting a subnetwork in the Control Panel will bring it into focus in the tiled window view.
Additional functions can be accessed by right-clicking on the name of a particular subnetwork in the Control Panel.
In particular,  partition this network to one further level  allows users to partition a huge network to deep levels of GO efﬁciently without generating hundreds of other subnetworks from parallel branches.
The Author(s) 2012.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
[10:51 18/6/2012 Bioinformatics-bts278.tex]  Page: 1943 1943 1944   Copyedited by: TRJ  MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: APPLICATIONS NOTE  C.Zhang et al.
Fig.
1.
Mosaic Control Panel, context menu and tiled result windows.
Mosaic highlights the subset of proteins and interactions associated with  cell proliferation , a signiﬁcant term from an enrichment analysis in the study of atherosclerosis (King et al., 2005)  2.3 Compartmental layout Mosaic performs cell-based layouts using a cell template that deﬁnes graphical regions corresponding to cellular compartments and locations.
Nodes are positioned into regions based on their GO cellular component annotation or in an  unassigned  region (right margin) if no annotations are present.
Once nodes have been assigned to regions and positioned, a force-directed layout is applied to nodes within each region.
Nodes annotated as being located in more than one cellular component are replicated across regions.
A sufﬁx is added to the node IDs for replicated nodes, whereas the  canonical name  is retained as the original node ID and used as the node label.
In addition, replicate nodes are given a red border.
Because of node replication, relevant edges are also copied.
To reduce the complexity of the network, while retaining the original information, edges can be pruned using a deletion strategy to remove certain edges.
The strategy is to keep those replicate edges that are completely contained within a region and delete those replicate edges that extend between different regions.
The cellular layout algorithm stores region assignment and whether a node exists in multiple regions as node attributes.
Information on whether an edge connects to a node annotated as  unassigned  is stored as an edge attribute.
2.4 Visual style The ﬁnal step in Mosaic is to apply color to nodes based on their GO Molecular Function annotation.
If a node has multiple Molecular Function annotations, the most speciﬁc annotation will determine the node color.
At the top of the Mosaic Control Panel, sets of nodes can be selected to display detailed information with the  Select nodes  button.
By clicking the  Legend  button, the color legend of all Molecular Function terms can be toggled on and off.
3 CONCLUSION Mosaic provides researchers with an interactive tool to evaluate biological interactions within the context of well-deﬁned processes, functions and cellular localization while retaining all original network information.
Use of additional ontologies is anticipated to provide further insights into the relevance of large-scale interaction datasets and will be supported in future versions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Jiguang Wang for discussion, testing and future planning.
Funding: National Institutes of Health [NRNB GM103504 to A.R.P.
and R33 GM078601 to D.X.]
Google Summer of Code program [to C.Z.]
Conﬂict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES Bader,G.D.
and Hogue,C.W.
(2003) An automated method for ﬁnding molecular  complexes in large protein interaction networks.
BMC Bioinformatics, 4, 2.
Kelder,T.
et al.
(2010) Finding the right questions: exploratory pathway analysis to  enhance biological discovery in large datasets.
PLoS Biol., 8, e1000472.
King,J.Y.
et al.
(2005) Pathway analysis of coronary atherosclerosis.
Physiol.
Genomics,  23, 103 118.
Machado,D.
et al.
(2011) Modeling formalisms in systems biology.
AMB Express, 1, 45.
Royer,L.
et al.
(2008) Unraveling protein networks with power graph analysis.
PLoS  Comput.
Biol., 4, e1000108.
Smoot,M.E.
et al.
(2011) Cytoscape 2.8: new features for data integration and network  visualization, Bioinformatics, 27, 431 432.
1944  [10:51 18/6/2012 Bioinformatics-bts278.tex]  Page: 1944 1943 1944
