BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE  Vol.
29 no.
13 2013, pages 1682 1684 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt193  Sequence analysis  Advance Access publication April 23, 2013  mapDamage2.0: fast approximate Bayesian estimates of ancient DNA damage parameters Ha  kon Jo  nsson1,*, Aure  lien Ginolhac1, Mikkel Schubert1, Philip L. F. Johnson2 and Ludovic Orlando1 1Centre for GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, 1350 København K, Denmark and 2Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA Associate Editor: Michael Brudno  ABSTRACT Motivation: Ancient DNA (aDNA) molecules in fossilized bones and teeth, coprolites, sediments, mummified specimens and museum col- lections represent fantastic sources of information for evolutionary biologists, revealing the agents of past epidemics and the dynamics of past populations.
However, the analysis of aDNA generally faces two major issues.
Firstly, sequences consist of a mixture of endogen- ous and various exogenous backgrounds, mostly microbial.
Secondly, high nucleotide misincorporation rates can be observed as a result of severe post-mortem DNA damage.
Such misincorporation patterns are instrumental to authenticate ancient sequences versus modern contaminants.
We recently developed the user-friendly mapDamage package that identifies such patterns from next-generation sequen- cing (NGS) sequence datasets.
The absence of formal statistical mod- eling of the DNA damage process, however, precluded rigorous quantitative comparisons across samples.
Results: Here, we describe mapDamage 2.0 that extends the original features of mapDamage by incorporating a statistical model of DNA damage.
Assuming that damage events depend only on sequencing position and post-mortem deamination, our Bayesian statistical frame- work provides estimates of four key features of aDNA molecules: the average length of overhangs ( ), nick frequency ( ) and cytosine de- amination rates in both double-stranded regions ( d) and overhangs ( s).
Our model enables rescaling base quality scores according to their probability of being damaged.
mapDamage 2.0 handles NGS datasets with ease and is compatible with a wide range of DNA library protocols.
Availability: mapDamage 2.0 is available at ginolhac.github.
io/mapDamage/ as a Python package and documentation is main- tained at the Centre for GeoGenetics Web site (geogenetics.ku.dk/ publications/mapdamage2.0/).
Contact: jonsson.hakon@gmail.com Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on February 13, 2013  revised on April 16, 2013  accepted on April 18, 2013  1 INTRODUCTION  wide diversity of atypic nucleotidic bases are formed following oxidative and hydrolytic degradation (Lindahl, 1993  Pa  a  bo et al., 2004), even in the most favorable preservation conditions.
Post-mortem DNA damage limits our ability to access ancient DNA (aDNA) sequences and increases the risk of exogenous modern contamination, as undamaged DNA molecules are more prone to enzymatic manipulation.
Nucleotide misincor- poration patterns, which are mostly driven by deaminated forms of cytosines (uracils), have been suggested as a powerful approach to authenticate aDNA sequences generated on next- generation sequencing (NGS) platforms (Briggs et al., 2007) and motivated the creation of the mapDamage package (Ginolhac et al., 2011).
Such patterns could vary according to the specific molecular approach used for constructing (Meyer et al., 2012) and/or amplifying (Ginolhac et al., 2011) second-generation DNA libraries.
For instance, for one of the most popular proto- cols (Meyer and Kircher, 2010), we observe inflated cytosine deamination rates at 50-overhangs, an increase in C !
T substi- tution rates toward sequencing starts and complementary in- crease in G !
A rates toward reads ends (Briggs et al., 2007).
Conversely, a novel procedure targeting single-stranded tem- plates has shown elevated C !
T substitution rates at both ends (Meyer et al., 2012).
Statistical modeling of such patterns has been developed by Briggs et al., 2007 with strand break, overhangs and cytosine deamination as key factors.
Using read alignment to reference genomes and maximum likelihood optimization, this approach has delivered the first quantitative estimates of damage param- eters.
However, the likelihood framework originally implemented scales poorly with the size of NGS datasets, and extensive run- ning times have prevented common usage.
Here, we present an extension of mapDamage, which implements a fast approxima- tion of the DNA damage model using a Bayesian framework.
mapDamage 2.0 opens the possibility of comparing DNA damage levels across temporal and environmental gradients.
Posterior distributions of damage parameters also enable pena- lizing the quality score of likely damaged bases, reducing noise in downstream single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) calling procedures.
DNA in historical samples is subject to a plethora of environ- mental conditions and degradation reactions (Sawyer et al., 2012).
Abasic sites, strand breaks, interstrand cross-links and a  2 APPROACH  *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Here we build on the DNA damage model described in Briggs et al., 2007.
We make the simplifying assumption that mutations  ß The Author 2013.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com   and post-mortem DNA damage are independent within a frag- ment, with occurrences depending only on the relative position from the sequence ends.
We can now correct base quality scores provided in alignment BAM files [perrði, rÞ at position i for read r] using  errði, rÞ ¼ 1   ð1   perrði, rÞÞð1   pdamðiÞÞ p0  3 METHODS  mapDamage2.0  The general idea is to mutate bases following an Hasegawa, Kishino and Yano (HKY) transition matrix (Hasegawa et al., 1985) and then inde- pendently add post-mortem damage on top of mutated bases.
In this framework, we have multinomial distributions describing the position- specific substitutions for any given base (SA, i, SC, i, SG, i and ST, i).
SA, i   Mul DA, 1, 0, 0, 0  ð  ð  Þ    ð ,  Þ   Pdamð d,  s,  ,  , iÞ  Þ    is the HKY transition matrix, and Pdam is defined as the DNA damage transition matrix.
We assume post-mortem cytosine deamination is the main driver of nucleotide misincorporations in agreement with experi- mental evidence (Briggs et al., 2007), providing  0 BB@  Pdam ¼  1 CCA  1 0 pga 0  0  1   pct  0 0  0 0  1   pga  0  0 pct 0 1  Where the base-specific damage probabilities are defined as  pctð d,  s,  ,  , iÞ ¼  i  i  s þ  d 1    i pgað d,  s,  ,  , iÞ ¼ ð1    iÞ  i  s þ  d 1    i ð  ð  Þ  ð  Þ  ð  Þ  Þ  The motivation for the base-specific damage probabilities pdam is best explained by the Markov chain in Figure 1 where the first jump decides if the position is before or after a nick  then a C !
T substitution could be observed following deamination in overhang or double-stranded DNA regions.
A similar Markov chain could be drawn for G !
A substitu- tions (Supplementary Section 1).
For rescaling base quality scores, we assume that C !
T and G !
A substitutions either originate from true biological differences or from damage driven misincorporations.
We can derive an estimate for the probability that a C !
T (similar for G !
A) misincorporation at pos- ition i along the reads is due to damage using  c, c   pc, tðiÞ  pdamðiÞ ¼   c, c   pc, tðiÞ þ  c, t  Fig.
1.
A schematic view describing the DNA damage Markov chain, which extends the DNA substitution model.
The states Cend and Tend correspond to the final nucleotides in the sequences  4 DISCUSSION  We applied mapDamage2.0 on a series of aDNA sequence data- sets generated from a range of periods, source materials and environments (Supplementary Section 3).
Posterior predictive intervals and empirical frequencies are in general agreement, as shown for the ancient plague dataset (Supplementary Table S2 and Supplementary Figs S4 S9) (Schuenemann et al., 2011), demonstrating the adequacy of our method.
We observed a ratio of cytosine deamination rates for double- and single- stranded regions orders of magnitude greater than estimates based on in vitro experiments in aqueous solution (0.007 in Lindahl, 1993 versus 0.026 0.070 for Schuenemann et al., 2011 in Supplementary Table S1).
This suggests that tissue- and sample-specific micro-environmental characteristics drive differ- ent DNA damage kinetics in situ.
We also found a significant rank correlation between the posterior mean for single-stranded cytosine deamination and sample age (Supplementary Table S3) in agreement with Sawyer et al., 2012.
However, remains of simi- lar age and location showed diverse parameter estimates (Supplementary Table S2), suggesting a prominent role of micro-environmental characteristics over age in diagenesis.
We also applied our quality rescaling scheme to the sequence data of an Australian Aboriginal individual who died in 1920s (Rasmussen et al., 2011).
This increased the overlap of genotype calls to dbSNP v137, suggesting that lower false-positive SNP calls were achieved (Supplementary Table S4).
5 CONCLUSION  We have developed a computational method for inferring aDNA damage parameters from NGS sequence datasets, with minimal changes to the DNA damage model presented by Briggs et al., 2007.
Our model is compatible with the specificities of different sequencing and library building protocols.
We believe that downscaling quality scores of likely damaged bases is the first from a long list of possible applications for damage param- eter posterior distributions, limiting the impact of nucleotide misincorporations in downstream sequence analyses.
The know- ledge of such distributions could also be instrumental for im- proving mapping procedures to reference genomes (Schubert et al., 2012).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  The authors are grateful to EUROTAST (Marie Curie FP7 Initial Training Network), a Marie Curie Career Integration (293845), a Marie Curie Intra-European Fellowship Grant (299176) and Danish Council Independent Research  Natural Sciences (FNU) for funding.
Johannes Krause, Simon Rasmussen and Stefan Prost for sharing data/scripts.
for  Conflict of Interest: none declared.
1683   H.Jo  nsson et al.
REFERENCES  Meyer,M.
et al.
(2012) A high-coverage genome sequence from an archaic deniso-  van individual.
Science, 338, 222 226.
Briggs,A.W.
et al.
(2007) Patterns of damage in genomic DNA sequences from a  Pa  a  bo,S.
et al.
(2004) Genetic analyses from ancient DNA.
Annu.
Rev.
Genet., 38,  Neandertal.
Proc.
Natl Acad.
Sci.
USA, 104, 14616 14621.
645 679.
Ginolhac,A.
et al.
(2011) mapDamage: testing for damage patterns in ancient DNA  Rasmussen,M.
et al.
(2011) An aboriginal Australian genome reveals separate  sequences.
Bioinformatics, 27, 2153 2155.  human dispersals into Asia.
Science, 334, 94 98.
Hasegawa,M.
et al.
(1985) Dating of the human-ape splitting by a molecular clock  Sawyer,S.
et al.
(2012) Temporal patterns of nucleotide misincorporations and  of mitochondrial DNA.
J. Mol.
Evol., 22, 160 174.
DNA fragmentation in ancient DNA.
PloS One, 7, e34131.
Lindahl,T.
(1993) Instability and decay of the primary structure of DNA.
Nature,  Schubert,M.
et al.
(2012) Improving ancient DNA read mapping against modern  362, 709 715.  reference genomes.
BMC Genomics, 13, 178.
Meyer,M.
and Kircher,M.
(2010) Illumina sequencing library preparation for highly multiplexed target capture and sequencing.
Cold Spring Harb.
Protoc., 2010, pdb.prot5448.
Schuenemann,V.J.
et al.
(2011) Targeted enrichment of ancient pathogens yielding the pPCP1 plasmid of Yersinia pestis from victims of the Black Death.
Proc.
Natl Acad.
Sci.
USA, 108, E746 E752.
1684
