BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE  Vol.
29 no.
14 2013, pages 1837 1839 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt284  Databases and ontologies  Advance Access publication June 3, 2013  AuthorReward: increasing community curation in biological knowledge wikis through automated authorship quantification Lin Dai1,2, Ming Tian2, Jiayan Wu1, Jingfa Xiao1, Xumin Wang1, Jeffrey P. Townsend3,4 and Zhang Zhang1,* 1CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China, 2School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China, 3Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics and 4Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA Associate Editor: Jonathan Wren  ABSTRACT Summary: Community curation harnessing community intelligence in knowledge curation, bears great promise in dealing with the flood of biological knowledge.
To exploit the full potential of the scientific com- munity for knowledge curation, multiple biological wikis (bio-wikis) have been built to date.
However, none of them have achieved a substantial impact on knowledge curation.
One of the major limitations in bio-wikis is insufficient community participation, which is intrinsically because of lack of explicit authorship and thus no credit for commu- nity curation.
To increase community curation in bio-wikis, here we develop AuthorReward, an extension to MediaWiki, to reward com- munity-curated efforts in knowledge curation.
AuthorReward quanti- fies researchers  contributions by properly factoring both edit quantity and quality and yields automated explicit authorship according to their quantitative contributions.
AuthorReward provides bio-wikis with an authorship metric, helpful to increase community participation in bio-wikis and to achieve community curation of massive biological knowledge.
Availability: http://cbb.big.ac.cn/software.
Contact: zhangzhang@big.ac.cn Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on April 1, 2013  revised on May 8, 2013  accepted on May 13, 2013  1 INTRODUCTION  Biological knowledge is generated at ever-faster rates and dis- persed among researchers and across literatures.
As each new biological study has become increasingly dependent on the avail- ability of existing knowledge, comprehensive and up-to-date col- lection of biological knowledge across a wide variety of research fields is of critical significance in life sciences (Clark, 2007).
Traditionally, biological knowledge has been aggregated through expert curation, conducted manually by dedicated ex- perts.
However, with the burgeoning volume of biological data and increasingly diverse densely informative published litera- tures, expert curation becomes more and more laborious and time consuming, increasingly lagging behind knowledge creation.
*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Accordingly, community curation harnessing community intel- ligence for knowledge curation has gained significant attention as a solution to this issue (Salzberg, 2007  Waldrop, 2008  Zhang et al., 2011).
A successful example that engages community in- telligence in knowledge aggregation is Wikipedia that features up-to-date content, huge coverage and low cost for maintenance.
Spirited by the extraordinary success of Wikipedia, multiple bio- logical wikis (bio-wikis) have been built to date (Supplementary Table S1).
However, bio-wikis have not achieved a substantial impact on community curation of biological knowledge (Finn et al., 2012).
One of the major limitations in bio-wikis is insufficient partici- pation from the scientific community, which is intrinsically be- cause of lack of explicit authorship and thus no credit for community-curated contributions (Finn et al., 2012  Howe et al., 2008).
A valuable attempt has been made to motivate community contributions in wikis by means of social rewarding techniques (Hoisl et al., 2007), but it does not provide explicit authorship for any wiki page.
Although authorship has been introduced in a non-MediaWiki based system (Hoffmann, 2008), it only links every sentence to its author but does not provide a quantitative measure of authorship, and most import- ant, it is inapplicable to extant bio-wikis that are largely built on MediaWiki (a free, open source and widely used wiki engine, which is adopted by Wikipedia).
Several initiatives based on se- mantic web technologies have already emerged for biological knowledge management (Antezana et al., 2009).
However, they do not promise to manage or quantify authorship of the free text in bio-wikis.
To increase community curation in bio-wikis, here we develop AuthorReward, an extension to MediaWiki, to reward community-curated efforts in bio-wikis by contribution quantification and explicit authorship.
2 ALGORITHMS  MediaWiki allows anyone to develop customized functionalities by packaging a bunch of codes as MediaWiki extensions.
Thus, AuthorReward is implemented as an extension to MediaWiki.
Although MediaWiki itself includes an infrastructure for individ- ual contributions to be recognized, it only records the revision history and provides no explicit authorship.
ß The Author 2013.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com   L.Dai et al.
A wiki page contains a collection of knowledge on a specific subject, where multiple researchers are most likely to collabora- tively provide edits.
AuthorReward aims to provide a viable quantification for researchers  contributions in bio-wikis.
A major concern to automated authorship has been ensuring that authorship cannot be  manipulated  by spurious, short-lived edits (Supplementary Text S1).
For any wiki page p, we assume there are a series of edit versions v0, v1, v2, .
.
., vn, where version v0 is empty and n40.
AuthorReward counts multiple successive ver- sions edited by a researcher as one version.
Thus, any neighbor- ing versions, vi  1 and vi (where 1  i  n), are edited by different researchers.
The edit distance between vi and vj, termed as d(vi, vj) (where i5j), is computed by the Levenshtein distance (LD) (Levenshtein, 1966) that measures the minimum number of edit operations (insertions, deletions and substitutions) required to transform one string into the other.
In AuthorReward, the contribution score of version vi, CS(vi), is formulated straightfor- wardly as  CSðviÞ ¼ c½dðvi 1, vnÞ   dðvi, vnÞ ,  ð1Þ where c is the scale factor, d(vi  1, vn) is the edit distance between vi   1 and vn and d(vi, vn) is the edit distance between vi and vn.
In Equation (1), CS(vi) factors edit quality as well as edit quantity in an implicit manner  the edit quantity of version vi, QTY(vi), amounts to the edit distance between vi and its previous version vi  1, viz., d(vi   1, vi) [Equation (2)], and the edit quality of version vi, QAL(vi), corresponds to whether the edit persists in comparison with the last version vn [Equation (3)].
QTYðviÞ ¼ dðvi 1, viÞ  ð2Þ  dðvi 1, viÞ  QALðviÞ ¼ dðvi 1, vnÞ   dðvi, vnÞ  ð3Þ According to the triangle inequality, QAL(vi) ranges from  1, when the edits were entirely reverted, to þ1, indicating that the edits were totally preserved in the last version.
Therefore, QAL(vi), in other words, measures how long the edit lasts in the latest version  a high (or low) quality score is given for ver- sion vi, if it is long-lived (or short-lived).
Consequently, CS(vi) can be expressed by QTY(vi) multiplied by QAL(vi), namely, CS(vi)¼ QTY(vi)  QAL(vi).
Thus, CS(vi) is not easily gamed, providing a viable quantification for researchers  contributions.
Considering that one researcher may provide many discon- tinuous edits across the evolution of a wiki page, and thereby contribute multiple versions in one wiki page, the contribution score of researcher r in page p, S(r, p), is quantified as the sum over all contributed versions, Sðr, pÞ ¼  CSðviÞ,  ð4Þ  X  vi2Eðr, pÞ  3 APPLICATION AND FEATURES  To test the functionality of AuthorReward, we installed it in RiceWiki (http://ricewiki.big.ac.cn).
For testing purposes, we chose the semi-dwarfing gene (sd1), which is one of the most important genes deployed in modern rice breeding and is also known as the  green revolution gene  affecting plant height of rice.
There were nine researchers collaboratively annotating the sd1 gene, providing 87 versions as of August 23, 2012 (Supplementary Table S2  http://ricewiki.big.ac.cn/index.php/ Os01g0883800).
As testified on the sd1 gene (Supplementary Fig.
S1), AuthorReward is capable of yielding sensible quantitative contri- butions and providing automated explicit authorship, consistent well with perceptions of all participated contributors.
Moreover, AuthorReward features good compatibility with any MediaWiki- based system and simple installation, consequently possessing a broad scope for its application and providing a consistent appearance and functionality as Wikipedia.
4 CONCLUSION  AuthorReward provides bio-wikis with an authorship metric, fea- turing robust contribution quantification and automated explicit authorship.
When contribution is appropriately quantified and authorship is duly rewarded, it is possible to exploit the full potential of the scientific community in knowledge curation.
Although AuthorReward does not contribute directly to the integration of biological knowledge, it provides a standard prac- tice to reward community-curated efforts, which in return can increase community participation in bio-wikis for knowledge curation.
Thus, our intention here is to produce an automated, simple and robust authorship metric and no automated measure will be able to gauge scientific content.
AuthorReward can be used in combination with semantic web technologies, potentially promising a significant advance for harnessing community intel- ligence for knowledge curation.
In addition, social rewarding techniques rating) can be used together with AuthorReward for contribution evaluation.
Moreover, is likely in the long term to integrate community-curated efforts across multiple bio-wikis for each researcher, which accordingly requires close collaborations among bio-wikis and standardized mechanisms for individual identity recognition (e.g.
OpenID at http://www.openid.net).
(e.g.
peer  it  AuthorReward provides a standard practice to reward commu- nity-curated efforts in bio-wikis, and it is of interest to the sci- entific community intending to perform knowledge curation collectively and collaboratively in bio-wikis and also other domain wikis.
where E(r, p) is a set of versions contributed by researcher r in page p. As a consequence, the total contribution of researcher r in a bio-wiki is termed as the sum of multiple contribution scores in all participated pages,  X  SðrÞ ¼  Sðr, pÞ,  p2P  ð5Þ  where P is a set of pages in which researcher r provides edits.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  The authors thank Jun Yu, Lina Ma, Gang Wu, Hao Wu, Chao Xu, Jian Sang and Ang Li for their valuable comments on this work.
Funding: National Programs for High Technology Research and Development (863 Program  2012AA020409)  the  100-Talent  Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Y1SLXb1365)   1838   AuthorReward  National Natural Science Foundation of China (60803050, 61132009)  USA National Institutes of Health P01 (GM068067).
Conflict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES  Antezana,E.
et al.
(2009) Biological knowledge management: the emerging role of  the Semantic Web technologies.
Brief.
Bioinform., 10, 392 407.
Clark,T.
(2007) Knowledge integration in biomedicine: technology and community.
Brief.
Bioinform., 8, E1 E3.
Finn,R.D.
et al.
(2012) Making your database available through Wikipedia: the  pros and cons.
Nucleic Acids Res., 40, D9 D12.
Hoffmann,R.
(2008) A wiki for the life sciences where authorship matters.
Nat.
Genet., 40, 1047 1051.
Hoisl,B.
et al.
(2007) Social rewarding in wiki systems motivating the community.
In: Schuler,D.
(ed.)
Online Communities and Social Computing.
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp.
362 371.
Howe,D.
et al.
(2008) Big data: the future of biocuration.
Nature, 455, 47 50.
Levenshtein,V.
(1966) Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and  reversals.
Soviet Physics Doklady, 10, 707 710.
Salzberg,S.L.
(2007) Genome re-annotation: a wiki solution  Genome Biol., 8, 102.
Waldrop,M.
(2008) Big data: Wikiomics.
Nature, 455, 22 25.
Zhang,Z.
et al.
(2011) Data integration in bioinformatics: current efforts and chal- (ed.)
Bioinformatics Trends and Methodologies.
lenges.
In: Mahdavi,M.A.
InTech, Rijeka, Croatia.
1839
