BIOINFORMATICS  Vol.
29 ISMB/ECCB 2013, pages i18 i26 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt223  Automated cellular annotation for high-resolution images of adult Caenorhabditis elegans Sarah J. Aerni1,2, Xiao Liu3, Chuong B. Do4, Samuel S. Gross1, Andy Nguyen5, Stephen D. Guo1, Fuhui Long6, Hanchuan Peng7, Stuart S. Kim5 and Serafim Batzoglou1,* 1Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, 353 Serra Mall, Stanford, CA 94305, USA, 2Biomedical Informatics Training Program, Stanford University School of Medicine, 251 Campus Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA, 3School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, 423andMe, Inc., 1390 Shorebird Way Mountain View, CA 94043, USA, 5Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 279 Campus Drive Beckman Center B300, Stanford, CA 94305-5329, USA, 6Janelia Farm Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, VA, USA and 7Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, WA, USA  ABSTRACT Motivation: Advances in high-resolution microscopy have recently made possible the analysis of gene expression at the level of individual cells.
The fixed lineage of cells in the adult worm Caenorhabditis elegans makes this organism an ideal model for studying complex biological processes like development and aging.
However, annotat- ing individual cells in images of adult C.elegans typically requires ex- pertise and significant manual effort.
Automation of this task is to enabling high-resolution studies of a large therefore critical number of genes.
Results: In this article, we describe an automated method for anno- tating a subset of 154 cells (including various muscle, intestinal and hypodermal cells) in high-resolution images of adult C.elegans.
We formulate the task of labeling cells within an image as a combinatorial optimization problem, where the goal is to minimize a scoring function that compares cells in a test input image with cells from a training atlas of manually annotated worms according to various spatial and mor- phological characteristics.
We propose an approach for solving this problem based on reduction to minimum-cost maximum-flow and apply a cross-entropy based learning algorithm to tune the weights of our scoring function.
We achieve 84% median accuracy across a set of 154 cell labels in this highly variable system.
These results dem- onstrate the feasibility of the automatic annotation of microscopy- based images in adult C.elegans.
Contact: saerni@cs.stanford.edu  1 INTRODUCTION  Comprehensive gene expression profiling using high-resolution images from in situ hybridization or fluorescent reporter experi- ments has become feasible owing to advances in imaging technology and the growing availability of genomic resources.
Image-based gene expression analysis is especially promising for the study of Caenorhabditis elegans, as the fixed developmen- tal lineage of all 959 cells in the adult worm permits, at least in principle, direct comparison of expression values of reporter genes in analogous cells from different individuals.
In practice, however, the process of identifying the cells in an image of an adult worm is usually performed manually, which is extremely tedious and time-consuming.
Owing to the significant expertise required for accurate cell identification, most in situ analyses of  *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
gene expression in adult C.elegans to date have been limited to much lower regional resolution.
A crucial step in making high-resolution global gene expres- sion analysis possible in the worm is to develop computational approaches that can extract expression data from images, thereby allowing high-throughput conversion of unstructured image data into well-structured gene expression tables suitable for computational analysis.
Previous methods for single-cell gene expression analysis in model organisms have largely relied on time-series information and region markers to map the locations of individual cells (Bao et al., 2006  Fowlkes et al., 2008  Kera  nen et al., 2006  Luengo Hendriks et al., 2006  Murray et al., 2008  Zhao et al., 2008).
In C.elegans, however, tracking cell lineages is extremely difficult after the embryonic stage owing to the amount of time required for monitoring the development of each individual worm and the large morphological changes that take place during development.
Therefore, techniques that allow mapping of single cells without the assistance of time series information are needed.
For worms in the first larval stage (L1) following embryonic development, the absolute and relative spatial locations of indi- vidual cells are highly constrained.
Based on this insight, a marker-guided spatially constrained bipartite matching algo- rithm was previously developed for labeling cells in 3D images of L1 worms (Long et al., 2008).
This method was shown to achieve high accuracy (86%) for annotating 357 out of the 558 cells present in the L1 developmental stage (Long et al., 2009).
For adult C.elegans, however, the cell labeling task is substan- tially more difficult.
In addition to a near doubling of the number of somatic cells from 558 to 959, thousands of germ line cells are also present in the adult worm resulting in 2500  3500 total cells.
The additional germ line cells occupy locations near somatic cells of interest throughout the trunk of the worm, which poses a substantial difficulty for annotation approaches that rely on location-based features alone.
Moreover, the number of somatic cells is variable in the adult worm unlike worms at the L1 stage, further decreasing the effectiveness of spatial cues for cell identification.
Methods have been proposed that combine the segmentation of cells from the 3D images and their label annotation into a single step for the L1 worm (Qu et al., 2011) to improve the overall accuracy on the set of 82 muscle cells.
This method requires cell-specific markers to be consistently expressed in a subset of cells and again relies on an invariable cell lineage.
ß The Author 2013.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com   More concretely, although the adult C.elegans is post-mitotic, meaning no additional somatic cell divisions take place once de- velopment is complete, not every individual produces precisely the same number of cells.
In our data, we have observed a high degree of variability in a set of four intestinal cells, which may each undergo one additional division to give rise to two daughter cells.
To accurately assign labels to the cells in an individual, it is crucial to recognize whether the parent intestinal cell or the two daughter cells are present.
In this article, we formulate the problem of labeling cells in 3D images of adult C.elegans as a combinatorial optimization problem.
Our method builds on prior work by using a rich scoring function that incorporates additional features beyond spatial location, such as cell size, intensity of a muscle-marker gene and neighborhood density.
We extend our formulation to accommodate the cell number variation that arises owing to post-embryonic cell division.
Finally, we show how to solve the resulting optimization problem efficiently via reduction to minimum-cost maximum-flow, and describe a straightforward cross-entropy based algorithm for fitting parameters of the model.
We test the method on a set of 25 manually curated images of day 1 adult worms.
Using our algorithm, we achieve 84% median accuracy on a subset of 154 cells in the adult worm, demonstrating the feasibility of automated methods for this task.
2 METHODS  2.1 Overview of method In this section, we present methods for automatic annotation of adult worms.
Images in the adult were obtained using an experimental protocol similar to the approach described in previous work that performed auto- mated single-cell annotation to obtain high-resolution gene expression data in the larval worm (Liu et al., 2009).
In these images, single cells are visualized through a combination of 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining of DNA in all cells (shown in the blue channel), and green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression in a subset of nuclei (shown in the green channel).
These two complementary approaches enable detec- tion of all cells within a worm, and identification of specific marker cells to guide cell labeling.
Figure 1 shows a sample image of a worm where the 3D images have been projected along the z-axis.
Previous work (Long et al., 2008) attempted to solve the annotation task for worms in the first larval stage (L1) using a marker-guided two- stage bipartite matching algorithm.
In this approach, unlabeled cells in an input worm image were matched with annotated cells from a reference  Fig.
1.
This image of a day 1 adult hermaphrodite contains DAPI-stained nuclei, visible in blue, and the GFP body wall muscle reporter in a subset of cells in green.
The 3D image is projected along the z-axis to create this 2D image.
In the figure, the heterogeneity of the worm cell shapes is easily visible, including the elongated shape of the green muscle cells, the large number of germ line cells (white arrowhead) and the large intestinal cells (red arrowhead)  Automated cellular annotation of adult C.elegans  atlas on the basis of cell location.
This hierarchical strategy focuses on a small subset of GFP-marker expressing cells before considering all cells in the L1 worm.
It includes a heuristics approach that through an iterative graph pruning scheme imposes relative spatial constraints on cell label- ings.
Because of the highly stereotyped spatial arrangement of cells within worm images (Liu et al., 2009), location-based features alone were suffi- cient to obtain good accuracy for cellular annotation at this early stage of development.
As discussed in the preceding section, however, adult worms pose a substantially greater challenge for cellular annotation than L1 worms.
To achieve reasonable accuracy in adult worms, which have an order-of- magnitude more cells in total, we propose an approach that incorpor- ates additional features into a cost function that, when used to solve the annotation task, increases accuracy compared with using location alone.
We first formalize the task of label assignment as a combinatorial optimization problem, then introduce the set of features used in the cost function.
We show how the optimization problem can be solved using a minimum-cost maximum-flow algorithm, and propose simple extensions that allow for the explicit incorporation of additional, variable, cell division events during late development.
We finally describe the parameter estimation process used to assign weights for these features.
2.2 Formulation of cell lineage annotation as a combina-  torial optimization problem  Suppose that a 3D input image contains p cells, x ¼ ðx1, x2, .
.
.
, xpÞ, each of whose locations and boundaries have already been extracted in a pre- processing step.
Let y ¼ ðy1, y2, .
.
.
, ypÞ denote the corresponding labels that we wish to predict for each cell, where yi 2 Y for some set of can- didate labels Y ¼ f 0,  1, .
.
.
,  qg.
Here, we assume that  0 is the label used to denote cells that have no specified annotation.
We refer to this label as the dud label.
1,  2, .
.
.
,  q correspond to the q different types of cells identified by an expert human annotator for images in our training set  in our work, for example,  1 through  107 represent different types of muscle cells found in adult worms, including 95 body wall muscles,  108 through  116 represent different types of hypodermal cells and  117 through  142 are 26 different intestinal cells.
Finally,  143 through  154 are a set of intestinal cells that participate in variable cell division, which we will address later.
The task of determining the appropriate label for each cell can be  posed as a combinatorial optimization problem in which (i) Each cell xi is assigned exactly one label from Y, (ii) Each label  j (for j 6¼ 0) is assigned to exactly one cell and (iii) The dud label  0 may be assigned to multiple cells (e.g.
all germ  line cells in the training data are given the label  0).
Let ½aij  2 f0, 1gp ðqþ1Þ be a matrix whose entries aij are set to 1 when- is assigned label  j, and 0 otherwise.
Similarly, ever cell xi let ½cij  2 Rp ðqþ1Þ be a matrix of costs for each possible assignment of cell to label.
Formally, the labeling task can be written as the following inte- ger programming problem:  minimize  ½aij   aijcij,  q  p  X X X X  j¼0 q  i¼1  j¼0 p  subject to  aij ¼ 1,  i ¼ 1, .
.
.
, p  ð1Þ  j ¼ 1, .
.
.
, q  aij ¼ 1, i¼1 aij 2 f0, 1g  where the constraints ensure that all cells are assigned exactly one label, and vice versa.
i19   S.J.Aerni et al.
2.3 Defining cost matrices The choice of costs ½cij  is the key factor in determining the quality of the predicted labelings from our bipartite matching algorithm.
In this section, we describe an approach for constructing cost matrices that takes into account multiple aspects of compatibility between a cell xi and a putative label  j:  (i) Cell location: A 3D vector indicating the location of a cell xi in worm-coordinate space with each dimension standardized to have zero mean and unit variance.
(ii) Cell size: A scalar value indicating the size of a cell xi as mea-  sured by the number of voxels contained in the cell object.
(iii) GFP expression levels: A scalar value indicating and mean green channel voxel values in the cell object, standardized within each worm to have zero mean and unit variance across all cells.
(iv) DAPI intensity: Two scalar values indicating the mean and the standard deviation of the blue channel voxel intensities in the cell object, standardized within each worm to have zero mean and unit variance across all cells.
(v) Neighborhood: Two scalar values indicating the number of cells within a certain distance of the cell s center (either a 10 voxel or 25 voxel radius).
(vi) Cell shape: A set of scalar values representing the percent of variance captured along each axis from the principal components analysis (PCA) of the voxel locations contained in the cell.
This roughly represents the elongation along a set of axes for the cell.
In addition, the value of the x-coefficient for the first eigenvector is included.
All of the above features are those typically used when an expert  human annotator is presented with a new adult worm to label.
Consider a single aspect of compatibility between a cell xi and a putative label  j.
Here, we focus specifically on cell location (though the construction of cost matrices for other aspects of compatibility is done in the same way).
We begin by assuming that we have access to a training set S of worm images, each of which have been fully annotated by a human expert.
Our goal is to define a cost matrix ½cij  such that cij reflects the extent to which the location of a cell xi in an input image is compat- ible with the location of cells that were annotated with label  j in the training set S. Let hxiilocation denote the 3D vector of coordinates for a given cell xi in standardized worm-coordinate space.
Each dimension is standardized to have zero mean and unit variance.
One simple choice of cost is given by the squared Mahalanobis distance,  clocation ij  ¼ ðhxiilocation    location  j  ÞT location   1  j  ðhxiilocation    location  j  Þ  ð2Þ  where  j is a 3D vector giving the average location of training cells with label  j, and  j is the sample covariance matrix of these locations.
The Mahalanobis distance can be thought of as a variation on a weighted Euclidean distance measure that accounts for correlation between coord- inates in different dimensions.
Similar costs may be defined for cell size, GFP expression level and additional features.
Note that in the case of scalar-valued features (e.g.
cell size), the above expression reduces to     !
j  and standard deviation  size  where the mean  size are estimated based on all cells from the training data with a particular label  j.
Finally, given multiple separate cost matrices, we can construct a single cost matrix by taking a simple weighted sum: cij ¼ ewlocation clocation  ij þ .
.
.
þ ewshape cshape  þ ewsize csize  ð4Þ  ij  ij  j  where w ¼ ðwlocation, wsize, .
.
.
, wshapeÞ is a vector of (log) weights.
i20  2.4 Formulation of cell lineage annotation as a  minimum-cost flow  One approach to solving the combinatorial optimization problem in one is a straightforward application of maximum weight bipartite matching (a.k.a., linear assignment) that was used in (Long et al., 2008).
In this approach, one constructs a bipartite graph containing p nodes in each partition.
The left partition contains a single node for each input cell.
The right partition contains a single node for each non-null label  1, .
.
.
,  q and p  q nodes for the null label  0.
The cost for matching the ith node in the left partition with the jth node in the right partition is set to cij, and the minimum cost matching can be found in Oðp3Þ time using the Hungarian algorithm.
labels.
For general  transportation tasks,  Another alternative is to reduce 1 to an instance of the transportation problem, which eliminates the need to explicitly enumerate nodes with null the algorithm of Kleinschmidt and Schannath (Kleinschmidt and Schannath, 1995) takes Oðpq log pðp þ log qÞÞ time, which is an improvement over the Oðp3Þ afforded by the Hungarian algorithm.
Here, we take an even more gen- eral approach that also avoids creating these same duplicate nodes by reduction to minimum-cost flow.
We show that a simple algorithm for minimum cost flow achieves Oðpqðq þ log pÞÞ time as a consequence of the structure of our problem.
The flexibility of the minimum-cost flow approach allows us to further extend the algorithm to handle the special case of cells that undergo variable cell division.
Construct a directed graph G ¼ ðV, EÞ containing p nodes (denoted x1, .
.
.
, xp) representing cells in the input worm, qþ 1 nodes representing the possible labels for these cells (denoted  0, .
.
.
,  q and which include the dud label) and two additional nodes s and t representing the sink and source for the graph.
The edges of the graph consist of the following:  jth label node  ith cell in the input worm  (i) ðs, xiÞ: an edge from the source node to a node representing the (ii) ðxi,  jÞ: an edge from the ith cell node in the input worm to the (iii) ð j, tÞ: an edge from each label node to the sink There are p total edges of the first type, pðq þ 1Þ total edges of the second type and qþ 1 total edges of the third type for each input worm.
With each edge ða, bÞ associate a lower bound, Lab, an upper bound Uab and a cost Cab.
These constraints and costs are defined differently for each type of edge:   Ls, xi ¼ Us, xi ¼ 1 and Cs, xi ¼ 0, 8i.
L j, t ¼ U j, t ¼ 1 and C j, t ¼ 0, j40.
L 0, t ¼ U 0, t ¼ p   q and C 0, t ¼ 0   Lxi,  j ¼ 0, Uxi,  j ¼ 1 and Cxi,  j ¼ cij as defined in the section describing the formulation of the combinatorial optimization, 8i, j  where the first two constraints ensure that all cells and non-dud labels are matched exactly once, the third constraint ensures that dud labels are provided to exactly p  q cells, and the last constraint sets the costs for matching particular cells with particular labels.
The minimum-cost maximum-flow problem is stated as follows:  X X  ðu, vÞ2E  X  Cuvfuv  fuv    where  u represents the signed supply value for each node, defined as  subject to  v:ðv, uÞ2E  v:ðu, vÞ2E Luv   fuv   Uuv  fvu ¼  u  8u 2 V,  8ðu, vÞ 2 E,  8  :   u ¼  if u ¼ s if u ¼ t otherwise:  p  p 0  ij ¼ hxiisize    size  csize  j   size j  2  ð3Þ  min   For any solution to the minimum-cost maximum-flow problem stated above, the edges with fxi,  j ¼ 1 represent the annotations of cell xi with label  j.
The computational advantage of a minimum-cost maximum-flow for- mulation can be more clearly seen using a slightly modified but equivalent formulation of the problem above in which the  0 node is omitted from the graph, the costs of all ð j, tÞ edges (for j40) are adjusted by subtracting C 0, t and the supply values are adjusted accordingly to achieve a target flow of q (rather than p).
When solving the latter formulation, at most q augmentations are required to find the optimal solution using the sim- ple minimum-cost maximum-flow algorithm suggested by Edmonds and Karp (Edmonds, 1972), giving an asymptotic runtime of Oðpqðq þ log pÞÞ.
This is a substantial improvement over the Oðp3Þ Hungarian algorithm for weighted perfect matching, as q   p in our setting.
In our experiments, we opted for the more straightforward formula- tion described here (which we extend in later sections) and used the Network Simplex function in the Lemon Library (Kira  ly and Kova  cs, 2010  Dezs et al., 2011) for optimization.
As expected, this gave a sub- stantial practical speed-up compared to a highly efficient implementation of the Hungarian algorithm for bipartite matching.
2.5 Annotation with variable cell divisions Although the cell lineage for adult worms is known and largely fixed, some exceptions exist.
In particular, we observed in our data that the four posterior intestinal cells (two ventral and two dorsal) can each undergo an additional cell division.
As an example, let s assume  j is the jth cell in the C.elegans atlas (Altun and Hall, 2008) and is determined to be present in all adult cells.
However, the data indicate that  j divides and gives rise to two additional cells, an anterior and posterior daughter cell.
We will refer to these sets of cells, which undergo variable cell division as the set of labels at the indices P ¼ f143, 146, 149, 152g.
For each of the parent cells j 2 P, let DaughterðjÞ ¼ fj þ 1, j þ 2g denote the set of daughter cells produced when j divides.
Biologically, either a parent cell is present, or it has divided and given rise to the two daughter cells.
In particular, a matching should never simultaneously label both a parent cell and any daughter cell  similarly, a matching that labels one of the daughter cells should also label its sister cell.
These types of constraints cannot be modeled using the standard bipartite matching algorithm.
The minimum-cost flow formulation can capture some of these con- straints resulting from the variability in cell divisions in the annotation process by adding nodes and edges to the graph constructed in the pre- vious section.
For each variably dividing parent cell j 2 P, create two decision nodes, d 1   ð j, d 1  j , and construct edges as follows:  ¼ 1 and cost C j, d 1  ¼ 0, U j, d 1  j and d 2  ¼  j  j  j  j  0 8j 2 P   ð jþ1, d 1 C jþ1, d 1   ð jþ2, d 2 C jþ2, d 2   ð 0, d 2 0 8j 2 P  j Þ with constraints L j, d 1 j Þ with constraints L jþ1, d 1 ¼ 0 8j 2 P j Þ with constraints L jþ2, d 2 ¼ 0 8j 2 P j Þ with constraints L 0, d 2 j , tÞ with constraints Ld k    ðd k  j  j  j  0 8j 2 P, k 2 f1, 2g  ¼ 0, U jþ1, d 1 ¼ 0, U jþ2, d 2  j  j  ¼ 1 and cost  ¼ 1 and cost  j  ¼ 0, U 0, d 2 j , t ¼ 1, Ud k  ¼ 1 and cost C 0, d 2 j , t ¼ 1 and cost Cd k  j  j  j , t ¼  Any previous edge directly connecting  j,  jþ1 or  jþ2 to the sink node t (for any j 2 P) should be deleted.
Finally, the amount of flow from the dud label l0 to the sink t is reduced as a result of flow redirected to the decision nodes.
ð 0, tÞ with constraints L 0, t ¼ p   q   r, U 0, t ¼ p   q   r and  cost c 0, t ¼ 0  where r is the number of parent cells that can variably divide  here r¼ 4.
Automated cellular annotation of adult C.elegans  Fig.
2.
The network consists of a source node (s), a sink node (t), a set of nodes for each of the p total input cells, x1, x2, .
.
.
, xp, a dud label node  0 and q unique labels of which a subset participating in variable cell divisions.
The label  j represents a parent and  jþ1 and  jþ2 its daughters as described in the text.
d1 j represent the decision nodes for that cell divisions.
The source node, s, pushes p units of flow into the network.
All blue edges have a lower and upper bound of 1.
The black edges all have lower bound of 0 and an upper bound of 1.
Finally, the red edge from the dud label node,  0, to the sink node, t, has a lower and upper bound equal to p   q   r where r is the number of parent cells that may divide  j and d2  The decision nodes are used to impose mutual exclusion constraints.
For example, d 1 j ensures that exactly one of the two labels, either the parent  j or the anterior daughter  jþ1, will be present in the final anno- tation.
Similarly, d 2 j is used to determine whether the posterior daughter  jþ2 will be annotated.
Ideally, the method achieves a solution in which the pair of daughter cells ð jþ1,  jþ2Þ or only a parent cell ð jÞ is used by routing a unit of flow through the dud,  0.
However, this construction imposes no restriction on both daughter cells being labeled simultaneously, nor does it prevent the parent being labeled alongside the posterior daughter.
For this reason a heuristic post-processing step is needed after the two assignments are performed independently (Note, a graph construction exists that does account for these additional constraints.
However, given the current for- mulation of costs, a solution cannot be obtained that properly scores these relationships.
A modification to the cost formulation should be explored in future work.)
In particular, if the posterior daughter  jþ2 is labeled, then ensure that the anterior daughter  jþ1 is also labeled (reassigning from the parent  j to the anterior daughter  jþ1 as needed).
Similarly, if the posterior daugh- ter  jþ2 is unlabeled, this implies that the parent cell has not divided, and so ensures it is labeled (reassigning from the anterior daughter  jþ1 to parent  j as needed).
Figure 2 presents a representation of the structure of the network.
¼  2.6 Estimating parameter weights for improved matching  results  This section focuses on the method for learning the appropriate weights used in Equation (4).
Once determined, using the weights in the optimal assignment in the matching problem will yield an annotation of the p cells in an input worm.
Define YðxÞ as the set of all possible matchings for an input worm x, and define y0 2 YðxÞ as the solution that minimizes the network flow problem for a given set of weights w ¼ ðwlocation, wsize, .
.
.
, wshapeÞ.
The goal is to learn the appropriate weights w for combining the cost matrices as defined in Equation (4) such that for each worm x 2 S the solution y0 is close to the true labeling, y.
Let Q(y) denote the number of cells that have been assigned a label other than  0 in y (i.e.
the number of cells named by the expert annotator,  i21   S.J.Aerni et al.
QðyÞ ¼ jfyijyi 6¼ l0gj).
Also, define Rðy, y0Þ to be the number of cells with in y and y0, other than l0 (i.e.
Rðy, y0Þ ¼ jfyijyi ¼ the same label i ^ yi 6¼ l0gj).
y0 Define the learning objective as the average percentage of cells that  have the correct annotation for any given weight w. Rðy, y0Þ QðyÞ  hðX ,Y, wÞ ¼ 1 N  ðx, yÞ2X ,Y  X  ð5Þ  where N is the number of training worms.
A supervised learning technique must be chosen that estimates a set of weights w for the cost function such that for the resulting predictions the difference between the predicted labels y0 and the true labels y is globally minimized.
Finding a solution that minimizes not the cost of the labels for the individual cells, but rather the global matching is challenging.
Various methods have been proposed to solve this parameter estimation problem (de Boer et al., 2005  Caetano et al., 2007, 2009  Le and Smola, 2007  Petterson et al., 2009  Rubinstein and Kroese, 2004  Taskar, 2004  Taskar et al., 2005  Tsochantaridis et al., 2005).
Some approaches may be effi- cient computationally, such as max-margin structured estimation and need to be explored (Taskar, 2004  Taskar et al., 2005).
Here, we take a sampling approach described below.
Start with a distribution over the space of weights (i.e.
Rn), where n is the number of features used in the matching problem in 1 and randomly sample from this a number of times (e.g.
100) to obtain a set of weight vectors, fw½1 , .
.
.
, w½100 g. For each sampled weight vector, w, solve the network flow problem modeling variable cell division for each training worm, and compute the average per-worm accuracy in annotation given by Equation (5).
Then take the top fraction of performing weights (the so called elite set), and use them to estimate a new distribution from which to sample the next set of weights.
This is repeated until convergence as defined by a plateau in the objective function.
For sampling, each of the dimensions of the weight vectors are drawn independently.
In particular, i Þ.
After each each wi is sampled from a separate distribution Nð i,  2 iteration, the mean and standard deviation of the wis for the top  % of samples scored are used to estimate each weight s  i and  i in the next iteration of sampling.
The algorithm is run until convergence.
Intuitively this means that the matching problem is solved on the worms using a set of sampled weights.
As the space of possible weights is searched, the evaluation of the performance of the sample at each step allows the algorithm to identify a distribution for weights that show good performance on the training.
In essence, it is sampling the set of top performers, and removing the poor-performing set from the population.
A schematic is shown in Figure 3.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  A set of 25 day 1 adult hermaphrodites were imaged using fluor- escent confocal microscopy, producing a series of 3D image stacks.
These images were processed similarly to the approaches used in the first larval stage (Liu et al., 2009).
Each worm was stained with DAPI, making all nuclei visible in the blue channel.
In addition, the worms contained muscle-specific GFP markers, making a subset of body wall muscle cells visible in the green channel as shown in Figure 1.
The cells were automatically seg- mented using a modified version of a gradient-based approach described in other work (Li et al., 2007), which was adapted and parallelized to improve performance on the larger adult worms.
The segmentation was manually corrected, and from the set of 25 expert-curated worms, we extracted features of the cells, described in full detail in Section 2.3.
In short, the orientation of the worm was determined manually (head, tail, ventral).
We then extracted many features of the cells including location,  i22  Fig.
3.
This schematic of the sampling approach depicts the method used to learn optimal weights for the label assignment problem.
At the top, the two toy matching examples (A and B) show different performances of model fits at sampled weights (C).
The  Model  shows the available cell labels.
The  Subject  is a training example with its true labels indicated, 1 through 10.
The edges represent the final matching computed using the sampled weights.
In the top (yellow) example, the solution labels only six cells correctly.
In the lower red model, seven labels are correctly assigned.
We use a red shade to represent higher accuracy in this schematic.
To learn the weights for the assignment problem, the method proceeds as follows: 1.
Randomly sample many weights for the features (2 features shown here) from the given distribution and solve the matching problem on the training sets, computing the average accuracy of the annotation at those weights (D).
2.
Identify the top-scoring samples (represented by red) and use their weights to recompute a new distribution for the next iter- ation (shown in E).
Repeat until convergence  DAPI and GFP intensity, shape (e.g.
size and elongation) and neighborhood density.
Each worm was manually annotated with 142 labels consisting of a set of intestinal, muscle and hypodermal cells.
In addition, each worm was also annotated with a set of labels for cells that undergo variable division, consisting of four intestinal cells that could each divide and give rise to two daughter cells, accounting for 12 unique additional labels.
Therefore, each worm was anno- tated with a subset of the 154 total labels.
These particular cells were targeted by the expert annotator to study the biological process of aging.
The muscle and intestinal tissues degenerate most during aging and are therefore cells of interest.
The hypo- dermal cells were also included as a set that were readily recog- nized by the expert annotator.
3.1 Performance evaluation of an untrained matching  approach using 5-fold cross-validation  We first present the performance of automatically annotating cells by combining different sets of features into a scoring func- tion where these features are linearly combined.
Table 1 sum- marizes the results of combining the indicated set of features with equal weight in a cost function for assigning a given label to a cell.
These costs are used to solve the minimum-cost labeling of all cells using the set of available labels.
This assignment problem   Automated cellular annotation of adult C.elegans  Table 1.
Results for 5-fold cross-validation on single-cell label annotation with equally weighted features: the model is built from 20 training worms and used to label the remaining five  Name  Features  Duds scored  Median  loc  gs  full  Location  Location, size, GFP  Location, size, GFP & DAPI, shape, neighborhood    þ   þ   þ  0.38 0.43 0.68 0.70 0.66 0.74     0.36 0.41 0.67 0.71 0.65 0.73   2  0.012 0.014 0.0079 0.018 0.0088 0.011  Note: In all cases features were equally weighted.
The symbolþ in the column  Dud cells scored  indicates the   and  2 were estimated for unlabeled cells.
These unlabeled cells were given a score of 0 otherwise.
The features used are described in detail in Section 2.3.
The per-worm accuracy is computed for each worm using Equation (5).
The median, mean and variance are reported across all 25 worms.
i0 ¼ 0 8i, k, the ith cell receiving the label of dud  and cost functions are described in full in Section 2.
The table reports average accuracy as computed using Equation (5), the percentage of uniquely labeled cells in a test worm receiving the correct annotations.
In each model, as only a subset of cells in a worm is assigned a unique label (at most 150), there is a large number of unlabeled cells.
We present two models, one in which we ignore the unlabeled cells in the scoring of an assignment, and another in which the unlabeled cells are scored.
For each com- bination of features, the table shows a model where unlabeled cells incur no cost in using the cost matrix described in the Equation (4) ck (a label given to cells without a unique annotation, e.g.
germ line cells) and the kth feature.
For those models in which the dud cells were scored, the cost is computed from the estimated  0 and  0 as formulated in Equation (4).
In Table 1, these models are denoted by the inclusion of the symbolþ in the  Dud cells scored  column.
When dud cells are not scored, the column contains the symbol  .
In all experiments in Table 1, wi ¼ 0 8i.
As the result with a cost, ci0 ¼ 0 8i should always result in the use of the model with no cell division taking place, in experi- ments where dud label nodes are unscored, the bipartite match- ing formulation is used in which all 154 cells are assigned.
Forþ models, the minimum-cost maximum flow is solved using the LEMON open source graph template library (Dezs et al., 2011) (The LEMON library uses integral cost values to solve the network flow resulting in a decrease in precision.
It is noted that experiments were run to permit precision to five deci- mal places and had little effect on the results.)
In Table 1, the first two rows represent the model using loca- tion alone.
When the cost of unlabeled cells is not included (loc-), the model achieves an average accuracy of 36% per worm across the 5-fold cross-validation experiment.
Including a cost for un- labeled cells (locþ), results in an increase in accuracy to 41% per worm.
These location-based models achieve the lowest accuracy across all models shown in Table 1.
Each subsequent model includes the feature of location in addition to other morphological features (see Section 2.3 for full detail).
Incorporating two features of a cell, gfp intensity and size, results in a large increase in accuracy per worm to 67% (model gs- in Table 1), while scoring the unlabeled cells in the model shows further improvement to 71% (model gsþ in Table 1).
However, the highest mean accuracy score belongs to the model including a large set of features fullþ at 73%.
In the sub- sequent section, this set of features was used to train a more complete model in which the weights for combining features in the scoring function are learned using the sampling approach described in Section 2.6.
3.2 Performance evaluation using trained feature weights  Using the set of 25 worms, we assessed the ability to improve accuracy of the annotation by learning feature weights for the cost function defined in Equation (4).
Applying the sampling technique (Section 2.6), we report results on a 5-fold cross-val- idation experiment using the features from the fullþ model.
The initial distribution for each weight is set as Nð0, 4Þ.
Each iteration performs 100 independent samplings, and uses the   ¼ 10 top-scoring samples to compute the distribution of the weights for the subsequent iteration.
In the first iteration of training, solving the label assignment problem using the LEMON Library (Dezs et al., 2011  Kira  ly and Kova  cs, 2010) took on average 1 second (with an inter-quartile range of 0.69 to 1.29 s).
Each model was trained for over 30 iterations, at which point all models converged (the point where training accuracy no longer increases).
The model taken from the 30th iteration of each cross-validation run is used for testing on the held-out set of worms.
Results are shown in Table 2.
As reported above, solving the matching problem using loca- tion alone resulted in the mean accuracy of only 41%, even when estimating the   and   of the locations of unlabeled cells.
Improvements were observed by linearly combining location with additional features in the cost function, but further im- provements in accuracy can be achieved by training the cost model to weight the features differently.
Learning these weights led to an increase from the untrained per-worm mean accuracy of 73% to a per-worm mean accuracy of 77% on the worm model fullþ.
In addition to reporting a per-worm accuracy, a per-label accuracy is provided.
This is the mean and median accuracies achieved on each label when it was present in a worm.
Figure 4 shows the histogram of accuracies on a per-cell basis.
In this histogram, the distribution of per-cell accuracies when performing annotation using a model that uses location alone is clearly shifted to the left.
The fully trained model with learned feature weights  i23   S.J.Aerni et al.
Table 2.
Results for 5-fold cross-validation on single-cell label annotation with trained feature weights: training of feature weights was performed on 20 training worms using the set of features from the full model for the 154 cell labels  Accuracy measurement  Median  Per-worm accuracy Per-cell accuracy  0.77 0.84     0.77 0.77   2  0.0083 0.032  Note: The model included the scoring of unlabeled cells.
The per-worm accuracy is computed for each worm using Equation (5).
The table reports both the per-worm and the per-cell label accuracies, including their median, mean and variance in separate columns across the 25 test worms.
Fig.
4.
Accuracy for annotation of 154 cells in adult worm images.
In black, we show the accuracy using an untrained model considering loca- tion alone.
The gray histogram gives the per-cell accuracy counts of the untrained model incorporating additional features.
In white, we show the model with weights learned for these set of features and estimated means and variance for all cell labels, including  other  cells  shows the strongest shift to the right.
This demonstrates that the improvement in accuracy is not only on a per-worm basis, but also observed in a general improvement of individual cell label assignments.
These accuracies are at a median of 35% for the model using location alone, and 84% (with a mean of 77%) for the trained model.
In addition, five cells are given the correct label 100% of the time they are present in a worm.
An additional 35 labels are correctly assigned in the 90th percentile.
3.3 Accuracy of cell division identification using  network-flow formulation  Using the results of the cross-validated trained models described, we evaluated the accuracy of identifying cell divisions when they occur in the four intestinal cells.
Among the 25 worms, 100 intestinal cells (4 per worm) are able to undergo additional cell  i24  Table 3.
Results for 5-fold cross-validation identification of cell divisions of posterior intestinal cells  Parent cell name  Number of observed divisions  Correctly predicted state (%)  Ventral 9 Ventral 10 Dorsal 9 Dorsal 10  14 13 14 10  72 80 80 88  Note: The as True Positive þ True Negative  .
Total  column indicated as  correctly predicted state  is  calculated  divisions.
We observed 54 events where one of these intestinal cells underwent the further division.
Only 3 of the 25 worms had no additional cell divisions in all 4 of these intestinal cells.
Table 3 summarizes the results for each intestinal cell.
The four intestinal cells that are capable of dividing and giving rise to two daughter cells are the last two ventral cells in the intestine, Ventral9 and Ventral10, and the last two dorsal intestinal cells, Dorsal9 and Dorsal10.
The posterior-most cells of this tissue in both the dorsal and ventral hemispheres are named Dorsal10 and Ventral10.
The intestines just anterior to these two (Dorsal9 and Ventral 9) divide most frequently at 14 times each in the total of 25 worms.
Overall, the state of these cells is accurate 80% of the time.
The dorsal cells receive high accuracies at 88 and 80%.
The most challenging cell to predict is the ventral intestinal cell number 9 (Ventral9), which achieved 72% accuracy.
It is important to note that the identification of a division is not necessarily indicative of the correct annotation.
That is, although the two daughter labels are assigned within the worm, they are not necessarily assigned to the correct cells.
However, use of these labels still serves an important purpose in understanding variability in the worm s development.
In addition, identifying when cell divisions have not occurred prevents mis-annotation of the label to another cell when the actual cell is not present.
4 DISCUSSION  Creating automated techniques to annotate individual cells based on their unique cell labels in the organism C.elegans makes single-cell studies possible for non-experts and provides assist- ance for experts to perform analyses more rapidly.
The manual curation of the automatically segmented cells can be performed in a few hours, for which the 154 cells can be rapidly annotated at high accuracy.
In contrast, manual segmentation and annota- tion of the 154 cells in 3D for a well-trained biologist takes on the order of 2 days (X.Liu, personal communications).
To truly enable widespread research of single cells in images, high-fidelity labeling of cells must be possible.
This work demonstrates the potential of automatic techniques to succeed in the adult organism.
In C.elegans, existing approaches creating digital atlases in the developing embryo (Bao et al., 2006) and larvae (L1) (Long et al., 2008, 2009) proved to be poorly suited for the challenges of the adult worm as described earlier.
In particular, the previous   state-of-the-art bipartite matching algorithm for labeling L1 worms failed in the adult for a number of reasons.
The adult variability in the marker expression and exceptionally large number of germ line cells prevented the use of the same ap- proach.
Instead, we created a more complex model in which we learned the weights for a richer set of features, including cell characteristics of location and morphology.
What is more, the bipartite matching approach used in the L1 was prohibitively slow for training a full adult model given the number of cells.
As a result, learning feature weights required a new formulation using network flow, enabling the successful training of a more complex cost function.
We believe this work demonstrates the utility of using such a rich model to generate these high-confidence labels.
The im- provements in accuracy given in the results section provide evi- dence of the benefit of including morphological features in atlas- based modeling of C.elegans.
Future work might consider incorporating meta-features, such as posterior probabilities of a classifier that identifies tissue types, into the pipeline.
Such an approach can mimic the behavior of the expert annotator who generally first identifies the tissue type of a cell (e.g.
intestine) then assigns it the lineage-specific label, selecting from those available within its tissue type.
Alternatively, incorporating such classifier probabilities directly into a cost function may result in a more flexible model.
However, for the set of cells labeled in this work, the most salient features of the tissue were modeled directly in the scoring function (e.g.
size for intestinal cells).
In the future, training data will include cells from additional tissue types.
At this time, inclusion of tissue classifiers might prove valuable, particularly in the case of neurons.
These classifiers might distinguish small cells from over-segmented cell fragments, for example.
A confounding factor in the annotation process is the variabil- ity in the number of cells.
For example, we identified a set of intestinal cells where we observed variable cell divisions.
That is, at times they underwent an additional cell division, resulting in the presence of two daughter cells rather than the single parent iden- tified in the 959 known somatic cells.
Such variability cannot be properly represented by a traditional bipartite matching ap- proach.
This article presents a solution that through the construction of a special network structure for solving the anno- tation problem enables the selection of either the parent or the two daughters explicitly.
Although achieving good accuracy, the cur- rent construction requires a post-processing step to identify the presence of a second intestinal-like cell.
Future work might in- clude developing a method that does not rely on the identification of a single additional cell in the division, but rather identifies either one large parent cell, or simultaneously both daughter cells.
We also observed an anterior intestinal cell, Ventral3, that divided just once in the 25 worms used in this work.
This was not modeled owing to the infrequency of the cell division.
However, this observation indicates that there is likely further variability that has not yet been observed.
With increasing amounts of data, additional variability can be modeled explicitly to further improve cell annotation.
What is more, it may be pos- sible to model the co-occurrence of these cell divisions.
Some weak evidence exists in this dataset indicating that two intestinal cells might be correlated in their division patterns.
However, the relatively small amount of data makes it difficult to obtain  Automated cellular annotation of adult C.elegans  statistical significance, and therefore a model that takes into con- sideration the co-occurring cell divisions is left for future work.
Finally, extending the annotator to include labels for more of the total 959 known cells will be most valuable.
In addition to creating a more complete model of the worm, it will also improve overall annotation accuracy.
We believe this work has provided evidence for such potential gains in the fidelity of automated cell labeling through the inclusion of more cell labels.
In this work, we achieved an improvement in accuracy by modeling the cells that did not receive a unique cell lineage label, which we call the dud label.
Yet, even the models including the duds could be further extended.
There is significant variability within the set of unlabeled cells as it comprises many eggs, sperm cells, neu- rons, hypodermal cells and pharyngeal cells just to name a few.
It is possible to create a larger set of dud labels with more homo- geneous features representing the different subclasses within the unlabeled cells (e.g.
the oocytes in the germ line).
Therefore, the groups of duds can be mapped to their correct subtype.
In summary, we believe future work must focus on extending the annotation process by using more labels or by identifying additional subgroups to further improve accuracy.
With more data, richer models can be built to account for cell division vari- ability and inclusion of additional features.
The ultimate goal is a larger model that labels a large proportion of all cells that are uniquely and reproducibly identifiable in the adult worm.
This work represents the first step toward such a goal and provides a rich modeling approach capable of scaling with such extensions.
5 CONCLUSION  through training a rich model  In this article, we present a method capable of annotating a set of single cells in images of adult C.elegans at a median accuracy of 84%.
The work develops a novel framework for producing labels for 154 cells that is able to handle the additional challenges pre- sent in the adult worm that previous methods (created for earlier stages in the worm s development) are not able to handle.
These challenges include the increase in the number of cells, and vari- ability in cell location and cell divisions.
We address these chal- lenges incorporates morphological and spatial features, constructing a special net- work structure and explicitly modeling cells that receive non- unique labels.
By reducing the computational complexity in using a minimum-cost maximum-flow algorithm, we make feas- ible a cross-entropy based learning algorithm to tune the weights of the features in our scoring function and ultimately train a more accurate model that is capable of handling the variable cell divisions.
As a result, we demonstrate that the inclusion of additional features and the reformulation of the traditional ap- proach to the label assignment make possible the training of a richer model to improve accuracy.
Furthermore, we also demon- strate that inclusion of more cells, in addition to more features, leads to gains in accuracy for all cell label assignments.
that  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  The authors thank Batzoglou and Kim lab members and Eugene Myers for helpful discussions.
S.J.A.
drafted the manuscript, performed computational experiments, conceived of the original model and wrote the code.
X.L.
created, annotated and corrected  i25   S.J.Aerni et al.
images and assisted in feature selection.
C.B.D.
co-wrote the manuscript and contributed code.
S.J.A., C.B.D.
and S.D.G.
designed the model and experiments.
S.J.A., X.L., A.N.
and S.D.G.
processed and curated image data.
S.S.G.
suggested the training methodology.
S.D.G.
assisted in image processing and selection of segmentation method and tuning parameters.
F.L.
and H.P.
assisted in adapting L1 methods appropriately.
S.S.K.
and S.B.
conceived of the project, participated in designing and coordinating the project and assisted with editing the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by a William R. Hewlett Stanford Graduate Fellowship, a National Science Foundation Fellowship and the Stanford Biomedical Informatics Training Grant from the National Library of Medicine (LM-07033) (to S.J.A.).
This work was also funded in part by NSF grants (0640211 and 0312459) and NIH grant (GM091342-01).
Conflict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES  Altun,Z.
and Hall,D.
(2008) Handbook of C. elegans Anatomy.
In: WormAtlas.org.
http://www.wormatlas.org/hermaphrodite/hermaphroditehomepage.htm.
Bao,Z.
et al.
(2006) Automated cell lineage tracing in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Proc.
Natl Acad.
Sci.
USA, 103, 2707 2712.
Caetano,T.S.
et al.
(2007) Learning graph matching.
IEEE 11th International  Conference on Computer Vision 2007, 0, 1 8.
Caetano,T.S.
et al.
(2009) Learning Graph Matching.
IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal.
Mach.
Intelligence, 31, 1048 1058.  de Boer,P.T.
et al.
(2005) A Tutorial on the cross-entropy method.
Ann.
Oper.
Res., Dezs,B.
et al.
(2011) LEMON an open source Cþþ graph template library.
134, 19 67.
Electron Notes Theor Comput Sci, 264, 23 45.
Edmonds,J.
and Karp,R.M.
(1972) Theoretical  improvements in algorithmic  efficiency for network flow problems.
J. ACM, 19, 248 264.
Fowlkes,C.C.
et al.
(2008) A quantitative spatiotemporal atlas of gene expression in  the Drosophila blastoderm.
Cell, 133, 364 374.
Kera  nen,S.V.E.
et al.
(2006) Three-dimensional morphology and gene expression in the Drosophila blastoderm at cellular resolution II: dynamics.
Genome Biol., 7, R124.
Kira  ly,Z.
and Kova  cs,P.
(2010) An experimental study of minimum cost flow al- gorithm.
In: 8th International Conference on Applied Informatics.
Eger, Hungary, 2010.
Kleinschmidt,P.
and Schannath,H.
(1995) A strongly polynomial algorithm for the  transportation problem.
Math.
Program., 68, 1 13.
Le,Q.
and Smola,A.
(2007) Direct optimization of ranking measures.
Mach.
Learn.,  arXiv:0704.3359.
Li,G.
et al.
(2007) 3D cell nuclei segmentation based on gradient flow tracking.
BMC Cell Biol., 8, 40.
Liu,X.
et al.
(2009) Analysis of cell fate from single-cell gene expression profiles in  C. elegans.
Cell, 139, 623 633.
Long,F.
et al.
(2008) Automatic Recognition of Cells (ARC) for 3D images of C. elegans.
In: Vingron,M.
and Wong,L.
(eds) Research in Computational Molecular Biology, Volume 4955 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, pp.
128 139.
Long,F.
et al.
(2009) A 3D digital atlas of C. elegans and its application to single-cell  analyses.
Nat.
Meth., 6, 667 672.
Luengo Hendriks,C.
et al.
(2006) Three-dimensiondal morphology and gene expres- sion in the Drosophila blastoderm at cellular resolution I: data acquisition pipeline.
Genome Biol., 7, R123.
Murray,J.I.
et al.
(2008) Automated analysis of embryonic gene expression with  cellular resolution in C. elegans.
Nat.
Methods., 5, 703 709.
Petterson,J.
et al.
(2009) Exponential Family Graph Matching and Ranking.
CoRR  2009, abs/0904.2623.
Qu,L.
et al.
(2011) Simultaneous recognition and segmentation of cells: application  in C. elegans.
Bioinformatics, 27, 2895 2902.
Rubinstein,R.
and Kroese,D.P.
(2004) The Cross-Entropy Method: A Unified Approach to Combinatorial Optimization, Monte-Carlo Simulation and Machine Learning.
Springer-Verlag, New York.
Taskar,B.
(2004) Learning structured prediction models: a large margin approach.
PhD thesis, Stanford University, CA.
Taskar,B.
et al.
(2005) Learning structured prediction models: a large margin ap- proach.
In: Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on Machine learning.
ICML  05, New York, NY, USA: ACM.
896 903.
Tsochantaridis,I.
et al.
(2005) Large margin methods for structured and inter-  dependent output variables.
J. Mach.
Learning Res., 6, 1453 1484.
Zhao,Z.
et al.
(2008) Comparative analysis of embryonic cell lineage between  Caenorhabditis briggsae and Caenorhabditis elegans.
Dev.
Biol., 314, 93 99.  i26
