BIOINFORMATICS  Vol.
29 ISMB/ECCB 2013, pages i217 i226 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt245  Multitask learning for host pathogen protein interactions Meghana Kshirsagar1, Jaime Carbonell1 and Judith Klein-Seetharaman1,2,3,* 1Language Technologies Institute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave., PA 15213, USA, 2Forschungszentrum Ju  lich, Institute of Complex Systems (ICS-5), 52425 Ju  lich, Germany and 3Systems Biology Centre, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK  ABSTRACT Motivation: An important aspect of infectious disease research in- volves understanding the differences and commonalities in the infec- tion mechanisms underlying various diseases.
Systems biology-based approaches study infectious diseases by analyzing the interactions between the host species and the pathogen organisms.
This work aims to combine the knowledge from experimental studies of host  pathogen interactions in several diseases to build stronger predictive models.
Our approach is based on a formalism from machine learning called  multitask learning , which considers the problem of building models across tasks that are related to each other.
A  task  in our scenario is the set of host pathogen protein interactions involved in one disease.
To integrate interactions from several tasks (i.e.
dis- eases), our method exploits the similarity in the infection process across the diseases.
In particular, we use the biological hypothesis that similar pathogens target the same critical biological processes in the host, in defining a common structure across the tasks.
Results: Our current work on host pathogen protein interaction pre- diction focuses on human as the host, and four bacterial species as pathogens.
The multitask learning technique we develop uses a task- based regularization approach.
We find that the resulting optimization problem is a difference of convex (DC) functions.
To optimize, we implement a Convex Concave procedure-based algorithm.
We com- pare our integrative approach to baseline methods that build models on a single host pathogen protein interaction dataset.
Our results show that our approach outperforms the baselines on the training data.
We further analyze the protein interaction predictions generated by the models, and find some interesting insights.
Availability: The predictions and code are available at: http://www.cs.
cmu.edu/ mkshirsa/ismb2013_paper320.html Contact: j.klein-seetharaman@warwick.ac.uk Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
1 INTRODUCTION  Infectious diseases are a major health concern worldwide, caus- ing millions of illnesses and deaths each year.
Newly emerging viral diseases, such as swine H1N1 influenza, severe acute re- spiratory syndrome (SARS) and bacterial infections, such as the recurrent Salmonella and Escherichia coli outbreaks not only lead to wide-spread loss of life and health, but also result in heavy economic losses.
To better navigate this landscape of infectious diseases, it is important to not only understand the mechanisms of individual diseases, but also the commonalities between them.
Combining knowledge from related diseases will give us deeper insights into infection and host immune response,  *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
will enhance our ability to comprehend new diseases and lead to efficient development of therapeutics.
Key to the infection process are host pathogen interactions at the molecular level, where pathogen proteins physically bind with human proteins.
Via these protein interactions, the patho- gen manipulates important biological processes in the host cell, evades host immune response and multiplies within the host.
Interactions between host and pathogen proteins can be studied using small-scale biochemical, biophysical and genetic experi- ments or large-scale high-throughput screening methods like yeast like PHI-base (Winnenburg et al., 2008), PIG (Driscoll et al., 2009), HPIDB (Kumar and Nanduri, 2010), PHISTO (Tekir et al., 2012) aggre- gate host pathogen protein interactions from several small-scale and high-throughput experiments via manual literature curation.
These databases are valuable sources of information for develop- ing models of the modus operandi of pathogens.
two-hybrid (Y2H) assays.
Databases  However, interaction datasets from these databases are not only small but are available for only a few well-studied patho- gens.
For example, the PHI-base (Winnenburg et al., 2008) database covers 64 diseases but has only 1335 interactions, PIG (Driscoll covers only 12 pathogens.
Computationally, this calls for techniques that combine datasets and build joint models across several pathogens, which can then be used to analyze the commonalities in the pathogens and also to predict plausible interactions that are biased by this joint understanding.
et al., 2009)  In our work, we study host pathogen protein protein inter- action (PPI) where the host is fixed and the pathogens are vari- ous bacterial species (Fig.
1A).
The host species we consider is human and the bacterial species are Yersinia pestis, Francisella tularensis, Salmonella and Bacillus anthracis, which cause the dis- eases bubonic plague, acute pneumonia, typhoid and anthrax, respectively.
Some recent work on infectious diseases has alluded to the hypothesis that different pathogens target essentially the same critical biological processes in the human body.
The analysis by Chen et al.
(2012) suggests that HIV infection shares common molecular mechanisms with certain signaling pathways and can- cers.
Dyer et al.
(2008) study bacterial and viral interactions with human genes and find infection mechanisms common to multiple pathogens.
Experiments by Jubelin et al.
(2010) show how vari- ous bacterial cyclomodulins target the host cell cycle.
The study by Mukhtar et al.
(2011) on plant pathogens, in particular, Arabidopsis concludes that pathogens from different kingdoms deploy independently evolved virulence proteins that interact with a limited set of highly connected cellular hubs to facilitate their diverse life cycle strategies.
Figure 1B illustrates an example depicting the commonality in various bacterial species, where  ß The Author 2013.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com   M.Kshirsagar et al.
A  B  Fig.
1.
(A) Host pathogen PPI prediction where the host is human and the pathogens are bacteria.
(B) An example depicting the commonality in the bacterial attack of human proteins.
Pathway-1 and pathway-3 (high- lighted) represent critical processes targeted by all bacterial species  they are targeting the same biological pathways in their human host.
This biological hypothesis, which we henceforth call the com- monality hypothesis, is exploited here to jointly learn PPI models for multiple bacterial species.
We translate the hypothesis into a prior that will bias the learned models.
We use a multitask learn- ing based approach, where each  task  represents the interaction of one bacterial species with human.
The prior is represented in the form of a regularizer that penalizes models to the degree that the above hypothesis is violated.
2 BACKGROUND  The most reliable experimental methods for studying PPI are often time-consuming and expensive, making it hard to investigate the prohibitively large set of possible host pathogen inter- actions for example, the bacterium B.anthracis, which causes anthrax, has about 2321 proteins, which when coupled with the 25 000 or so human proteins gives approximately 60 million pro- tein pairs to test, experimentally.
Computational techniques com- plement laboratory-based methods by predicting highly probable PPIs thereby enabling experimental biologists to focus on fewer interactions and ruling out the vast majority of unlikely ones.
In particular, supervised machine learning based methods use the few experimentally discovered interactions as training data and formulate the interaction prediction problem in a classifica- tion setting, with target classes:  interacting  or  non-interacting .
Features are derived for each host pathogen protein pair using various attributes of the two proteins such as protein sequence, gene expression, gene ontology (GO) etc.
The general outline of the supervised PPI prediction procedure is illustrated in Supplementary Figure S1.
Most of the prior work in PPI prediction has focussed on building models separately for individual organisms (Chen and Liu, 2005  Qi et al., 2006  Singh et al., 2006  Wu et al., 2006) or on building a model specific to a disease in the case of host  pathogen PPI prediction (Dyer et al., 2007  Kshirsagar et al., 2012  Qi et al., 2009  Tastan et al., 2009).
The use of PPI data  i218  from several organisms has predominantly been in the form of (i) features derived from various PPI datasets, (ii) use of common structural properties of proteins across organisms (Wang et al., 2007) or (iii) methods that narrow down predicted interactions in the organism of interest (Garcia et al., 2010).
Some of these methods use the concepts of  homologs ,  orthologs  and  inter- ologs  to define a similarity measure between PPIs from various organisms (Garcia et al., 2010).
There has been little work on combining PPI datasets with the goal of improving prediction performance for multiple organ- isms.
Qi et al.
(2010) proposed a semi-supervised multitask framework to predict PPIs from partially labeled reference sets.
The basic idea is to perform multitask learning on a supervised classification task and a semi-supervised auxiliary task via a regularization term.
Another line of work in PPI prediction (Xu et al., 2010) uses the Collective Matrix Factorization (CMF) approach proposed by Singh and Gordon (2008).
The CMF method learns models for multiple networks by simultan- eously factorizing several adjacency matrices and sharing param- eters amongst the factors.
Xu et al.
(2010) use these ideas in their transfer learning setting, where the source network is a relatively dense interaction network of proteins and the objective is to infer PPI edges in a relatively sparse target network.
To compute similarities between the nodes in the source and target networks, they use protein sequences and the topological structures of the interaction networks.
3 APPROACH  Multitask learning is a family of machine learning methods that addresses the issue of building models using data from multiple problem domains (i.e.
tasks ) by exploiting the similarity be- tween them.
The goal is to achieve performance benefits for all the tasks involved.
This paradigm of building joint models has been applied successfully in many areas including text mining, computer vision, etc.
Because bioinformatics datasets often rep- resent an organism, a natural notion of a  task  is an  organ- ism  for example, the work by Widmer et al.
(2010) uses a multitask learning approach for splice-site prediction across many organisms.
They use phylogenetic trees to incorporate similarity between organisms (i.e.
tasks).
For a survey of multi- task learning in computational biology, see Xu and Yang (2011).
Our multitask learning method is based on the task regular- ization framework, which formulates the multitask learning problem as an objective function with two terms: an empirical loss term on the training data of all tasks, and a regularization term that encodes the relationships between tasks.
Equation (1) shows the general form of such an objective, the term R being the regularizer raised to the power p and with a q-norm.
The work by Evgeniou and Pontil (2004) is one of the early few to develop this general approach.
The function in Equation (1) represents a simple multitask objective with a single regularizer R  many of the formulations often involve a summation over multiple terms.
ð1Þ  Loss ðtaskiÞ þ  jjRjjp  L ¼  q  P i2tasks  We optimize this function by modifying the regularizer R to encode the biological hypothesis.
Our approach differs greatly from prior work because we propose a technique to translate a   Combining host-pathogen PPI data  species are likely to interact with human proteins from the same biolo- gical pathway .
Figure 1B illustrates an example where this hypothesis holds.
The pathway information for each human protein can be obtained from pathway databases like Reactome (Matthews et al., 2009) and PID (Schaefer et al., 2009).
While pathways are generally represented as graphs, for our current work we do not use the edges.
We treat a pathway as a set of proteins a human protein h can be a member of several pathways depending on the biological processes it is involved in.
Let N be the total number of pathways in human.
For a protein pair i ¼ 5b, h4, let pi 2 f0, 1gN be the binary  pathway vector  indicating the pathway membership of h.  P  The commonality hypothesis suggests that the pathway memberships of human proteins from interactions should be similar across tasks.
We define a pathway-summary function S, which aggregates all pathway vectors for a given task T s. Because our hypothesis is about interactions, we only consider pathway vectors of positive examples.
Let Xþ t rep- resent the set of positive examples from tasks T s and T t  let nþ t be the aggregation done by S. their sizes.
In Figure 2, we depict Mathematically, we have  s , Xþ s , nþ  SðT sÞ ¼ 1 nþ  s IposðwT sÞ s xi pi  s  s  i2Xþ  Let Ps ¼ fpi  ð2Þ s is the pathway vector for example i, and IposðzÞ ¼ Iðz40Þ.
S sums where pi up the pathway vectors of examples predicted to be positive.
We normalize using nþ s to compensate for the different dataset sizes across tasks.
s g be a matrix containing all pathway vectors for positive examples from task T s. Analogously, Pt 2 f0, 1gN nþ is a matrix for the positive examples from task T t. Matrices Ps and Pt are constant matrices and are known a priori.
Let SðT sÞ and SðT tÞ be the pathway summaries of the tasks.
We want to penalize the dissimilarity between these summaries.
Our objective function thus has the following general form:  sji ¼ 1 .
.
.
nþ  t  Lðws, wtÞ ¼ lðwsÞ þ lðwtÞ þ  jjRjj2  2 þ   ðjjwsjj2 R ¼ SðT sÞ   SðT tÞ:  2 þ jjwtjj2 2Þ  ð3Þ  where  Here lðwsÞ and lðwtÞ can be any convex loss functions computed over the two tasks.
We use logistic loss in our work based on prior experience with PPI datasets.
The last two  2 norms over the parameter vectors ws and wt control overfitting.
The parameters   and   take positive values.
The indicator function Ipos is non-differentiable.
So we approximate Ipos with the exponential function, which is a convex upper bound of the  problem-relevant biological hypothesis into a task regulariza- tion based approach rather than applying existing general for- malisms on a dataset.
Our tasks try to capture a naturally occurring phenomenon.
While our framework is developed in the context of a specific hypothesis, we also illustrate the incorp- oration of other hypotheses with an example.
The key contribu- tions of our work are as follows:    we present a novel way of combining experimental PPI data  coming from several organisms    we incorporate domain knowledge in designing a prior that causes the learned models to exhibit the requisite common structure across the tasks    to optimize the resulting non-convex objective function, we implement a concave convex procedure (CCCP)-based method  In the Methods section (Section 4), we describe details of the PPI datasets and our multitask learning framework.
The evalu- ation metrics and description of experiments is in Section 6, results and analysis in Section 7.
4 METHODS  4.1 Multitask pathway based learning In this section, we describe how we incorporate the commonality hypoth- esis into our multitask classification framework formulating it as an optimization problem.
We consider each human-bacteria PPI prediction problem as one task.
The predicton problem is posed as a binary classification task, with each instance xi being a pair of proteins 5b, h4, where one protein is the bacterial protein  b  (e.g.
Y. pestis) and the other  h  is the host protein (i.e.
human).
The class-label yi 2 fþ1,   1g represents interacting and non- interacting proteins respectively.
Features are defined for every protein- pair using various properties of the individual proteins and combining them all into a single feature vector.
The positive class in our training data comprises the known human-bacterial PPI which are obtained from data- bases like PHISTO (Tekir et al., 2012).
The construction of the negative- class data is explained in Section 5.
Our objective is to minimize the empirical error on the training data while favoring models that are biased toward the commonality hypoth- esis.
To achieve this, we use a bias term in the form of a regularizer in our objective function.
For brevity and without loss of generality, we will henceforth refer to each human bacteria PPI prediction problem as a  task  (We will also refer to a task by the name of the bacterial species only, as the host species, i.e.
human, is common across all tasks).
Our method first combines all tasks in a pairwise manner, and finally aggregates the output from the pairwise models.
Let fT kgm k¼1 be the set of tasks to be combined, where m is the number of tasks.
Consider two tasks T s and T t. Let the training data for the task T s be Xs ¼ fxi sji ¼ 1 .
.
.
nsg where each example xi is Xt ¼ fxi t 2 Rdt .
ns and nt are the number of training examples and ds and dt denote the number of features in the two tasks.
Let ws 2 Rds , wt 2 Rdt represent the parameter vectors, i.e.
the models for the two tasks.
We now describe how we combine these two tasks.
Section 4.3 will show how such pairwise models are aggregated.
s 2 Rds .
Similarly, the training data for T t  tji ¼ 1 .
.
.
ntg where xi  The pathway-based objective Biologists often represent the set of human proteins involved in a particular biological process by a graph called a  biological pathway .
One such example, the  glucose transport pathway  in human is shown in the Supplementary.
To use this pathway construct, we revise our hypothesis to  proteins from different bacterial  Fig.
2.
A schematic illustrating the pathway summarizing function S for a task T 1.
On the left are the examples from the input predicted to be positive, indicated by Xþ.
The matrix P has the pathway vectors for each example in Xþ.
The summary function aggregates the pathway vectors to get the distribution  i219   M.Kshirsagar et al.
indicator function and will make optimization easier.
Let  ðzÞ ¼ ez=C, where C is a positive constant.
This function, for various values of C has been plot in Figure 3.
Small positive values of z ¼ wTxi indicate positive- class predictions that are closer to the decision boundary of the classifier.
Examples predicted to be positive with a high confidence have a large z.
With varying values of C, the function   gives varying importance to pre- dictions based on their classifier confidence  z .
Negative values of z, which correspond to examples predicted to be negative, are given close to zero importance by  .
The choice of an appropriate C is important so as to ensure the proper behavior of the summary function S. A steeply increas- ing curve (C¼ 1) is undesirable as it will assign too much weight to the summary of only some of the examples.
We chose a moderate value of C¼ 30 for our experiments.
Replacing Ipos by   in Equation (2), our summary function S becomes SðT sÞ ¼ 1 s 4 ðwT sÞ.
Putting everything together, our object- s xi pi nþ ive with the logistic loss terms, the pathway summary function and the  2   X regularizer terms has the following form:  P i2Xþ  X           s  s  Lðws, wtÞ ¼ X  ns  i¼1  log 1 þ e wT s xi  syi s  X  þ  nt  j¼1  log 1 þ e wT t xj  tyj  t  ð3Þ  þR 2ðws, wtÞ  t ðwT tÞ t xj pj                 þ   1 nþ  sÞ   1 s ðwT s xi pi nþ j2Xþ 2 þ jjwtjj2 2Þ where R 2ðws, wtÞ ¼  ðjjwsjj2  i2Xþ  s  t  s  t                2  2  The objective in Equation (3) is non-convex, and with some algebraic simplifications we can reduce it to a difference of convex functions (DC).
To optimize this function, we implement the CCCP algorithm, which was originally introduced by Yuille and Rangarajan (2003).
4.2 Solving the optimization problem The objective in Equation (3) is non-convex in the shown form.
We tried to optimize it directly using L-BFGS, but found that the objective does not decrease consistently.
Below, we show that (3) is a DC functions.
The first two log-loss terms [we abbreviate them henceforth as  ðws, wtÞ] and the last R 2 term are all convex and do not pose any problem with optimization.
PROPOSITION 1.
The objective (3) is a DC functions.
Lðws, wtÞ ¼ Fðws, wtÞ   Gðws, wtÞ  ð4Þ  PROOF.
Expanding the pathway vectors pi  s and pj  t and rewrit-  ing Equation (3) we get  X  L ¼  ðws, wtÞ þ R 2ðws, wtÞ s  ðwT s xi pki  X ð 1 nþ  þ    N  k¼1  s  i2Xþ  s  X  L ¼  ðws, wtÞ þ R 2ðws, wtÞ þ    X  fk ¼ 1 nþ  s  i2Xþ  s  s  ðwT s xi pki  k¼1 sÞ and gk ¼ 1 nþ  t  sÞ   1 nþ X  t  N  t  ðwT t xj pkj  tÞÞ2  t  j2Xþ ðfk   gkÞ2, where X  Note that fk and gk are non-negative convex functions.
This follows because  ðzÞ ¼ ez=C is a positive convex function and the matrices Ps and Pt are non-negative by construction.
fk and gk are both thus positive linear combinations of convex functions and hence convex.
We now decompose the squared term in Equation (5) as follows.
ðfk   gkÞ2 ¼  ðfk þ gkÞ2  2ðf2  ð6Þ  k þ g2  kÞ    P k¼1  N  P k¼1  N  P k¼1  N  We further observe that f2  k is convex.
To derive this, we use the following proposition: a composition of a monotonically increas- ing convex function and a convex function is still convex.
The square function hðzÞ ¼ z2 is a monotonically increasing function for z   0, thus the composition with fk (i.e.
hðfkÞ) is also convex by the positivity of fk.
Analogously, g2 k is also convex.
Further, ðfk þ gkÞ2 is also convex by the same argument.
Substituting (6) X back into Equation (5) we get our result.
L ¼ ½ ðws, wtÞ þ R 2ðws, wtÞ þ    2ðf2  k þ g2 kÞ   N  k¼1  X  N  ð7Þ  ðfk þ gkÞ2     ½  L ¼ Fðws, wtÞ   Gðws, wtÞ  k¼1  To optimize this function, we use a CCCP algorithm (Yuille and Rangarajan, 2003).
Our approach is inspired by the work from Yu and Joachims (2009) on learning structural SVMs.
The idea is to compute a local upper bound on the concave function ( G) and instead of optimizing L from Equation (4) directly, use an approximation based on the upper bound of  G. Equation (7) shows this function Lapprox.
Let w represent the concatenation of the two parameter vectors ws and wt.
Let wk be the k-th iter- ate.
We have from Taylor s first order approximation that  GðwÞ    GðwkÞ þ ðw   wkÞTrG for all w. This allows us to obtain the following approximation, which we get by substituting the above bound in place of  G in Equation (4):  min  w  LapproxðwÞ ¼ min ¼ min  w  ½FðwÞ   GðwkÞ þ ðw   wkÞTrG  ½FðwÞ þ wTrG   w  ð7Þ  since wk is a constant.
The optimization problem in Equation (7) is now convex and can be solved using conventional techniques like L-BFGS, conjugate gradient, etc.
The outline of our CCCP-based procedure is shown in Listing 1.  ð5Þ  t  ðwT tÞ: t xj pkj  j2Xþ  t  Algorithm 1 CCCP procedure 1: Initialize w ¼ w0 2: repeat 3: Compute rG using wk 4: Compute current value Lapprox Solve wkþ1 ¼ argmin 5: Set k ¼ k þ 1 6: 7: Compute new value L0   ¼ Lapprox   L0 8: 9: until  5   approx  approx  w  ½FðwÞ þ wTrG   Fig.
3.
The exponential function ez=C for different values of C  i220  Yuille and Rangarajan (2003) show that such a CCCP-based algorithm is guaranteed to decrease the objective function at every iteration and to converge to a local minimum or saddle point.
We observe a similar be- havior in our experiments.
Computationally, this algorithm is efficient   because the regularizer works on a subset of the data only the positive examples, which are a small fraction of the complete training data.
species, the sizes of all datasets and the number of all possible host pathogen protein pairs are listed in Table 1.
Combining host-pathogen PPI data  Stopping criteria The convergence criterion for algorithm 1 is  5 , where   is a threshold.
We used   ¼ 1 in our experiments.
Smaller values required a long time to convergence.
The inner optimization (line # 5), which uses L-BFGS, had a convergence threshold of 0.0001.
This step took more iterations initially and fewer iterations getting closer to convergence.
4.3 Combining pairwise models In the previous sections, we described how we combine two tasks.
In particular, Equation (3) involves pairwise learning, which results in two models ws and wt.
Because our current framework can combine only two       m 2  tasks at a time, for m tasks we perform pairwise learning experi- ments and then combine their outputs.
Each task will thus have m  1 models as a result of pairing up with each of the other tasks.
Let the set of models for task T s be Ms ¼ fws1 , ws2 .
.
.
wsm 1g.
We treat Ms as an en- semble of models for this task and aggregate the output labels from all models to get the final labels on the test data.
Let the output labels from each model for a given test instance x be Ox ¼ fo1, o2 .
.
.
om 1g.
Then the final output label y is computed by taking a vote and checking if it crosses a threshold:   P     if  oj  1  1  Iðoj ¼ 1Þ otherwise    v  ð8Þ  8  :  y ¼  where v is a vote threshold that should be crossed in order for the label to be positive.
In our experiments, we found that the predictions for T s from all models in Ms overlapped greatly.
Hence, we used v¼ 1, which implies that x is an interaction if any one of our four tasks labels it as such.
5 DATASET AND FEATURES  For Salmonella typhi, we used the list of 62 interacting protein pairs reported in Schleker et al.
(2012), which were obtained by the authors by manual literature curation.
These interactions come from small-scale experiments.
The other three PPI inter- action datasets were obtained from the PHISTO database.
Most of the reported interactions for these three bacterial species come from a single high-throughput experimental study reported in Dyer et al.
(2010).
While F.tularensis, S.typhi and Y.pestis are gram-negative gamma-protobacteria, B.anthracis is a gram-posi- tive bacteria.
The number of unique proteins in each bacterial  Table 1.
Characteristics of all four interaction datasets used  5.1 Feature set  For each protein pair, we compute features similar to the work in Kshirsagar et al.
(2012).
Some features use both proteins in the pair, while some others are based on either the host protein or the pathogen protein.
While the features used for S.typhi were obtained directly from the authors, those for the other three datasets were derived from the following attributes of proteins available in public databases: protein sequences from Uniprot (UniProt Consortium, 2011), gene ontology from GO database (Ashburner et al., 2000), gene expression from GEO (Barrett et al., 2011), properties of human proteins in the human PPI network.
Owing to the lack of space, we briefly mention only some of the prominent features here, and encourage the readers to refer to the supplementary for details.
The sequence features count the frequency of amino acid based n-grams or n-mers (for n¼ 2, 3, 4, 5) in the protein sequence.
The GO features count the co-occurrence of host pathogen GO term combinations.
The human PPI network-based features compute various graph prop- erties like node-degree, betweenness-centrality, clustering coeffi- cient of the human protein.
Our features define a high-dimensional and sparse space (the number of features is listed in Table 1).
Because our features are derived by integrating several databases, some of which are not complete, there are many examples and features with missing values.
In our current work, we eliminate all examples with 410% missing features.
For the rest, we use mean value based feature imputation.
Handling missing data effectively is an im- portant aspect of the PPI prediction problem  however, it is not the focus of this work.
The remaining examples after elimination and imputation are also shown in Table 1.
5.2 Negative class examples  The interactions listed in the table form the positive class.
Because there is no experimental evidence about proteins that do not inter- act, we construct the  non-interacting  (i.e.
negative) class using a technique commonly used in PPI prediction literature.
We use random pairs of proteins sampled from the set of all possible bacteria human protein pairs.
The number of random pairs chosen as the negative class is decided by what we expect the  B.anthracis  F.tularensis  Y.pestis  Total no.
of bacterial proteins ( reviewed  protein set  2321  1086  4600  from UniprotKB)  Total no.
of human bacteria protein pairs No.
of known interactions No.
of interactions with no missing features Size of training data with 1:100 class ratio No.
of unique features in the training data  59.4 M  27.8 M  117.7 M  3073 655 66 155 69 4715  1383 491 49 591 468 955  4059 839 84 739 886 480  S.typhi  3592  87.7 M 62 62 6262 349 155  Note: Total no.
of human proteins: 25 596  M, million.
For each host pathogen PPI dataset, the number of pathogen proteins, the size of the dataset and other such statistics are shown.
i221   M.Kshirsagar et al.
interaction ratio to be.
We chose a ratio of 1:100 meaning that we expect 1 in every 100 random bacteria human protein pairs to interact with each other.
In general, there is no basis for choosing a more meaningful ratio, as there are few known interactions.
We rely on previous work on better-studied organisms, where a ratio of 1:100 was used, based on the number of known interactions.
Further, prior studies (Dyer et al., 2007  Tastan et al., 2009) also use a similar ratio.
This random selection strategy is likely to introduce  1% false negatives into the training set.
5.3 Analyzing the known interactions  We analyze the known host pathogen interactions from our datasets.
This analysis also motivates our choice of a multitask approach that uses a pathway-based similarity across tasks.
The known PPIs are compared across datasets in two ways: (i) path- way enrichment and (ii) presence of interologs.
(i) The human proteins involved in each interaction dataset are used to obtain the human pathways that are enriched.
We use Fisher s test (based on the hypergeometric distri- bution) to compute the P-value of each pathway.
We plot these P-values for each pathway, and for each dataset in the form of a heatmap shown in Figure 4.
The heatmap shows how there are several commonly enriched pathways across the datasets (the black vertical lines spanning all four rows).
It also shows the difference in the enrichment  for the S.typhi dataset, which comes from small-scale PPI experiments.
(ii) We analyze the similarity between the PPIs from various datasets.
A natural way to determine similarity is to check if proteins known to interact in one dataset have homolo- gous proteins that are also interacting in another dataset.
Such pairs of proteins, also called  interologs , are defined as a quadruple of proteins A, B, A0, B0, where A $ B (interaction) and A0 $ B0.
Further, A, A0 are homologs and B, B0 are also homologs.
The number of such inter- ologs existing between the four datasets is shown in Table 2.
To compute homologs of a protein, we used BLASTP sequence alignment with an e-value cutoff of 0.1.
As evident from Table 2, there are few interologs across the bacterial PPIs.
None of the high-throughput datasets have an interolog in the small-scale S.typhi data- set.
This seems to indicate that interolog-based approaches to compute task similarity are not relevant here.
The phe- nomenon governing the similarity of these host pathogen interactions is probably at a much higher level, rather than at the level of individual proteins.
We explore one such possibility the  commonality hypothesis .
6 EXPERIMENTS  We use 10-fold cross validation (CV) to evaluate the perform- ance of all algorithms.
Our evaluation criteria do not use accur- acy, which measures performance on both the classes.
Because our datasets are highly imbalanced with a large number of nega- tive samples, a naı  ve classifier that always says  no  would still have a high accuracy.
We instead use precision and recall com- puted on the interacting pairs (positive class) because they can deal with class imbalance.
Precision Pð Þ ¼ number of true positives     number of predicted positives number of true positives  Recall Rð  Þ ¼  F1 score F1ð  total number of true positives in data Þ ¼ 2PR P þ R     Fig.
4.
Heatmap showing pathways enriched in each bacterial human PPI interactions dataset.
The horizontal axis represents the pathways (about 2100 of them) and the vertical axis represents the four datasets.
Each entry in the heatmap represents the P-value of a pathway w.r.t one dataset.
Darker values represent more enrichment.
The black columns that span across all four rows show the commonly enriched pathways  The baselines that we compare against are briefly described  below.
Independent models (Indep.
): We train models independently on each task using two standard classifiers: Support Vector Machines and Logistic regression with  1 and  2 regularization.
We used LibLinear (Fan et al., 2008) for these experiments and found that logistic regression with  1 regularization performs the  Table 2.
Conserved interactions in the form of interologs across the various host bacterial datasets  Human bacteria PPI datasets compared  H-B versus H-F  H-B versus H-Y  H-B versus H-S  H-F versus H-Y  H-F versus H-S  H-Y versus H-S  Number of Interologs  2  3  0  3  0  0  Note: H-X: stands for human pathogen where the pathogen  X  can be B, F, Y and S referring to B.anthracis, F.tularensis, Y.pestis and S.typhi., respectively.
The non-zero entry  2  for  H-B versus H-F  means there are two PPIs in the H-B dataset that have interologs in the H-F dataset.
i222   best across all tasks.
For conciseness, we report only the best model s performance.
Coupled models: This baseline was implemented so as to couple the regularizer parameter across two tasks, thereby keeping the basic framework similar to that in our technique.
To achieve this we optimize the function in Equation (9) and use the L-BFGS implementation from Mallet.
Note that the previous baseline has separate regularization parameters for each task.
L ¼    logð1 þ e wT s xi  sÞ þ syi    1 þ e wT t xj  tyj  t    þ  P ns i¼1     P nt j¼1 2 þ jjwtjj2  log  2  jjwsjj2     Combining host-pathogen PPI data  are reported in Section 7.
The range of values we tried during the  4.
For  , tuning of the regularization parameter ( ) were 150 10 the parameter controlling overfitting in multitask pathway  based learning (MTPL), we used a fixed value of   ¼ 1.
For Mean MTL, we tune both   and  .
To handle the high-class imbalance in our data, we used a weight-parameter Wpos to in- crease the weight of the positive examples in the logistic loss terms of our function.
We tried three values and found Wpos ¼ 100 performed the best on training data.
ð9Þ  7 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  7.1 Overall performance  Independent models with pathway features (Indep.
Path.
): This baseline incorporates the pathway information from the pathway vectors pi as features.
For each example i, the feature vector is appended by the pathway vector pi.
While our method uses the pathway vectors only for the positive class examples (via the matrices Ps and Pt), this baseline uses the pathway information for all examples via features.
The performance of this baseline will indicate whether using raw pathway information without incorporating any biologically relevant coupling does well.
We learn independent models for each task as before, and find that logistic regression with  1 regularization does the best (only these results are reported).
Mean Multi-task Learning (Mean MTL): This is a logistic regres- sion-based implementation of the multitask SVM model pro- posed by (Evgeniou and Pontil, 2004).
The important feature of this work is the use of a regularizer that penalizes the differ- ence between a model and the  mean  model formed by averaging over models from all m tasks.
In the original paper, the loss functions lðwiÞ were all hinge loss.
Because we find that logistic regression does better on our datasets, we replaced the original hinge loss function by logistic loss.
The objective we use is shown in Equation (10).
P i¼1  m  P  wi   1  m  wj  j              2  2  P i¼1  m  þ    jjwijj2  2  ð10Þ  L ¼  lðwiÞ þ    P i¼1  m  Multitask pathway-based learning: This refers to our technique, which minimizes the sum of logistic loss over the two tasks with an  2 regularization penalizing the difference between the path- way summaries.
We train two tasks at a time and compute the performance for each task.
Because we have four tasks, there are six such pairwise learning experiments in all.
While evaluating performance during 10-fold CV, we obtain the F1 on 1-fold of a task T t by averaging the F1 across all pairwise learning experi- ments that involve T t (see Section 4.3 for details).
The final CV performance reported in our results is an average over 10-folds.
6.1 Parameter tuning  We followed an identical procedure for all algorithms.
For the 10-fold CV experiments we train on 8-folds, use 1-fold as held- out and another as test.
The optimal parameters (i.e.
the best model) were obtained by parameter tuning on the held-out fold.
The test fold was used to evaluate this best model these results  Table 3 reports for each bacterial species, the average F1 along with the standard deviation for the 10-fold CV experiments.
The performance of all baselines is similar, and our method outper- forms the best of the baselines by a margin of 4 points for B.anthracis, 3.4 points for F.tularensis and 3.2 points for Y.pestis and 3.3 for S.typhi.
The overall performance of all meth- ods on this dataset is twice as good as that on the others.
We believe that the difference in the nature of the datasets might explain the above observations.
While the S.typhi dataset com- prises small-scale interaction studies, the other datasets come from high-throughput experiments.
Owing to its smaller size, it has less variance making it an easier task.
This dataset is also likely to be a biased sample of interactions, as it comes from focussed studies targeting select proteins.
The coupled learner (Coupled) performs slightly worse than Indep.
This is explained by the fact that Indep.
has more flexi- bility in setting the regularization parameter for each task separ- ately, which is not the case in Coupled.
It is interesting to note that the independent models that use the pathway matrices Ps and Pt as features (i.e.
Indep-Path) show a slightly worse per- formance than the Indep.
models that do not use them.
This seems to suggest that the cross-task pathway similarity structure that we enforce using our regularizer has more information than simply the pathway membership of proteins used as features.
Precision-Recall curves: We also plot the P-R curves for MTPL.
Please see the Supplementary Section 3.
7.2 Paired t-tests for statistical significance Given two paired sets of k measured values, the paired t-test determines whether they differ from each other in a significant  Table 3.
Averaged 10-fold CV performance for all methods for a posi- tive:negative class ratio of 1:100  Method  B.anthracis  F.tularensis  Y.pestis  S.typhi  Indep.
Coupled Indep.
Path.
Mean MTL MTPL  27.8  4 27  3.9 26.5  4.7 25.2  4.9 31.8  3.9  25.7  5.4 25.5  5 26.1  6.9 26.7  4 30.1  5.8  28.8  4 27.9  3.4 26.7  4.3 27.5  6.3 32.1  2.5  72.5  11.4 69.8  12.4 69.1  12.7 69.4  12.1 75.8  12.1  Note: Accuracy is reported as the F1 measure computed on the positive class.
The standard deviation over the 10-folds is also reported.
Bold values indicate the high- est F1 value for each column (i.e.
for that PPI dataset).
i223   M.Kshirsagar et al.
way.
We compare MTPL with Indep.
the best baseline from the 10-fold CV results.
Because the 10-fold CV results from the previous section give insufficient samples (i.e.
only 10 samples), we instead use 50 bootstrap sampling experiments and use the results to compute the P-values.
Each bootstrap sampling experi- ment consists of the following procedure: we first make two random splits of 80 and 20% of the data, such that the class ratio of 1:100 is maintained in both.
The training set is then constructed using a bootstrap sample from the 80% split and the test data from the 20% split.
A total of 50 models are thus trained and evaluated.
We do not tune parameters again for each model and instead use the optimal setting of parameter values from our 10-fold CV experiments.
The F1 is computed for each experiment thereby giving us 50 values, which will be our samples for the hypothesis test.
Because t-tests assume a normal distribution of the samples, we first did a normality test on each set of 50 F1 values.
We performed the Shapiro Wilk test with a significance level of   ¼ 0:00001 and found that our samples satisfy normality.
The averaged F1 over the 50 bootstrap experiments for the four tasks with MTPL and Indep.
has been tabulated in the Supplementary Table S1.
We observe that MTPL does better than Indep.
for the three high-throughput datasets and margin- ally underperforms for the S.typhi.
dataset.
Table 4 shows the P-values on applying the paired t-tests to the 50 F1 values.
For three of the four tasks, the performance improvement by MTPL is clearly statistically significant.
For the fourth task, which in- volves S.typhi., the baseline has a slightly better averaged per- formance but statistical significance.
Hence we can say that the performance of MTPL and Indep.
is similar for this task.
the P-value does not  indicate  Table 4.
P-values from pairwise t-tests of statistical significance  B.anthracis  F.tularensis  Y.pestis  S.typhi  P-value  4.1e-04a  9.1e-04a  2.2e-07a  0.1b  Note: We compare MTPL with the best baseline  Indep.
, using results from 50 bootstrap sampling experiments.
The null hypothesis is  there is no significant dif- ference between the performance of MTPL and Indep.
.
Null hypothesis: MTPL¼ Indep.
aAlt.
hypothesis: MTPL4Indep.
bAlt.
hypothesis: MTPL5Indep.
Table 5.
Pairwise model performance of MTPL  Pairwise tasks  F1  Task-1, Task-2  Task-1  Task-2  B.anthracis, F.tularensis B.anthracis, S.typhi B. anthracis, Y.pestis F.tularensis, S.typhi F.tularensis, Y.pestis S.typhi, Y.pestis  31.4 32 31.6 30.3 30 74.2  30.1 76.3 32 73 32.1 32.3  Note: F1 computed during 10-fold CV of various pairwise models from MTPL.
Positive: negative class ratio was 1:100.
The best F1 achieved for each task (i.e.
for each bacterial species) is shown in bold.
For example, B.anthracis has the best performance of 32 when it is coupled with S.typhi.
7.3 Pairwise performance of tasks in MTPL  The previous section gave a summary of the aggregated perform- ance of MTPL for every task.
Here we present the performance of every pairwise learning experiment of MTPL in Table 5.
This gives an idea of how various tasks benefit from being paired up with other tasks.
For each task, we check the task-pairing that gave the best performance (best F1 for each task is shown in bold).
For instance, the best F1 of 32.3 for Y.pestis was obtained in the pairwise model learned with S.typhi.
It is evident that coupling a model with one additional task seems to improve the performance over the baseline.
7.4 Feature importance across tasks  To get an understanding of inter-task model similarity, we com- pared the parameter vectors  w  of all tasks with each other (each w was learned on the entire training data).
Because the number of features is large, we computed the cosine similarity between them.
Note that we only use features that are common across tasks for this comparison.
Gene expression features for instance were not used as they vary with regard to the number of expres- sion time points, the experiment protocol, etc.
We found that  the feature weights vary greatly across models the cosine similarity ranges between 0.1 and 0.13.
We also analyzed which features had the highest absolute weight.
We found that the node-degree feature (computed using the human PPI graph) has a high positive weight across all tasks.
Gene  expression features have large negative weights across all tasks.
In general, the GO and protein sequence based n-gram features have different weights across tasks.
This seems to imply that having similar parameter values across models is not particularly important for this multitask problem.
This explains why one of our baselines: the Mean MTL method, which penalizes differences between parameter vectors, does not perform well.
Instead, regularization using the pathway summaries seems key in giving a better performance.
Sparsity of weights: We use  2 regularization in our optimiza- tion function, which does not produce sparse weight vectors.
We observe that  50% of the features have 0 weight in all tasks.
About 75 80% of the features have small weights in the range of (0.001 to  0.001).
7.5 Analysis of predictions  The F1 measure gave us a quantitative idea of the performance of each method on training data.
In this section, we present a qualitative analysis of the new interactions that our models pre- dict.
We first construct, for each task  T t , a random set Rt of protein pairs that is disjoint from the training dataset.
We train the pairwise models on the training data and obtain predictions on Rt.
The method described in Section 4.3 is used to aggregate predictions from all pairwise models.
The subset of Rt labeled as  positive  is used for the analysis described below.
i224   Combining host-pathogen PPI data  Table 6.
Five of the 17 commonly enriched pathways in the predicted interactions from MTPL  Platelet activation, signaling and aggregation Integrin alpha IIb beta3 signaling Stabilization & expansion of E-cadherin adherens junction Post-translational regulation of adherens junction stability & disassembly Signaling by NGF  found that using (i) gives us an improvement of upto 2.5 F points over the baseline methods.
8 CONCLUSION  We presented a method that uses biological knowledge in jointly learning multiple PPI prediction tasks.
Using a task regulariza- tion based multitask learning technique, we were able to encode a biological hypothesis into the optimization framework effect- ively, thus enabling the commonality hypothesis to be tested.
Our results indicate that the tasks benefit from this joint learning and we see an improvement of 4 F points over the baseline methods.
While our current results were presented on four bacterial spe- cies, we plan to extend our analysis to several other pathogens.
Another direction to explore is the case where the pathogen is fixed and the hosts are different.
Our current approach integrates multiple tasks in a pairwise manner, which is inefficient because it does not scale well while integrating several PPI datasets.
The most straightforward way of extending Equation (3) to learning m tasks simultaneously involves loss terms for each of the tasks and Oðm2Þ pairwise regularization terms, which unfortunately makes the optimiza- tion problem more complex and inefficient.
A more promising and efficient direction would be to consider model selection at the task level where only the most relevant and useful tasks are used for multitask learning.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  We would like to thank Kevin Gimpel for a helpful discussion of DC programming and the reviewers for their excellent feedback.
Funding: The work has been supported in part by the Richard King Mellon Foundation, the EraSysBioþ grant funds from the European Union and BMBF to the Salmonella Host Interactions Project European Consortium, SHIPREC, as well as NIH grants P50GM082251 and 2RO1LM007994-05, and NSF grant CCF- 1144281.
Conflict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES  Ashburner,M.
et al.
(2000) Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology.
Nat.
Genet., 25, 25 29.
Barrett,T.
et al.
(2011) NCBI GEO: archive for functional genomics data sets 10  years on.
Nucleic Acids Res., 39, D1005 D1010.
Chen,X.
and Liu,M.
(2005) Prediction of protein-protein interactions using random  decision forest framework.
Bioinformatics, 21, 4394 4400.  i225  Fig.
5.
The intersection of enriched human pathways from predicted interactions.
The total number of enriched pathways for each bacterial species are B.anthracis: 250, F.tularensis: 164, Y.pestis: 400 and S.typhi: 40.
The size of the intersection between all tasks  enriched pathways is 17.
The size of this intersection for the high-throughput datasets (excluding S.typhi) is much larger: 104  Enriched human pathways We perform enrichment analysis on the human pathways from the positive predictions of MTPL.
We use Fisher s exact test with the hypergeometric distribution.
We intersect the top enriched pathways that satisfy P-value   1e-07 from each task to get the commonly enriched pathways.
The sizes of the various intersections are shown in Figure 5.
Seventeen pathways are commonly enriched across all four tasks.
One hundred four pathways are enriched across the three high-throughput datasets, which is a significant fraction of the total number of pathways considered.
This result indicates that the bias produced by our regularizer does produce predic- tions satisfying the commonality hypothesis.
Table 6 shows some of the common enriched pathways.
The  Integrin alpha IIb beta3 ( IIb  3) signaling  pathway is enriched only in B.anthracis and Y.pestis in the training data.
However, in the predictions it is enriched in all four bacterial datasets.
Integrin- IIb  3 is a transmembrane receptor expressed in mast cells and plays an important role in innate immune re- sponses against pathogens.
We also analyze the overlap between the pathways enriched in the gold-standard positives and those enriched in the predictions.
Please see the Supplementary Section 5 for details.
7.6  Incorporating other biological hypotheses  The regularizer in Equation (3) uses the pathway information matrix to enforce pathway-level similarity.
The matrix can be used to represent any other common structure.
For example, consider the hypothesis  all pathogens target hub proteins in the host , which implies that bacterial proteins are often found to interact with host proteins that have a high node degree in the PPI network of the host.
We tried two variants to incorporate this hypothesis (i) we identify  hubs  in the human PPI graph and use the binary vectors pi as an indicator of the  hub  protein targeted by the bacterial protein, (ii) instead of a discrete  hub /  not hub  indicator we use pi to represent the node degree [each component of pi represents one node-degree bin say (10 20)].
We   M.Kshirsagar et al.
Chen,K.C.
et al.
(2012) Associations between HIV and human pathways revealed by protein-protein interactions and correlated gene expression profiles.
PLoS One, 7, e34240.
Qi,Y.
et al.
(2010) Semi-supervised multi-task learning for predicting interactions  between HIV-1 and human proteins.
Bioinformatics, 26, i645 i652.
Schaefer,C.F.
et al.
(2009) PID: the pathway interaction database.
Nucleic Acids  Driscoll,T.
et al.
(2009) Pig the pathogen interaction gateway.
Nucleic Acids Res.,  Res., 37, D674 D679.
37, D647 D650.
Schleker,S.
et al.
(2012) The current salmonella-host interactome.
Proteomics Clin.
Dyer,M.
et al.
(2007) Computational prediction of host-pathogen protein-protein  Appl., 6, 117 133.  interactions.
Bioinformatics, 23, i159 i166.
Singh,A.P.
and Gordon,G.J.
(2008) Relational learning via collective matrix factor-  Dyer,M.
et al.
(2008) The landscape of human proteins interacting with viruses and  ization.
In: KDD.
ACM, New York.
other pathogens.
PLoS Pathog., 4, e32.
Singh,R.
et al.
(2006) Struct2net: integrating structure into protein-protein inter-  Dyer,M.
et al.
(2010) The human-bacterial pathogen protein interaction networks of Bacillus anthracis, Francisella tularensis, and Yersinia pestis.
PLoS One, 5, e12089.
action prediction.
Pac.
Symp.
Biocomput., 403 414.
Tastan,O.
et al.
(2009) Prediction of interactions between HIV-1 and human pro-  teins by information integration.
Pac.
Symp.
Biocomput., 516 527.
Evgeniou,T.
and Pontil,M.
(2004) Regularized multi-task learning.
In: SIGKDD.
Tekir,S.D.
et al.
(2012) Infection strategies of bacterial and viral pathogens through  ACM, New York.
pathogen-host protein protein interactions.
Front.
Microbiol., 3, 46.
Fan,R.
et al.
(2008) Liblinear: a library for large linear classification.
J. Mach.
UniProt Consortium.
(2011) Ongoing and future developments at the universal  Learn.
Res., 9, 1871 1874.  protein resource.
Nucleic.
Acids Res., 39, D214 D219.
Garcia,J.
et al.
(2010) Biana: a software framework for compiling biological inter-  Wang,R.S.
et al.
(2007) Analysis on multi-domain cooperation for predicting pro-  actions and analyzing networks.
BMC Bioinformatics, 11, 56.  tein-protein interactions.
BMC Bioinformatics, 8, 39.
Jubelin,G.
et al.
(2010) Pathogenic bacteria target NEDD8-conjugated cullins to  Widmer,C.
et al.
(2010) Leveraging sequence classification by taxonomy-based  hijack host-cell signaling pathways.
PLoS Pathog., 6, e1001128.
multitask learning.
In: RECOMB.
Springer-Verilag, Berlin.
Kshirsagar,M.
et al.
(2012) Techniques to cope with missing data in host-pathogen  Winnenburg,R.
et al.
(2008) Phi-base update: additions to the pathogen host inter-  protein interaction prediction.
Bioinformatics, 28, i466 i472.
action database.
Nucleic Acids Res., 36, D572 D576.
Kumar,R.
and Nanduri,B.
(2010) HPIDB a unified resource for host-pathogen  interactions.
BMC Bioinformatics, 11 (Suppl.
6), S16.
Matthews,L.
et al.
(2009) Reactome knowledgebase of human biological pathways  Wu,X.
et al.
(2006) Prediction of yeast protein-protein interaction network: in- sights from the gene ontology and annotations.
Nucleic Acids Res., 34, 2137 2150.
Xu,Q.
and Yang,Q.
(2011) A survey of transfer and multitask learning in bioinfor-  and processes.
Nucleic Acids Res., 37, D619 D622.
matics.
J. Comput.
Sci.
Eng., 5, 257 268.
Mukhtar,M.S.
et al.
(2011) Independently evolved virulence effectors converge onto  hubs in a plant immune system network.
Science, 333, 596 601.
Qi,Y.
et al.
(2006) Evaluation of different biological data and computational clas- sification methods for use in protein interaction prediction.
Proteins, 63, 490 500.
Xu,Q.
et al.
(2010) Protein-protein interaction prediction via collective matrix fac- torization.
In: International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine.
IEEE, Hong Kong.
Yu,J.
and Joachims,T.
(2009) Learning structural SVMS with latent variables.
In:  International Conference on Machine Learning.
ACM, New York.
Qi,Y.
et al.
(2009) Systematic prediction of human membrane receptor interactions.
Yuille,A.
and Rangarajan,A.
(2003) The concave-convex procedure.
Neural  Proteomics, 23, 5243 5255.
Comput., 15, 915 936.  i226
