BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE  Vol.
29 no.
22 2013, pages 2946 2947 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt513  Gene expression  Advance Access publication September 4, 2013  NetWeAvers: an R package for integrative biological network analysis with mass spectrometry data Elizabeth A. McClellan1,2,*, Perry D. Moerland3,4,5, Peter J. van der Spek1 and Andrew P. Stubbs1 1Department of Bioinformatics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Dr. Molewaterplein 50, 3015GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Metropolitan State University of Denver, Colorado, USA, 3Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Bioinformatics Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, 1105AZ, The Netherlands, 4Netherlands Proteomics Centre, H.R.
Kruytgebouw, Padualaan 8, 3584CH Utrecht, The Netherlands and 5Netherlands Bioinformatics Centre, Geert Grooteplein 28, 6525GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands Associate Editor: Ziv Bar-Joseph  ABSTRACT Summary: The discovery of functionally related groups in a set of significantly abundant proteins from a mass spectrometry experiment is an important step in a proteomics analysis pipeline.
Here we de- scribe NetWeAvers (Network Weighted Averages) for analyzing groups of regulated proteins in a network context, e.g.
as defined by clusters of protein protein interactions.
NetWeAvers is an R package that pro- vides a novel method for analyzing proteomics data integrated with biological networks.
The method includes an algorithm for finding dense clusters of proteins and a permutation algorithm to calculate cluster P-values.
Optional steps include summarizing quantified pep- tide values to single protein values and testing for differential expres- sion, such that the data input can simply be a list of identified and quantified peaks.
Availability and implementation: The NetWeAvers package is writ- ten in R, is open source and is freely available on CRAN and from netweavers.erasmusmc.nl under the GPL-v2 license.
Contact: e.mcclellan@erasmusmc.nl Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on April 5, 2013  revised on July 31, 2013  accepted on August 28, 2013  1 INTRODUCTION  The statistical analysis of protein protein interaction networks (PPINs) in conjunction with mass spectrometry (MS) data is an effective way to find functional groups of identified proteins in large networks.
Several methods for network analysis are already implemented in R, but none are specific to label-free or labeled MS experiments.
The package ppiStats provides tools for the analysis of PPINs, specifically for bait-prey technologies (Chiang et al., 2013).
DEGraph performs gene network differential ex- pression (DE) testing on two conditions only (http://arxiv.org/ abs/1009.5173).
Few R packages are built specifically for MS data, and of those even fewer include downstream statistical analysis.
None of them include the possibility to test on more  *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
than two conditions or perform network analysis.
MSnbase and MALDIquant both process and quantify MS data without test- ing or network analysis (Gatto and Lilley, 2011  Gibb and Strimmer, 2012).
The package xcms quantifies peaks and per- forms statistical analysis to find differences in two groups (t-tests) at the peak level (Smith et al., 2006).
The package isobar offers tools only for isobarically tagged MS proteomics data and includes a method for testing the difference in ratios between two groups (Breitwieser et al., 2011).
BioNet, an R package that performs network analysis inte- gratively with P-values from biological data, uses a maximal- scoring subgraph algorithm to find the optimal sub-network and, optionally, additional suboptimal solutions (Beisser et al., 2010).
In the algorithm, nodes are scored using a function of P- values, maximum likelihood estimates from a beta-uniform mix- ture model and a false discovery rate threshold.
The inclusion of the false discovery rate threshold parameter influences the dis- covery of the optimal module by negatively scoring nodes con- sidered not significant.
Although multiple testing corrections and arbitrary significance cutoffs may be useful for detecting individ- ual regulated genes or proteins, using such procedures in network analysis can possibly increase the false-negative rate.
This is true especially when only one subnetwork, albeit  optimal , is de- tected, or when regulated genes or proteins interact with unregu- lated ones that are crucial to the connectivity of the subnetwork.
Considering this, we created an algorithm that finds and scores communities in a network without a subjective threshold and that does not require extra parameter specifications to find add- itional suboptimal subgraphs.
Supplementary Table S1 presents a comparison of NetWeAvers and other network analysis tools  Supplementary Table S3 provides a rationale for removing P- value thresholds.
Here we present an R package that implements a network analysis method for finding dense clusters of DE proteins from MS data.
It has three main components: peptide summarization, a test for DE and network analysis.
The summarization and hypothesis testing steps allow for simple statistical analysis at the level of individual proteins: quantitative values for peptides are summarized to obtain protein quantities, and linear models are used to test for differences between groups to determine the  ß The Author 2013.
Published by Oxford University Press.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com   statistical significance for each protein.
The resulting P-values for individual proteins can be used in the network analysis step, which scores highly connected subgraphs, i.e.
dense clusters, with these P-values.
Because the need to specify many param- eters can greatly impact the results, we chose a highly data-driven cluster-finding algorithm that requires only one parameter.
Our protein and cluster scoring each require only one additional parameter.
2 DESCRIPTION  NetWeAvers provides a method for the integrated statistical ana- lysis of MS data and biological networks.
The input for NetWeAvers is a set of peaks from an MS experiment that has been identified, quantified and normalized.
The data can be input as an R/Bioconductor ExpressionSet or a matrix to be converted into an ExpressionSet using customSummarizer.
If the data are at the peptide level, then summarization to the protein level in NetWeAvers (esetSummarizer).
This can be done before or after testing for DE (DEtest).
The summarization step consists of aggregat- ing all peptide quantities for a given protein using the mean or median so that each protein only has one value per sample.
required for use  is  The test for DE is implemented using the linear modeling framework of the limma package (Smyth, 2004).
The output of the test includes P-values that may be used in the main algorithm of NetWeAvers (runNetweavers), which maps the proteins to a user-specified network in node node format and function findDenseClusters uses the Walktrap algorithm for finding highly connected subgraphs as implemented in the R package igraph (Csa  rdi and Nepusz, 2006) as a part of the network analysis algorithm.
performs  analysis.
network  The  the  The clusters are scored using a weighted mean or median of log-transformed P-values (scoreClusters).
The weights are a function of the number of proteins with which a given protein interacts.
A permutation test (permTest) may be carried out to determine the statistical the clusters.
See Supplementary File 1 for more details on the cluster scoring and the permutation test, as well as Supplementary Figure S1 for a schematic overview of the NetWeAvers procedure.
significance of  3 APPLICATION  We applied the R package to MS data from a phosphorylation study of human embryonic stem cells (Van Hoof et al., 2009, see Supplementary File S1 for the experimental design).
The R pack- age vignette provided as Supplementary File S2 presents the code for summarizing the data, performing hypothesis testing and running the network analysis using the Reactome human PPIN, version 43 (Croft et al., 2011).
NetWeAvers identified clusters of proteins with roles in processes known to be involved in stem cell differentiation.
See Supplementary File 1 for these results, results from NetWeAvers applied to a null dataset and an  NetWeAvers  example using data that were summarized and tested in another R package.
4 CONCLUSIONS  NetWeAvers is a unique algorithm designed for quantitative MS data that incorporates key features of the proteins and networks (P-values and number of interactors, respectively) being ana- lyzed.
It uses only a few parameters and does not arbitrarily filter out non-significant proteins.
We applied our method to a publicly available MS dataset and found statistically significant and biologically meaningful networks.
The method may also be used with gene expression data.
Many databases provide PPINs in node node format, which makes it easy for users to connect NetWeAvers with their favorite databases.
The format of the NetWeAvers output allows for simple connections to tools like Cytoscape (Shannon et al., 2003) to visualize the resulting clusters.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  The authors thank Javier Mun  oz for discussions about the Van Hoof dataset and Steven V. Rødkær for suggesting changes to the algorithm.
Funding: This work was supported by The Netherlands Proteo- mics Centre, a program embedded in The Netherlands Genomics Initiative, and The Netherlands Bioinformatics Centre [NPC- GM WP3].
Conflict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES  Beisser,D.
et al.
(2010) BioNet: an R-package for the functional analysis of biolo-  gical networks.
Bioinformatics, 26, 1129 1130.
Breitwieser,F.
et al.
(2011) General statistical modeling of data from protein relative  expression isobaric tags.
J. Proteome Res., 10, 2758 2766.
Chiang,T.
et al.
(2013) ppiStats: protein-protein interaction statistical package.
R package version 1.25.0.
Croft,D.
et al.
(2011) Reactome: a database of reactions, pathways and biological  processes.
Nucleic Acids Res., 39, D691D697.
Csa  rdi,G.
and Nepusz,T.
(2006) The igraph software package for complex network  research.
Int.
J.
Complex Syst., 1695.
Gatto,L.
and Lilley,K.S.
(2011) MSnbase an R/Bioconductor package for isobaric tagged mass spectrometry data visualization, processing and quantitation.
Bioinformatics, 28, 288 289.
Gibb,S.
and Strimmer,K.
(2012) MALDIquant: a versatile R package for the ana-  lysis of mass spectrometry data.
Bioinformatics, 28, 2270 2271.
Shannon,P.
et al.
(2003) Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models  of biomolecular interaction networks.
Genome Res., 13, 2498 2504.
Smith,C.A.
et al.
(2006) XCMS: processing mass spectrometry data for metabolite profiling using nonlinear peak alignment, matching and identification.
Anal.
Chem., 78, 779 787.
Smyth,G.K.
(2004) Linear models and empirical Bayes methods for assessing dif- ferential expression in microarray experiments.
Stat.
Appl.
Genet.
Mol., 3, Article 3.
Van Hoof,D.
et al.
(2009) Phosphorylation dynamics during early differentiation of  human embryonic stem cells.
Cell Stem Cell, 5, 214 226.
2947
