BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE  Vol.
30 no.
21 2014, pages 3115 3117 doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu483  Genome analysis  Advance Access publication July 14, 2014  , Domenico Simone2,y  MToolBox: a highly automated pipeline for heteroplasmy annotation and prioritization analysis of human mitochondrial variants in high-throughput sequencing Claudia Calabrese1,y Cristiano Gutta  3, Giuseppe Gasparre1, Ernesto Picardi3,5,6, Graziano Pesole3,5,7 and Marcella Attimonelli3,* 1Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University of Bologna, 40138 Bologna, 2Department of Biosciences, University of Milan, 20133 Milan, 3Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceutics, University of Bari, 70126 Bari, 4Department of Sciences and Technologies, University of Sannio, 82100 Benevento, 5Institute of Biomembranes and Bioenergetics, National Research Council, 70126 Bari, 6National Institute of Biostructures and Biosystems, 00136 Rome and 7Center of Excellence in Genomics for Biomedicine and Agri-food (CEGBA), University of Bari, 70126 Bari, Italy Associate Editor: Inanc Birol  , Maria Angela Diroma3, Mariangela Santorsola4,  ABSTRACT Motivation: The increasing availability of mitochondria-targeted and off-target sequencing data in whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing studies (WXS and WGS) has risen the demand of effective pipelines to accurately measure heteroplasmy and to easily recognize the most functionally important mitochondrial variants among a huge number of candidates.
To this purpose, we developed MToolBox, a highly automated pipeline to reconstruct and analyze human mito- chondrial DNA from high-throughput sequencing data.
Results: MToolBox implements an effective computational strategy for mitochondrial genomes assembling and haplogroup assignment also including a prioritization analysis of detected variants.
MToolBox provides a Variant Call Format file featuring, for the first time, allele-specific heteroplasmy and annotation files with prioritized variants.
MToolBox was tested on simulated samples and applied on 1000 Genomes WXS datasets.
Availability and implementation: MToolBox package is available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/mtoolbox/.
Contact: marcella.attimonelli@uniba.it Supplementary information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.
Received on March 19, 2014  revised on July 8, 2014  accepted on July 9, 2014  1 INTRODUCTION  Emerging discoveries in human mitochondrial genetics, driven by the advent of next-generation sequencing, have revealed that in- dividuals exhibit a complex mixture of mitochondrial genotypes (He et al., 2010) and carry low-level heteroplasmic variants (Payne et al., 2013).
On the other hand, the deeper the sequen- cing coverage, the higher the number of mitochondrial DNA  *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors.
(mtDNA) variants and the variety of heteroplasmic ranges found per individual (Diroma et al., 2014  He et al., 2010  Payne et al., 2013).
In this frame, the deep sequencing of mtDNA raises the demand of effective pipelines to accurately measure heteroplasmy and to easily recognize the most function- ally important variants among a huge number of candidates.
To this purpose, we developed MToolBox, a highly automated bio- informatics pipeline to reconstruct and analyze human mtDNA from high-throughput sequencing (HTS) data.
The MToolBox workflow includes a computational strategy to assemble mito- chondrial genomes from whole-exome sequencing (WXS) and/or whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data (Picardi and Pesole, 2012), which was further updated to detect insertions and dele- tions (ins/dels) and to assess the heteroplasmic fraction (HF) of each variant allele with the related confidence interval (CI), reported as sample-specific meta-information in an enhanced version of the Variant Call Format (VCF) file (version 4.0).
The MToolBox pipeline analyzes the reconstructed genomes for haplogroup assignment (Rubino et al., 2012) and variant prioritization.
2 METHODS  2.1 Mitochondrial reads extraction, genome reconstruction and VCF file generation  The MToolBox pipeline integrates in a unique automatic workflow a computational strategy for mtDNA data extraction from WXS and WGS data (Picardi and Pesole, 2012), where new important features have been added.
MToolBox can accept as input raw data or prealigned reads (Fig.
1a).
In both cases, reads are mapped/remapped by the mapExome.py script (Fig.
1b) at user s choice either onto the Reconstructed Sapiens Reference Sequence (RSRS  Behar et al., 2012) or the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS  Andrews et al., 1999).
Subsequently, reads mapped on mtDNA are realigned onto the nuclear genome (GRCh37/hg19), to discard Nuclear mitochondrial Sequences (NumtS  Simone et al., 2011  Fig.
1c) and amplification artifacts.
The resulting Sequence Alignment/Map (SAM) file (Fig.
1d) can be optionally processed for ins/dels realignment around a set of  ß The Author 2014.
Published by Oxford University Press This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
C.Calabrese et al.
full compatibility of the resulting annotation with the current clinical literature (Bandelt et al., 2014).
3 RESULTS  The MToolBox performance in heteroplasmy detection was tested on four artificial heteroplasmic samples, whose sequencing was simulated at different mean depth (Supplementary Information).
MToolBox showed high specificity and sensitivity in detecting all the artificial heteroplasmy tested, with an average coverage depth equal or above 1000 .
MToolBox was exten- sively applied on WXS data from 1000 Genomes (Genomes Project et al., 2012 and Supplementary Information), to obtain a VCF file of mtDNA variants from 2419 individuals (available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/mtoolbox/files/1000Genomes_ data/).
Reliability of reconstructed mitochondrial genomes was confirmed by their haplogroup predictions, the majority of which coherent with the related individual (Supplementary Information).
The accuracy in heteroplasmy de- tection and quantification was confirmed by the results from four mother child pairs that showed the expected pattern of mtDNA inheritance (Supplementary Information).
ancestry of  the  4 DISCUSSION  A highly automated pipeline for mtDNA analysis from HTS data is not available to date.
To fill this gap, we developed MToolBox, an effective workflow with customizable parameters and able to analyze multiple samples in a single run.
MToolBox is the only tool that generates as output a VCF file, the standard format for large-scale genotyping information, suitably custo- mized for mitochondrial data, by including the heteroplasmy fraction and its related CI.
In fact, also the MitoSeek tool (Guo et al., 2013) performs mitochondrial HTS data ana- lyses, including somatic and structural variant recognition.
Additionally, MToolBox provides the user with essential ana- lyses of reconstructed mitochondrial genomes, i.e.
haplogroup assignment and variant prioritization, exploiting a broad collec- tion of annotation resources.
Thus, MToolBox may provide a valuable support for the recognition of candidate mitochondrial mutations in clinical studies.
Funding: This work was supported by Progetto Strategico  Invecchiamento  e  Medicina Personalizzata  (CNR, Italy) and the PRIN2009 fund assigned to M.A.
The computational work has been executed on the IT resources made available by the ReCaS project (PONa3_00052).
Conflicts of interest: none declared.
REFERENCES  Andrews,R.M.
et al.
(1999) Reanalysis and revision of the Cambridge reference  sequence for human mitochondrial DNA.
Nat.
Genet., 23, 147.
Bandelt,H.J.
et al.
(2014) The case of the continuing use of the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS) and the standardization of notation in human mito- chondrial DNA studies.
J. Hum.
Genet., 59, 66 77.
Behar,D.M.
et al.
(2012) A  Copernican  reassessment of the human mitochondrial  DNA tree from its root.
Am.
J. Hum.
Genet., 90, 675 684.
Fig.
1.
The main steps of the MToolBox workflow: (a d) read mapping and NumtS filtering  (e h) post-mapping processing  (i m) genome assembly, haplogroup prediction and variant annotation.
In brackets, programs or modules particularly important for the associated process.
Solid connectors indicate mandatory pipeline steps  dashed connectors (e g) indicate that the corresponding post-mapping steps can be optional, otherwise the OUT2.sam file directly undergoes the assembly process (h).
Please refer to Supplementary Information for a detailed description of MToolBox workflow steps  known ins/dels, annotated in HmtDB (Rubino et al., 2012) and MITOMAP (Ruiz-Pesini et al., 2007), and for putative PCR duplicates removal (Fig.
1e h and Supplementary Information).
This step generates a dataset of highly reliable mitochondrial aligned reads, which is used to the reconstruct assembleMTgenome.py the mtVariantCaller.py module for nucleotide mismatches and ins/dels detec- tion.
All the genomic variants are filtered based on the quality scores and read depth, and annotated in a VCF file (v.4.0), with the corresponding HF and CI values (Fig.
1j and Supplementary Information).
by now integrating  mitochondrial (Fig.
complete  genome  script  1i),  a  2.2 Haplogroup prediction and prioritization analysis of  mitochondrial variants  reconstructed contig against  MToolBox provides an output file with reconstructed contig sequence(s) (Contigs.fa) (Fig.
1k and Supplementary Information).
Each set of con- tigs is subjected to haplogroup prediction, relying on the RSRS-based Phylotree resource (van Oven and Kayser, 2009), by mt-classifier (Fig.
1l), an updated version of the fragment-classify tool (Rubino et al., 2012), which now includes a module to perform functional annotation and pri- oritization of mitochondrial variants (Fig.
1m and Supplementary Information).
This latter analysis is carried out by aligning each sample-specific related macro- haplogroup-specific consensus sequence (Supplementary Information) to recognize, via a prioritization process, private variants, deserving fur- ther clinical investigation.
The prioritization takes into account also the pathogenicity of each mutated allele, determined with different algo- rithms, and the nucleotide variability of each variant site  amino acid variability is also considered if codogenic (Supplementary Information).
For each mutated allele, additional anno- tations are also reported, i.e.
annotation from HmtDB and MITOMAP resources and their occurrence among 1000 Genomes Project samples (Supplementary Information).
Variants of assembled genomes are also reported with respect to rCRS (Supplementary Information), to ensure a  the variant  site  the  is  3116   MToolBox  Diroma,M.A.
et al.
(2014) Extraction and annotation of human mitochondrial from 1000 Genomes Whole Exome Sequencing data.
BMC  genomes Genomics., 15 (Suppl.
3), S2.
Picardi,E.
and Pesole,G.
(2012) Mitochondrial genomes gleaned from human  whole-exome sequencing.
Nat.
Methods., 9, 523 524.
Rubino,F.
et al.
(2012) HmtDB, a genomic resource for mitochondrion-based  Genomes Project,C.
et al.
(2012) An integrated map of genetic variation from 1,092  human variability studies.
Nucleic Acids Res., 40, D1150 D1159.
human genomes.
Nature, 491, 56 65.
Ruiz-Pesini,E.
et al.
(2007) An enhanced MITOMAP with a global mtDNA muta-  Guo,Y.
et al.
(2013) MitoSeek: extracting mitochondria information and perform- ing high-throughput mitochondria sequencing analysis.
Bioinformatics, 29, 1210 1211.
He,Y.
et al.
(2010) Heteroplasmic mitochondrial DNA mutations in normal and  tumour cells.
Nature, 464, 610 614.
Payne,B.A.
et al.
(2013) Universal heteroplasmy of human mitochondrial DNA.
Hum.
Mol.
Genet., 22, 384 390.  tional phylogeny.
Nucleic Acids Res., 35, D823 D828.
Simone,D.
et al.
(2011) The reference human nuclear mitochondrial sequences com- pilation validated and implemented on the UCSC genome browser.
BMC Genomics, 12, 517.  van Oven,M.
and Kayser,M.
(2009) Updated comprehensive phylogenetic tree of global human mitochondrial DNA variation.
Hum.
Mutat., 30, E386 E394.
3117
