Glycobiology vol. 19 no. 6 pp. 576–582, 2009
doi:10.1093/glycob/cwp015
Advance Access publication on February 24, 2009
Different mechanisms are involved in apoptosis induced by melanoma gangliosides
on human monocyte-derived dendritic cells

Karim Bennaceur1,2,3, Iuliana Popa2,5, Jessica Alice
Chapman4, Camille Migdal2, Josette P´eguet-Navarro2,
Jean-Louis Touraine3, and Jacques Portoukalian2
2Laboratory of Dermatological Research, University of Lyon-1 EA 41-69,
Building R, Edouard Herriot Hospital, 69437 Lyon Cx 03, France;
3Department of Transplantation and Clinical Immunology, University of
Lyon-1 and Edouard Herriot Hospital, Lyon, France; 4Faculty of Life
Sciences, University of Manchester, UK; and 5Institute of Macromolecular
Chemistry Petru Poni, Iasi, Romania

Received on May 16, 2008; revised on February 4, 2009; accepted on
February 6, 2009

Tumor escape is linked to multiple mechanisms, notably
the liberation, by tumor cells, of soluble factors that inhibit
the function of dendritic cells (DC). We have shown that
melanoma gangliosides impair DC differentiation and in-
duce their apoptosis. The present study was aimed to give
insight into the mechanisms involved. DC apoptosis was in-
dependent of the catabolism of gangliosides since lactosyl-
ceramide did not induce cell death. Apoptosis induced by
GM3 and GD3 gangliosides was not blocked by inhibitors
of de novo ceramide biosynthesis, whereas the acid sphin-
gomyelinase inhibitor desipramine only prevented apoptosis
induced by GM3. Furthermore, our results suggest that DC
apoptosis was triggered via caspase activation, and it was
ROS dependent with GD3 ganglioside, suggesting that GM3
and GD3 induced apoptosis through different mechanisms.

Keywords: acid sphingomyelinase/apoptosis/ceramides/
dendritic cells/gangliosides/melanoma

Introduction

Gangliosides are sialic acid-containing glycosphingolipids that
modulate several cellular functions such as proliferation, cell
adhesion, signal transduction, and apoptosis (Hakomori et al.
1998). It has long been known that the ganglioside composition
is altered in tumor cells. For instance, while normal melanocytes
only express GM3, melanoma cells overexpress a variety of
gangliosides, the majority being GM3 and GD3 (Tsuchida et al.
1987). Furthermore, a number of tumors, including metastatic
melanoma, shed gangliosides into their microenvironment
(Portoukalian et al. 1978; Ladisch et al. 1983; Bernhard et al.
1989) and much evidence suggests that soluble gangliosides
contribute to tumor-induced immunosuppression (McKallip
et al. 1999). Recently, we have shown that GM3 and GD3

1To whom correspondence should be addressed: e-mail: karim.bennaceur@
newcastle.ac.uk

gangliosides puriﬁed from human melanoma tumors impair den-
dritic cell (DC) differentiation from human monocytes (Peguet-
Navarro et al. 2003), as well as epidermal Langerhans cell mat-
uration (Bennaceur et al. 2006), and induce apoptosis of both
cell types. Indeed, ganglioside GD3 accumulation has been
shown to be associated with Fas or ceramide-mediated apop-
tosis (De Maria et al. 1997) and requires ceramides produced by
the action of acidic sphingomyelinase (De Maria et al. 1998).
Metabolic products of gangliosides, like ceramides, have also
been reported to induce apoptosis (Olshefski et al. 1996; Taha
et al. 2006). In contrast, gangliosides have also been shown to
protect L929 ﬁbroblast cell line from TNF-mediated apopto-
sis (Koike et al. 1993). Furthermore, the induction of apopto-
sis in hematopoietic cells is regulated by the balance between
apoptosis-inducing genes and -suppressing genes (McDonnell
et al. 1996). However, the effect of gangliosides on the ex-
pression of these genes is unknown. Therefore, in the present
investigation, we were interested in analyzing the mechanisms
of GM3 and GD3 ganglioside-induced apoptosis by using dif-
ferent approaches.

Results

Purity of the ganglioside fractions
Thin-layer chromatography was carried out to assess the purity
of the melanoma-derived ganglioside fractions. As shown in
Figure 1, the GM3 and GD3 fractions were free of other lipids
and no ninydrin-positive contaminant could be detected on the
thin-layer plate (not shown).

Dendritic cells in vitro take up and catabolize exogenous
gangliosides
GD3 tritiated on the sphingoid base was added at a concentration
of 50 μg/mL to the culture medium at the onset of the dendritic
cell differentiation process and, after 4 days incubation, the
fate of GD3 was investigated. Lipid analysis found that about
30% of the cell-associated radioactivity was still in the form
of intact GD3, with less than 2% migrating as GM3, and with
less than 10% of the remaining radioactivity being present in
sphingomyelin and ceramides (not shown).

Gangliosides induce apoptosis of DC
Figure 2 shows clearly that the presence of both GM3 and GD3
gangliosides in the culture medium of dendritic cells induces
apoptosis. However, it should be pointed out that, although
apoptosis was always observed under our experimental con-
ditions, we experienced a fairly high variability, depending on
the donors, in the yield of human dendritic cells and in their
susceptibility to apoptosis by gangliosides during this process.

Published by Oxford University Press 2009.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
576
by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Different mechanisms in apoptosis induced by melanoma gangliosides on human monocyte-derived DC

Ganglioside-induced DC apoptosis is caspase dependent
To test whether a caspase-dependent pathway is involved in
DC apoptosis, PARP cleavage was detected. PARP is involved
in DNA repair and the cleavage of this enzyme, a target of
caspase 3, has been used extensively as a marker of caspase 3
activity (Woo et al. 1998). The obtained results show that PARP
is cleaved more in DC treated with gangliosides than untreated
DC, in which the cleavage corresponds to spontaneous apoptosis
(Figure 2A). On the other hand, apoptosis of DC was detected
with an Annexin/PI kit. The broad inhibitor of caspase, Z-Vad,
was added every 2 days to the cell cultures, both in the presence
or absence of gangliosides. We observed that gangliosides do
not induce DC apoptosis in the presence of Z-Vad (Figure 2B),
and the apoptotic effects of GM3 and GD3 were abrogated.
Furthermore, caspase 3 detection revealed that GM3 and GD3
gangliosides increase caspase 3 activation (Figure 2C).

GD3 but not GM3 ganglioside induced a loss of mitochondrial
transmembrane potential
It has been suggested that mitochondria play an important role
in cellular apoptosis (Gogvadze et al. 2008). To investigate the
role of mitochondria in apoptosis induced by GM3 and GD3
gangliosides, the ﬂuorescent JC-1 probe was used to detect any
disruption of the mitochondrial transmembrane potential, as an
early apoptotic event in DC cells treated or not by ganglio-
sides. In apoptotic cells, the mitochondrial membrane potential
was dissipated; thus, the JC-1 dye was dispersed in the cell as
monomers detected in the FL1 channel. Representative dot plots
and the percentages of apoptotic cells based on FL1-positive and
FL2-negative signals are shown in Figure 3. The apoptotic cells
are shown in the lower-right quadrant of the plots and it is clear
that the presence of GD3 increases apoptosis by 15% whereas
GM3 has no signiﬁcant effect on apoptosis. The results thus
showed that GD3 induced apoptosis via mitochondria, unlike
GM3.

GD3 but not GM3 ganglioside induced production of
superoxide anion
To explore the molecular mechanisms of ganglioside-induced
apoptosis, we monitored superoxide anion production from DC
treated or not by GM3 and GD3 gangliosides during 4 days
by staining them with DHE, a ﬂuorescence dye for superox-
ide anion, and subsequent ﬂow cytometry analysis. In GM3-
treated DC, superoxide anion production is not signiﬁcantly in-
creased as compared with controls. However, in the presence of
GD3 ganglioside, DC superoxide anion production is increased
(Figure 4).

Kinetic studies of ganglioside-induced apoptosis
Kinetic studies were carried out to determine the necessary
time using melanoma-associated gangliosides GM3 and GD3 to
induce DC apoptosis. In a previous study (Peguet-Navarro et al.
2003), we showed that upon addition of GM3 or GD3 on day 2
of the culture, apoptotic cells could be detected from day 4. In
this study, GM3 and GD3 were added at the onset of cell culture,
and DC were collected and washed after respectively 1, 2, and
6 days before measuring apoptosis by annexin/propidium iodide
staining. When monocyte exposure to gangliosides was limited
to the ﬁrst or even second days of culture and apoptosis was
measured the same day, the percentage of apoptosis in treated

577

Fig. 1. Thin-layer chromatography of the GM3 and GD3 ganglioside fractions
isolated by HPLC from the total melanoma gangliosides. Gangliosides were
visualized using resorcinol–HCl reagent.

Fig. 2. Ganglioside-induced DC apoptosis is caspase dependent. To test
whether a caspase-dependent pathway is involved in DC apoptosis, (A) PARP
cleavage was detected. GM3- and GD3-induced apoptosis increased cleavage
of PARP. (B) The apoptosis of DC was detected also with an Annexin/PI kit.
The broad inhibitor of caspase Z-Vad was added every 2 days to the cell
cultures both in the presence or absence of gangliosides. (C) GM3- and
GD3-induced apoptosis increased caspase 3 activation.

K Bennaceur et al.

Fig. 3. GD3 ganglioside induced a loss of mitochondrial transmembrane potential. Gangliosides were added at the onset of culture, and cells were stained 6 days
later with JC-1 dye reagent (FluoProbes). Cells were analyzed for apoptosis by ﬂow cytometry (Becton Dickinson). In healthy cells, the JC-1 dye formed red
ﬂuorescent aggregates that were detected in the FL2 channel. In apoptotic cells, the dye was dispersed in the cell as green ﬂuorescent monomers, detected in the
FL1 channel. The dot plot of the X-axis (FL1), which is the log of JC-1 green ﬂuorescent monomers, and the Y-axis (FL2), which depicts red ﬂuorescent
aggregates, was obtained by ﬂow cytometry. The apoptotic cells (typically FL1-positive and FL2-negative) are indicated in the bottom-right quadrant.

as that of GM3 and GD3 gangliosides, suggesting that cell
death was not merely induced by products of the catabolism
of gangliosides. Still, some data obtained from kinetic studies
could suggest that ganglioside-induced DC apoptosis occurred
through accumulation of endogenous ceramides. Therefore,
to verify this possibility, de novo ceramide biosynthesis was
blocked by the inhibitors fumonisin B1 (50 μM) and/or myriocin
(50 μM), added at the beginning of cell culture in the presence or
absence of gangliosides. The results obtained showed that FB1
and myriocin (data not shown), which are speciﬁc inhibitors of
ceramide synthase, had no effect on ganglioside-induced apop-
tosis (Figure 6A), thus ruling out a ceramide-mediated mecha-
nism of apoptosis.

GM3 ganglioside induces an accumulation of ceramides
generated via the SMase pathway
Endogenous ceramide biosynthesis can also be generated by
sphingomyelin hydrolysis by two kinds of sphingomyelinase:
neutral and acid, which are inhibited respectively by glutathione
(10 mM) and desipramine (1 μM). These inhibitors were added
with the presence or absence of gangliosides every 2 days dur-
ing cell culture. Glutathione had no effect on DC survival (not
shown) whereas desipramine decreased apoptosis triggered by
GM3 ganglioside (Figure 6B).

aSMase mediates death of DC treated with GM3 but not with
GD3 ganglioside
To investigate the involvement of aSMase in DC death, small
interfering RNA (siRNA) technology was used. Introduction
of siRNA oligonucleotide targeting smpd-1/aSMase mRNA re-
duced DC death treated by GM3 ganglioside but not with GD3
(Figure 7A). This result suggests that the activation of acid sph-
ingomyelinase is responsible for DC apoptosis induced by GM3
ganglioside.

Effect of gangliosides on aSMase activity
For the determination of aSMase activity in vitro, we have de-
veloped a high-throughput method based on a ﬂuorescent sub-
strate analog (NBD-sphingomyelin) that is hydrolyzed by a cell
lysate to form the corresponding ceramide. After the reaction,
the remaining substrate and the product are extracted by organic
solvent, separated by thin-layer chromatography and quantiﬁed
by ﬂuorescence using densitometer. Figure 7B shows that the

Fig. 4. Effect of GM3 and GD3 gangliosides on superoxide anion production
during DC differentiation. Puriﬁed monocytes were cultured with GM-CSF
and IL-4, in the presence or the absence of GM3 or GD3 (50 μg/mL)
gangliosides. Gangliosides were added at the onset of culture, and cells were
stained 6 days later with dihydroethidium (DHE) staining and analyzed by
ﬂow cytometry.

DC was not signiﬁcantly different from the untreated control
cells. However, we observed on day 6 a high percentage of
apoptotic cells on ganglioside-treated DC (Figure 5). This result
suggests that several days are necessary for the apoptotic signal
to be triggered following incubation with gangliosides.

Ceramides generated via the de novo pathway are not
responsible for DC apoptosis
The addition of lactosylceramide (50 μg/mL) derived from en-
zymatic hydrolysis of melanoma gangliosides to DC did not
induce apoptosis, although its degradation pathway is the same

578

Different mechanisms in apoptosis induced by melanoma gangliosides on human monocyte-derived DC

Fig. 5. Kinetic studies of ganglioside-induced apoptosis. GM3 and GD3 were added at the onset of cell culture, and DC were collected and washed after
respectively 1, 2, and 6 days before measuring apoptosis by annexin/propidium iodide staining.

cleavage of NBD-sphingomyelin into ceramides by DC was
enhanced by GM3, whereas GD3 had no effect.

Discussion

Gangliosides added exogenously to the culture medium induce
alterations in several cellular events including cell growth, dif-
ferentiation, maturation, and apoptosis, but the molecular events
through which this occurs are largely unknown. Speciﬁc gan-
gliosides such as GM3 and GD3 have been reported to induce
DC apoptosis (Melchiorri et al. 2002; Peguet-Navarro et al.
2003; Bennaceur et al. 2006). In the 2003 study, it was observed
that gangliosides induce apoptosis of DC during their differen-
tiation from monocytes. The present study extends these results
by investigating the mechanisms of apoptosis of DC induced by
gangliosides.

In order to verify that the effects on dendritic cells reported
in this study were indeed linked to the presence of the ganglio-
sides, the following experiments were carried out as previously
published (Bennaceur et al. 2006): aliquots of freshly puriﬁed
ganglioside fractions were preincubated with speciﬁc antibodies
◦
for 1 h at 37
C with constant stirring, and then protein L-agarose
(Sigma-Aldrich) was added for one more hour. After centrifuga-
tion, the solution was found to be depleted of gangliosides and
none of the effects reported in our study could be seen using the
depleted solution, thus strongly suggesting that the gangliosides
are responsible for the observed effects on dendritic cells.

At the concentrations of gangliosides used in our study, these
compounds seem to be only slowly catabolized, and we found
that, after 4 days of incubation of dendritic cells with radioac-
tive GD3, this ganglioside still accounted for 30% of the cell-

associated radioactivity whereas metabolites such as ceramides
and sphingomyelin accounted each for less than 10%. These
results are within the same range of percentages as those pre-
viously reported by groups investigating the fate of exogenous
gangliosides on other types of human cells such as ﬁbroblasts
(Chigorno et al. 1997).

Several studies have shown that ceramide production is in-
creased in apoptotic cells before morphological modiﬁcations,
thus suggesting that ceramides are involved in the transduction
of the signal triggering cell apoptosis (Mathias et al. 1998).
In fact, it was demonstrated that the supernatant of melanoma
tumors induced ceramide biosynthesis and apoptosis in bone
marrow-derived DC (Kanto et al. 2001). Moreover, it is known
that proliferating tumors shed gangliosides in their microen-
vironment. In the previous study, kinetic studies showed that
ganglioside-induced apoptosis was detected between 4 and 6
days after their addition to the DC. Such a delay suggests a
cellular accumulation of substances mediating apoptosis.

Different approaches were used to clarify the involvement of
ceramides in DC apoptosis, ﬁrstly by blocking ceramide syn-
thesis with speciﬁc inhibitors and secondly by treating the cells
with inhibitors of ceramide catabolism. Initially, we demon-
strated that GM3- and GD3-induced apoptosis was caspase de-
pendent since it could be reversed by Z-Vad, a speciﬁc inhibitor.
This result was conﬁrmed by the strong cleavage of PARP on
DC treated with gangliosides. We also measured directly cas-
pase 3 activity in DC treated by GM3 and GD3 gangliosides,
and the results suggested that both gangliosides increased cas-
pase 3 activity. Furthermore, it had been shown that GD3 gan-
glioside induces an apoptotic signal via CD95 receptor and
activates caspases (De Maria et al. 1997). On the other hand,
our results regarding the mitochondrial inner-transmembrane

579

K Bennaceur et al.

Fig. 6. Ceramides generated via the de novo pathway are not responsible for
DC apoptosis. (A) The de novo ceramides biosynthesis was blocked with
Fumonisin B1 (50 μg/mL). These inhibitors were added at the beginning of
cell culture in the presence or absence of gangliosides. (B) GM3 ganglioside
induced an accumulation of ceramides via the acid SMase pathway. Acid
sphingomyelinase inhibited by desipramine (1 μM) was added in the presence
or absence of gangliosides every 2 days during cell culture. Results are
representative of four independent experiments.

potential (m), as determined by the JC-1 ﬂuorescence shift,
demonstrated that GD3, but not GM3, induced a loss of mito-
chondrial transmembrane potential. Recent studies indicate that
mitochondria exhibit functional and structural changes that reg-
ulate apoptosis (H¨uttemann et al. 2007). Measurements of m
revealed that cells undergoing apoptosis have a signiﬁcantly
lower m than normal cells. These results were conﬁrmed
after ROS detection by DHE staining. In GM3-treated DC, su-
peroxide anion production was not signiﬁcantly increased when
compared with controls. However, GD3 ganglioside increased
superoxide anion production. These results suggest that unlike
GM3, GD3 ganglioside is involved in DC apoptosis via a direct
effect on mitochondria. In the other approach to understand the
induced DC apoptosis mechanism caused by GM3 and GD3
gangliosides, lactosylceramide derived from melanoma gan-
gliosides by sialidase treatment was used. Since the addition
of lactosylceramide had no effect on DC (data not shown), it
is highly unlikely that the observed effects could be triggered
by ceramides produced by the cleavage of added gangliosides
because lactosylceramide is a metabolite of ganglosides that is
further degraded into ceramides during the catabolic process.
Free ceramides are released mainly through the SMase pathway

580

Fig. 7. (A) aSMase RNAi-mediated downregulation of apoptosis induced by
GM3 but not with GD3 gangliosides. (B) DC treated by GM3 but not with
GD3 gangliosides increased ceramides production via the acid
sphingomyelinase pathway.

or the de novo biosynthesis pathway. The enzymes involved in
these pathways reside in different intracellular compartments,
leading to different localizations of ceramides (Mathias et al.
1998). Furthermore, in the apoptotic process, cells may respond
differently to some forms of stress and stimulus by generating
ceramides from different pathways. Indeed, the induction of de
novo biosynthesis of ceramides during apoptosis is due to stress
stimulus such as cytotoxic drugs on T lymphocytes (Boland
and Foster 1997), ionizing radiations on skin cells (Farrell et al.
1998) or exogenous fatty acids on hematopoietic cells (Paumen
et al. 1997). In our study, apoptosis induced by GM3 and GD3
was not reversed by the addition of fumonisin B1, suggesting
that ceramides generated via the de novo pathway are not respon-
sible for DC apoptosis. On the other hand, the implication of the
SMase pathway in the apoptotic process seems to be generally
better recognized. Several studies showed apoptosis on different
kinds of cells following stimuli such as TNF-α, Fas, interleukin-
1, deprivation of growth factors (Mathias et al. 1998), cytotoxic
drugs (Bezombes et al. 2001), and ultra-violet light (Chatterjee
and Wu 2001). We have seen that glutathione and trimipramine
(not shown), which are inhibitors of neutral sphingomyelinase,
did not reverse the apoptosis induced by gangliosides. By con-
trast, desipramine which blocks acid sphingomyelinase activity
completely prevented apoptosis induced by GM3, whereas it
had no effect on GD3-induced apoptosis. These results were
conﬁrmed since DC treated by GM3, but not with GD3 gan-
gliosides, increased ceramide production via the acid sphin-
gomyelinase pathway. Equally, aSMase iRNA-mediated down-
regulation of apoptosis was detected after treatment with GM3,
but not with GD3. Although GM3 is also a breakdown prod-
uct of GD3 ganglioside, the failure of the latter ganglioside to

Different mechanisms in apoptosis induced by melanoma gangliosides on human monocyte-derived DC

inﬂuence the aSMase pathway could be explained by the fact
that membrane-bound sialidase cleaves GD3 directly into lacto-
sylceramide without detectable intermediate GM3, as observed
by Merritt et al. (1987). In summary, our results suggest that gan-
glioside GM3 induces the production of ceramides via SMase
which accounts for the apoptosis of DC, whereas GD3 induces
apoptosis via a direct action on mitochondria, thus showing
that GM3 and GD3 induce apoptosis of DC through different
mechanisms.

In conclusion, we have now unveiled some of the biochemical
pathways leading to apoptosis of dendritic cells when they are
incubated with melanoma-derived GM3 and GD3 gangliosides,
as described in our ﬁrst report (Peguet-Navarro et al. 2003).
However, the mechanisms accounting for the impairment of
the major functions of dendritic cells such as allogeneic T-cell
proliferation and migration to lymph nodes (Bennaceur et al.
2006) remain to be investigated.

Materials and methods

Puriﬁcation of monocytes
Mononuclear cells were obtained from peripheral blood of
healthy donors by centrifugation on Lymphoprep. Mono-
cytes were puriﬁed by negative magnetic depletion using
hapten-conjugated anti-CD3, CD7, CD19, CD45RA, and CD56
(MACS, Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch, Germany) and a magnetic
cell separator (Midi MACS), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The technique resulted routinely in >85% purity,
as assessed by anti-CD14 staining and ﬂow cytometry analysis.

Western blotting for PARP detection
To isolate the whole cell lysates for immunoblotting, the cell
pellets were suspended in the lysis buffer. The samples were in-
C for 30 min, and then centrifugated at 14,000 × g
◦
cubated at 4
for 15 min. The supernatants were collected, and total protein
was quantiﬁed. Fifty micrograms of lysate was separated by
12% SDS–PAGE and transferred to the polyvinylidene diﬂuo-
ride membrane blocked with defatted milk at 5% in PBS (w/v).
Immunostaining was performed with rabbit polyclonal primary
Abs speciﬁc for PARP (Sigma-Aldrich) followed by incuba-
tion with goat polyclonal anti-rabbit IgG conjugated to HRP
(Sigma-Aldrich).

Caspase 3 assay
The cells were stained with an anti-caspase 3 antibody as a
primary antibody, and then with goat anti-mouse IgG coupled
with ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate as a secondary antibody. Fluo-
rescence analysis was performed on 104 cells using a ﬂow cy-
tometer (Becton Dickinson, Mountain View, CA) and the Cell
Quest software.

Reagents and enzymatic inhibitors
The cell permeable inhibitor of caspase-1 and caspase-3,
N-benzyloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp (O-Me) ﬂuoromethyl ke-
tone (Z-VAD-fmk), diphenylene iodinium (DPI), L-cycloserine,
myriocin, fumonisin B1 (FB1), glutathione (GSH), desipramine
were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, France.

Puriﬁcation of gangliosides
Gangliosides were puriﬁed from human melanoma tumors in our
laboratory. GM3 and GD3 were isolated by high-performance
liquid chromatography on a 250-4 Si100 column (Merck,
Darmstadt, Germany) with a Hitachi L-6200 apparatus (Hialeah,
FL) using a ternary gradient of hexane–isopropanol–water
(55/36/9 to 55/30/15, v/v/v) at a ﬂow rate of 0.25 mL/min.
Fractions of 0.5 mL were collected, and elution was monitored
by thin-layer chromatography on HPTLC silica gel 60 plates
(Merck) migrated in chloroform/methanol/0.2% aqueous cal-
cium chloride (60/35/8, v/v/v). The plates were visualized by
◦
C after spraying with a resorcinol–HCl reagent.
heating at 150
The GM3- and GD3-containing fractions were separately run a
second time to ensure optimal purity. Aliquots of both ganglio-
sides were tritiated on the long-chain base (Schwarzmann 1978)
using sodium borotritide (American Radiolabelled Chemicals,
St. Louis, MO).

Production of dendritic cells
The culture medium was RPMI 1640 supplemented with
L-glutamine (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY), 1% gen-
tamicin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), and 10% heat-
inactivated FCS (Myoclone; Life Technologies), hereafter called
the complete medium. Puriﬁed monocytes (106 cells/mL) were
cultured for 6 days in 12-well tissue culture plates (Costar,
Cambridge, MA) in the complete medium supplemented with
recombinant human GM-CSF (200 ng/mL, Schering-Plough)
and IL-4 (33 ng/mL, Schering-Plough), in the presence or ab-
sence of melanoma-derived gangliosides, respectively, GM3 and
GD3 (50 μg/mL). On days 2 and 4, cells were fed with fresh
medium and cytokines. Enzymatic inhibitors were added at dif-
ferent times to the culture.

Apoptosis detection by annexin/propidium iodide
Apoptosis is characterized by exposure of phosphatidylserine
residues on the cell surface. DC apoptosis was measured using
the annexin V-FITC kit, with dead cells identiﬁed by propidium
iodide (Immunotech). For this assay, 5000 events were col-
lected on a FACScan II cytometer and analyzed with CellQuest
software.

Mitochondrial apoptosis assay
To investigate whether GM3 and GD3 gangliosides induce apop-
tosis via mitochondria, we used the FluoroProbes JC-1 mito-
chondrial apoptosis detection reagent (Interchim, Montlucon,
France) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. This assay is
based on the disruption of the mitochondrial inner-membrane
electrochemical potential using a ﬂuorescent dye. Brieﬂy, dur-
ing DC differentiation GM3 and GD3 gangliosides are added
into cells culture on days 2 and after 4 days of culture, mito-
chondrial apoptosis assay was performed with JC-1 reagent, and
then analyzed immediately by ﬂow cytometry. In healthy cells,
JC-1 dye accumulated in the mitochondria as aggregates and
was detected in the FL2 channel. In apoptotic cells, the dye was
dispersed throughout the cell as monomers and detected in the
FL1 channel.

Detection of ROS production
Dihydroethidium staining (DHE 5 μM) was used to evaluate
intracellular levels of superoxide (O2
) in DC treated or not by

−

581

K Bennaceur et al.

gangliosides. DHE is freely permeable to cells and in the pres-
ence of superoxide is oxidized to ﬂuorescent ethidium bromide
which gets trapped inside the cells by intercalation into DNA.
After gangliosides treatment, DC were washed three times with
PBS. Next, DHE (5 μM) was added into each well of six-well
plates (Falcon, Franklin Lakes, NJ) and incubated for 20 min at
room temperature. Staining was stopped by washing cells three
times with PBS, and then analyzed by FACS Calibur (Becton
Dickinson, Mountain View, CA).

Fluorescence assay of acid sphingomyelinase (aSMase)
For determination of aSMase activity in human DC as a function
of substrate concentration, human DC (2×106) were incubated
with 10 nmol N-C12:0-NBD-sphingomyelin (Matreya, Pleasant
◦
Gap, PA) in a total volume of 200 μL for 1 h at 37
C. The reac-
tion was stopped by adding 2 mL CHCl3–CH3OH, 2:1 (v/v) for
lipid extraction. The solvent of the organic phase was evaporated
under N2, the residue was redissolved in 100 μL CHCl3, and the
resultant solution was applied onto a TLC plate. After migration
in a solvent system chloroform–methanol–water 65:25:4 (by
volume), the plate was scanned with a CS-930 Chromatoscan
densitometer (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a ﬂuo-
rescence apparatus. The resulting ratio NBD-ceramide/NBD-
sphingomyelin allowed the calculation of aSMase activity.

SiRNA-mediated gene silencing
To suppress aSMase mRNA expression, siRNA speciﬁc for
this enzyme (sc-41650 from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Paris,
France) was used. The efﬁciency of siRNA treatment on acid
SMase activity was checked as detailed above, and the activity
was found to be decreased by at least 85%. Oligonucleotide
(2 nmoles) targeting aSMase/smpd1 was transfected into cells
with QiagenTM Lipid Reagent and cultured for 48 h. At the end
of the incubation period, DC death was assessed with propidium
iodide.

Funding

A bursary from the Matrix Association (Laboratory of Der-
matological Research, EA 41-69, Building R, Edouard Herriot
Hospital, 69437 Lyon Cx 03, France). Funding to pay the Open
Access publication charges for this article was provided by the
Matrix Association.

Conﬂict of interest statement

None declared.

References
Bennaceur K, Popa I, Portoukalian J, Berthier-Vergnes O, P´eguet-Navarro
J. 2006. Melanoma-derived gangliosides impair migratory and antigen-
presenting function of human epidermal Langerhans cells and induce their
apoptosis. Int Immunol. 18:879–886.

Bernhard H, Meyer zum B¨uschenfelde KH, Dippold WG. 1989. Ganglio-
side GD3 shedding by human malignant melanoma cells. Int J Cancer.
44:155–160.

Bezombes C, S´egui B, Cuvillier O, Bruno AP, Uro-Coste E, Gouaz´e V, Andrieu-
Abadie N, Carpentier S, Laurent G, Salvayre R, et al. 2001. Lysosomal
sphingomyelinase is not solicited for apoptosis signaling. FASEB J. 15:297–
299.

582

Boland MP, Foster SJ. 1997. Daunorubicin activates NFkappaB and induces
kappaB-dependent gene expression in HL-60 promyelocytic and Jurkat T
lymphoma cells. J Biol Chem. 272:12952–12960.

Chatterjee M, Wu S. 2001. Cell line dependent involvement of ceramide in

ultraviolet light-induced apoptosis. Mol Cell Biochem. 219:21–27.

Chigorno V, Riva C, Valsecchi M, Nicolini M, Brocca P, Sonnino S. 1997.
Metabolic processing of gangliosides by human ﬁbroblasts in culture. For-
mation and recycling of separate pools of sphingosine. Eur J Biochem.
250:661–669.

De Maria R, Lenti L, Malisan F, d’Agostino F, Tomassini B, Zeuner A,
Rippo MR, Testi R. 1997. Requirement for GD3 ganglioside in CD95-
and ceramide-induced apoptosis. Science. 277:1652–1655.

De Maria R, Rippo MR, Schuchman EH, Testi R. 1998. Acidic sphin-
gomyelinase (ASM) is necessary for fas-induced GD3 ganglioside accu-
mulation and efﬁcient apoptosis of lymphoid cells. J Exp Med. 187:897–
902.

Farrell AM, Uchida Y, Nagiec MM, Harris IR, Dickson RC, Elias PM, Holleran
WM. 1998. UVB irradiation up-regulates serine palmitoyltransferase in
cultured human keratinocytes. J Lipid Res. 39:2031–2038.

Gogvadze V, Orrenius S, Zhivostovsky B. 2008. Mitochondria in cancer cells:

What is so special about them? Trends Cell Biol. 18:165–173.

Hakomori S, Handa K, Iwabuchi K, Yamamura S, Prinetti A. 1998. New insights
in glycosphingolipid function: “Glycosignaling domain,” a cell surface as-
sembly of glycosphingolipids with signal transducer molecules, involved in
cell adhesion coupled with signaling. Glycobiology. 8:xi-xix.

H¨uttemann M, Lee I, Samavati L, Yu H, Doan JW. 2007. Regulation of mi-
tochondrial oxidative phosphorylation through cell signaling. Biochim Bio-
phys Acta. 1773:1701–1720.

Kanto T, Kalinski P, Hunter OC, Lotze MT, Amoscato AA. 2001. Ceramide
mediates tumor-induced dendritic cell apoptosis. J Immunol. 167:3773–
3784.

Koike T, Fehsel K, Zielasek J, Kolb H, Burkart V. 1993. Gangliosides protect

from TNF alpha-induced apoptosis. Immunol Lett. 35:207–212.

Ladisch S, Gillard B, Wong C, Ulsh L. 1983. Shedding and immunoregula-
tory activity of YAC-1 lymphoma cell gangliosides. Cancer Res. 43:3808–
3813

Mathias S, Pena LA, Kolesnock RN. 1998. Signal transduction of stress via

ceramide. Biochem J. 335:465–480.

McDonnell TJ, Beham A, Sarkiss M, Andersen MM, Lo P. 1996. Importance

of the Bcl-2 family in cell death regulation. Experientia 52:1008–1017.

McKallip R, Li R, Ladisch S. 1999. Tumor gangliosides inhibit the tumor-

speciﬁc immune response. J Immunol. 163:3718–3726.

Melchiorri D, Martini F, Lococo E, Gradini R, Barletta E, De Maria R,
Caricasole A, Nicoletti F, Lenti L. 2002. An early increase in the disialo-
ganglioside GD3 contributes to the development of neuronal apoptosis in
culture. Cell Death Differ. 9:609–615.

Merritt WD, Casper JT, Lauer SJ, Reaman GH. 1987. Expression of GD3
ganglioside in childhood T-cell lymphoblastic malignancies. Cancer Res.
47:1724–1730.

Olshefski R, Taylor B, Heitger A, Hasegawa A, Ladisch S. 1996. Induction of
programmed cell death and immunosuppression by exogenous sphingolipids
are separate processes. Eur J Biochem. 241:47–55.

Paumen MB, Ishida Y, Han H, Muramatsu M, Eguchi Y, Tsujimoto Y, Honjo
T. 1997. Inhibition of carnitine palmitoyltransferase I augments sphin-
golipid synthesis and palmitate-induced apoptosis. J Biol Chem. 272:3324–
3329.

Peguet-Navarro J, Sportouch M, Popa I, Schmitt D, Portoukalian J. 2003. Gan-
gliosides from human melanoma tumors impair dendritic cell differentiation
from monocytes and induce their apoptosis. J Immunol. 170:3488–3494.

Portoukalian J, Zwingelstein G, Abdul-Malak N, Dor´e JF. 1978. Alteration of
gangliosides in plasma and red cells of humans bearing melanoma tumors.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 85:916–920.

Schwarzmann G. 1978. A simple and novel method for tritium labeling of
gangliosides and other sphingolipids. Biochim Biophys Acta. 529:106–
114.

Taha TA, Mullen TD, Obeid LM. 2006. A house divided: Ceramide, sphingosine,
and sphingosine-1-phosphate in programmed cell death. Biochim Biophys
Acta. 1758:2027–2036.

Tsuchida T, Saxton RE, Irie RF. 1987. Gangliosides of human melanoma: GM2

and tumorigenicity. J Natl Cancer Inst. 78:55–60.

Woo M, Hakem R, Soengas MS, Duncan GS, Shahinian A, K¨agi D, Hakem A,
McCurrach M, Khoo W, Kaufman SA, et al. 1998. Essential contribution
of caspase 3/CPP32 to apoptosis and its associated nuclear changes. Genes
Dev. 12:806–819.

