Glycobiology vol. 19 no. 11 pp. 1155–1162, 2009
doi:10.1093/glycob/cwp076
Advance Access published on June 15, 2009
REVIEW

Structural insights into what glycan arrays tell us about how glycan-binding proteins
interact with their ligands

Maureen E Taylor and Kurt Drickamer1
Division of Molecular Biosciences, Department of Life Sciences, Imperial
College, London SW7 2AZ, UK

Received on April 19, 2009; revised on May 25, 2009; accepted on May 25,
2009

Screening of glycan arrays represents a powerful, high-
throughput approach to deﬁning oligosaccharide ligands for
glycan-binding receptors, commonly referred to as lectins.
Correlating results from such arrays with structural anal-
ysis of receptor–ligand complexes provide one way to vali-
date the arrays. Using examples drawn from the family of
proteins that contain C-type carbohydrate-recognition do-
mains, this review illustrates how information from the ar-
rays reﬂects the way that selectivity and afﬁnity for glycan
ligands is achieved. A range of binding proﬁles is observed,
from very restricted binding to a small set of structurally
similar ligands to binding of broad classes of ligands with
related terminal sugars and even to failure to bind any of the
glycans on an array. These outcomes provide insights into
the importance of multiple factors in deﬁning the selectivity
of these receptors, including the presence of conformation-
ally deﬁned units in some oligosaccharide ligands, local and
extended interactions between glycans and the surfaces of
receptors, and steric factors that exclude binding of some
ligands.

Keywords: glycan array/glycan-binding receptor/lectin/
modeling/structure

Introduction

Glycan-binding receptors are involved in biological processes
that require recognition of selected sets of oligosaccharide lig-
ands. Receptor-mediated glycan-binding events underlie se-
lective adhesion between mammalian cells, sorting and traf-
ﬁcking of soluble glycoproteins, and detection of microbial
pathogens based on their surface glycosylation (Taylor and
Drickamer 2006; Varki et al. 2009). Glycan arrays are increas-
ingly being used as a means of characterizing the glycan-binding
speciﬁcity of these receptors (Feizi et al. 2003; Paulson et al.
2006).

There are important practical issues that have been addressed
in the construction and probing of glycan arrays (Box 1). Mul-

tiple different platforms have been described for the display
of glycans using a range of immobilization strategies. These
include both noncovalent adsorption, such as direct immobi-
lization on nitrocellulose (Wang et al. 2002), binding of lipid-
conjugated glycans to nitrocellulose surfaces (Fukui et al. 2002),
and binding of biotinylated ligands to streptavidin-coated sur-
faces (Guo et al. 2004), and various types of covalent linkages
to surfaces through the reducing ends of oligosaccharides (Blixt
et al. 2004; Manimala et al. 2006; Karamanska et al. 2008).
The nature of the surface and the spacer between the glycan
and the surface can affect the interaction with glycan-binding
proteins, often in unpredictable ways. Data shown here were
obtained with glycans covalently attached to polymer-coated
glass surfaces through spacers of different lengths in a for-
mat developed by the Consortium for Functional Glycomics
(Blixt et al. 2004). Arrays are generally probed with soluble
lectins or soluble fragments of membrane receptors that have
been ﬂuorescently labeled. Because of the extensive washing
steps needed to remove unbound receptors, binding to arrays is
generally enhanced through avidity resulting from multivalent
binding of naturally oligomeric receptor fragments or clusters
of carbohydrate-binding domains generated by oligomerization
motifs such as immunoglobulin Fc domains or biotinylation
tags that can be clustered on streptavidin tetramers (Paulson
et al. 2006; Powlesland et al. 2006).

Although it is clear that glycan arrays are powerful tools for
highly parallel analysis of the interaction of receptors with a
broad spectrum of potential ligands, an understanding of the
signiﬁcance of the positive and negative results obtained is still
being developed. Multiple approaches have been employed for
array validation, most commonly involving solid-phase binding
assays employing labeling strategies to detect bound receptors
(van Vliet et al. 2005), quantitative binding competition assays
(Guo et al. 2004), isothermal titration calorimetry (Gregg et al.
2008; Neu et al. 2008), or surface plasmon resonance (Bochner
et al. 2005; van Liempt et al. 2006). The focus of this review
is on structural features of the binding proteins and the glycan
ligands that explain some of the behaviors observed on the ar-
rays. Examples are drawn from the family of glycan-binding
proteins that contain C-type carbohydrate-recognition domains
(CRDs) (Box 2). Many of these domains have been tested on
the array created by the Consortium for Functional Glycomics
(CFG), generating one of the largest collections of reasonably
comparable datasets available. Importantly, both the glycan ar-
ray binding data and coordinates for the crystal structures of
receptor–glycan complexes are publicly available through the
CFG web site (www.functionalglycomics.org) and the Protein
Data Bank (DPB) (www.rcsb.org).

1To whom correspondence should be addressed: Tel: +44-20-7594-5282; Fax:
+44-20-7594-3057; e-mail: k.drickamer@imperial.ac.uk
c(cid:2) 2009 The Author(s). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses?by-nc/2.0/uk/) which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution,
1155
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

M E Taylor and K Drickamer

Materials and methods

Receptors that display highly selective ligand binding
The most readily interpreted results on the glycan array are those
that reﬂect binding to a very limited set of glycans that clearly
share a structural motif. The endothelial scavenger receptor
C-type lectin illustrates this type of situation since probing of
the array even at relatively high protein concentrations reveals
selective binding to only a few glycans, all of which contain
the Lewisx or Lewisa trisaccharide motifs (Figure 1A) (Coombs
et al. 2005; Feinberg, Taylor, et al. 2007). Plotting the data in
rank order of the signal strength observed on the array reveals
a sharp drop-off in binding, with relatively few structures that
fall in a twilight zone between strong signals and background.
In addition to the presence of the Lewisx and Lewisa motifs in
the group of positive ligands, it is also important to note the
absence of these motifs in most of the glycans that do not bind
to the receptor.

The Lewisx trisaccharide is a commonly recognized struc-
tural motif in ligands for glycan-binding receptors. In addition
to the scavenger receptor C-type lectin, DC-SIGN (discussed
below) and the selectins bind to ligands that contain this unit
(Vestweber and Blanks 1999; van Die et al. 2002; Guo et al.
2004; Rosen 2004). An important feature of these ligands is that

1156

the three sugar residues that make up the Lewisx epitope are con-
sistently in the same conformation in glycans in solution and in
crystals as well as in glycans bound to receptors, as analyzed by
NMR and crystallography (Miller et al. 1992; Perez et al. 1996;
Somers et al. 2000; Feinberg, Taylor, et al. 2007). This structure
results from van der Waals packing of the fucose and galactose
residues against each other, forming a rigid and stable structure
(Figure 1B). In the complex with the scavenger receptor C-type
lectin, the 3- and 4-hyroxyl groups of the galactose residue of
the Lewisx ligand form coordination bonds with a bound cal-
cium ion, an arrangement that is characteristic of the C-type
lectins (Box 2). A further feature of the Lewisx conformation is
that the relatively nonpolar B face of galactose remains exposed,
allowing it to pack with the side chain of tryptophan and other
aromatic amino acids (Figure 1B). In addition to these interac-
tions with the galactose residue, the fucose residue also makes
contact with other residues projecting from the protein surface
as can be seen in a surface representation of the bound complex
(Figure 1C).

A key consequence of the preformed, rigid conformation of
the glycan ligand is that there is little or no conformational
entropy penalty associated with the binding interaction. Crystal
structures of C-type CRDs in the absence of glycan ligands
reveal that the binding site is also preformed, so that the only

Glycan arrays and structures of receptor-glycan complexes

(Petrescu et al. 1999). This is one of two conformations of the
disaccharide that have been observed, but the fact that it appears
to be a preferred if not necessarily completely stable, preformed
conformation would still reduce the entropy penalty associated
with binding to a receptor. Although potential interactions with
the binding site in LSECtin have been modeled, these remain to
be examined experimentally.

In summary, glycan array results indicating highly selective
binding to a group of glycans can reﬂect the presence of a pre-
formed conformational feature in the ligands, which provides an
extended surface for local interactions with the receptor surface
at minimal entropy cost associated with glycan immobilization.

Receptors that bind to broad classes of glycan ligands
One of the ﬁrst receptors tested against glycan arrays was DC-
SIGN, which appears to have a dual role in the interaction of
dendritic cells with pathogen surfaces as well as with T cells
(Geijtenbeek et al. 2000; Engering et al. 2002). The glycan array
analysis reveals binding to two classes of ligands: high mannose
oligosaccharides and Lewis-type structures (Figure 2A), while
structural analysis suggests that the mechanisms underlying in-
teractions with the two classes of ligands differ signiﬁcantly
(Guo et al. 2004). The Lewisx trisaccharide sits in the binding
site as a rigid unit, as in the case of the scavenger receptor
C-type lectin, but the placement of the fucose rather than the
galactose residue in the primary binding site results in a more
limited set of interactions (Figure 2B and C). Notably, the promi-
nent phenylalanine residue on the surface of the CRD is not
positioned sufﬁciently close to the oligosaccharide to allow
packing interactions with the galactose residue. Nevertheless,
the limited contacts observed are probably sufﬁcient to generate
speciﬁcity because of the rigid structure of the oligosaccharide
ligand.

In contrast, binding to the more ﬂexible high mannose ligands
involves a different energetic balance. Because high mannose
oligosaccharides are known to assume multiple conformations
(Petrescu et al. 1999), no one of which would exactly match
the conformation needed to dock into the binding site, the en-
tropy cost associated with freezing out one of these structures
would be substantial. The structure of a ligand with ﬁve mannose
residues in the binding site can be modeled on the available crys-
tal structure of a mimic containing the core trimannose structure
capped with two GlcNAc residues (Figure 2D and E) (Feinberg,
Castelli, et al. 2007). The model reveals that by snaking though a
groove on the surface of the CRD and wrapping around the sur-
face phenylalanine residue, the oligosaccharide can make many
favorable interactions. Thus, binding of this class of ligand must
involve a signiﬁcant trade-off between entropy costs for immo-
bilization of the ligand and additional favorable contacts in a
much more extended binding site. The binding of DC-SIGN to
high mannose oligosaccharides thus provides a second paradigm
for how relatively narrow speciﬁcity for a class of ligands can
be achieved.

Other receptors display binding to a still broader spectrum
of ligands on the glycan array, which structurally appears to
correlate with binding largely to terminal residues in glycans.
For example, ranking of ligands for the macrophage galac-
tose receptor detected on the glycan array reveals preferential
binding to glycans bearing GalNAc residues that are either un-
substituted or substituted only on the 6-position (Figure 2F),

1157

change needed to accommodate the glycan ligand is release
of water molecules that occupy the coordination positions that
will be replaced by the hydroxyl groups of the sugar. Thus, the
enthalpy gain associated with the secondary contacts with the
surface of the protein is not negated by an extensive entropy
penalty, resulting in an overall more favorable free energy of
the interaction that is reﬂected in a 70-fold enhanced afﬁnity
for Lewisx trisaccharide compared to galactose, as measured
in binding competition assays (Coombs et al. 2005; Feinberg,
Taylor, et al. 2007).

Although many oligosaccharides display conformational het-
erogeneity, the Lewisa and Lewisx trisaccharides are not the only
examples of preferred local conformations that create preformed
structural features that can interact with receptors with a mini-
mal entropy penalty associated with glycan immobilization. In
the case of another endothelial cell receptor, LSECtin, glycan
array screening at high receptor concentration reveals binding
to multiple groups of ligands with terminal fucose and GlcNAc
residues, but at reduced concentrations much more selective
binding is observed to glycans bearing terminal GlcNAcβ1-
2Man disaccharides (Figure 1D) (Powlesland et al. 2008). Anal-
ysis of the conformation of this disaccharide in multiple crystal
structures reveals that in many cases it assumes a common pre-
ferred conformation in which the N-acetyl group of GlcNAc is
positioned above the mannose residue, making van der Waals
interactions with the B face of the hexose (Figure 1E and F)

M E Taylor and K Drickamer

Fig. 1. Ligand binding by the scavenger receptor C-type lectin (SRCL) and LSECtin. (A) Glycan array data for the mouse receptor (200 μg/mL) plotted in rank
order of ligand binding. The 10 oligosaccharides giving the highest signals are highlighted in red, along with other structurally similar glycans that are ranked
lower. (B) Structure of Lewisx trisaccharide bound to SRCL. The surface of the protein is shown, with Ca2+
highlighted in violet. The A face of fucose and the A
and B faces of galactose are labeled. These designations are based on the order of the ring carbons, which is clockwise when the sugar is viewed from the A face.
(C) Structure of the complex in (B) with surface colored by underlying atom type and ligand presented as space-ﬁlling spheres. (D) Results for glycan arrays
probed with labeled human LSECtin CRD-streptavidin tetramers (4.5 μg/mL). The structures of the ﬁve oligosaccharides giving the highest signals are shown.
Bars are coded based on terminal sugars in the glycans: green for mannose and blue for GlcNAc. (E and F) Structure of a portion of a bi-antennary glycan
terminating in GlcNAc-β1-2Man disaccharides showing packing of the N-acetyl group of GlcNAc on top of mannose. The ﬁgure was created from CFG
primscreen_GLYCAN_v3_72_02172005 and CFG primscreen_1043 and structures 2OX9 and 1SLA in the PDB.

1158

Glycan arrays and structures of receptor-glycan complexes

Fig. 2. Binding of multiple classes of ligands to DC-SIGN and the macrophage galactose receptor. (A) Data for screening of a recent version of the Consortium for
Functional Glycomics glycan array with human DC-SIGN (200 μg/mL). Results are presented in rank order of binding, with bars for mannose-terminated glycans
colored green and bars for glycans containing the Lewisa or Lewisx epitopes highlighted in red. The 10 oligosaccharides giving the strongest signals are shown at
the top and additional related glycans are indicated below. (B and C) Structure of the CRD from DC-SIGN in complex with a tetrasaccharide containing the Lewisx
epitope. (D and E) Structure of the CRD with Man5 modeled into the binding site based on the crystal structure with a GlcNAc2Man3 oligosaccharide. (F) Binding
data for the human macrophage galactose receptor (4.5 μg/mL) on the CFG printed glycan array. The results are similar to previous studies with the human and rat
receptors on earlier streptavidin-based arrays (Coombs et al. 2005; van Vliet et al. 2005). The data are color-coded to indicate glycans bearing GalNAc with free 3
and 4 hydroxyl groups in purple and galactose with free 3 and 4 hydroxyl groups in orange, except galactose residues in α linkage or adjacent to fucose residues,
which are in yellow. In spite of the preference for exposed GalNAc and galactose residues, binding of other glycans indicated in black also occurs, including the
simple sugar glucose which gives the highest signal. (G and H) Model of the binding site in the macrophage galactose receptor with a bound GalNAc residue,
based on the structure of the galactose-binding mutant of mannose-binding protein that was created by insertion of key binding site residues from the
galactose-binding receptor. These residues include the marked tryptophan residue and the glycine-rich loop positioned just to the right of this residue, which serves
to hold it in the position for packing against galactose or GalNAc residues. For the model, additional surface residues were substituted into the structure using
Insight software. Data are from CFG primscreen_2010, and the model structures were created starting from entries 1sl5, 1k9i, and 1afb in the PDB.

1159

M E Taylor and K Drickamer

with simple GalNAc being one of the most prominent ligands.
Although binding to galactose-terminated structures is also de-
tected, these ligands generally give weaker signals. These results
are consistent with other proﬁling methods that indicate a strong
preference for GalNAc over galactose (van Vliet et al. 2005).
Structural and mutagenesis studies indicate that GalNAc and
galactose bind in the primary binding site on the CRD, ligated
to the binding site calcium ion and packing against a trypto-
phan residue for increased afﬁnity and speciﬁcity, with further
selectivity for GalNAc resulting from favorable contacts with
the 2-acetamido group (Figure 2G and H) (Iobst and Drickamer
1996; Kolatkar et al. 1998).

The overall trend in the types of glycans bound to the
macrophage galactose receptor is evident from the array data,
and all of the ligands with high signals can be accounted for by
interactions of a terminal sugar with the primary binding site.
The fact that there are no other obvious common features of the
most prominent ligands is consistent with the suggestion that
speciﬁcity derives from the interaction with the terminal sugar.
However, many glycans that feature apparently appropriate ter-
minal residues do not rank amongst the best ligands, and there
are no obvious rules describing which ligands bind and which do
not. Two factors are generally correlated with lower ranking in
the binding: linkage in α- rather than β-conﬁguration and linkage
adjacent to a fucose residue. These observations illustrate the
importance of a further mechanism that has been invoked to ex-
plain binding speciﬁcity, which is exclusion of some ligands by
steric hindrance. Surface features of the CRD near to the bind-
ing site may block binding of some ligands, particularly those
with ﬁxed geometry such as the Lewisx structure, rather than
enhance binding through favorable interactions. In such cases,
afﬁnity must be generated largely though the interactions with
the terminal monosaccharides, which makes the packing inter-
action of the galactose with the tryptophan residue particularly
important. Selectivity then results more from exclusion of some
classes of ligands. A similar principle of exclusion probably ex-
plains why DC-SIGN binds poorly to some fucose-containing
ligands and well to others, particularly given the position of the
surface phenylalanine residue near to the primary binding site.
Comparing the glycan array proﬁles for the scavenger recep-
tor C-type lectin and LSECtin (Figure 1A and D) with those for
DC-SIGN and the macrophage galactose receptor (Figure 2A
and F) reveals differences in the shapes and color distributions
of the proﬁles. The ﬁrst set of receptors, in which the bind-
ing sites make multiple favorable interactions with a relatively
rigid structural motif, give strong signals with a few structurally
related glycans, after which there is a sharp drop-off in signal, re-
ﬂecting the fact that binding is dependent on the presence of the
speciﬁc binding epitope. In contrast, the proﬁles for the second
set of receptors are more extended, with a continuous decline in
signal and no strict segregation of structurally distinct ligands.
Although binding to these receptors reﬂects a nucleating interac-
tion with a mannose-type or a galactose-type monosaccharide,
the afﬁnity for oligosaccharides results from a complex balance
between entropy costs of immobilizing larger oligosaccharides,
with resulting favorable interactions, and steric exclusion.

Receptors with low selectivity binding sites
At the most extreme end of the glycan array results are recep-
tors that are known to bind sugar ligands but which interact

1160

poorly with all of the oligosaccharides on the array. Serum
mannose-binding protein represents such a case since very lit-
tle binding is evident even with highly ﬂuorescent probe at high
receptor concentrations (Figure 3A). There are no obvious com-
mon features to the glycans which give the highest signals, and
the pattern is not reproduced in multiple screens of the array.
The binding site in this protein is open, so that there are very
few constraints on what binds beyond the key hydroxyl groups
that coordinate with the binding site calcium ion (Weis et al.
1992; Ng et al. 2002). However, as a result of this arrangement,
there are very few possibilities for further favorable interactions
to enhance afﬁnity as in the case of DC-SIGN (Figure 3B).
The binding of mannose, GlcNAc, and fucose in the primary
binding site is not enhanced by packing with an adjacent tryp-
tophan residue as seen for the galactose- and GalNAc-binding
receptors. Also, binding involves only a limited portion of the
terminal residue of oligosaccharide ligands because other por-
tions of the glycans are not in direct contact with the surface
of the protein, which contrasts sharply with the arrangement in
DC-SIGN.

The inherently weak and low speciﬁcity of the interaction of
mannose-binding protein with terminal sugars means that bio-
logically signiﬁcant binding can only occur through multivalent
interactions. Although multivalency plays a role in increasing
avidity of interactions of many glycan-binding receptors, for
the mannose-binding protein the geometry of the placement
of multiple binding sites facing a single direction is a deter-
mining feature for broad recognition of glycan-rich surfaces
without requiring speciﬁc complex oligosaccharide structures
(Figure 3C) (Weis and Drickamer 1994). The wide spacing
between the binding sites in mannose-binding protein trimer
and their rigid arrangement means that although they are able to
engage with repetitive sugar structures on surfaces of bacteria
and fungi, they probably cannot adapt well to the spacing of
glycans on the arrays (Figure 3D). Thus, the lack of binding
to the glycan array reﬂects an alternative structural mechanism
of optimizing interactions with sugars, in this case with min-
imal local selectivity so that spatial distribution becomes the
dominant factor in determining speciﬁcity.

Conclusions and perspective

The description of some of the factors that lead to speciﬁcity
and afﬁnity in glycan–receptor interactions presented in this
review illustrate how the power of both glycan arrays and struc-
tural analysis is enhanced by examining the results of the two
approaches in combination. The fact that the interpretations are
largely consistent with each other provides validation for the use
of the arrays to deﬁne binding speciﬁcity of receptors. The array
allows screening of far more ligands than could be undertaken
in a structural analysis. Viewing the limited set of structures of
receptor–ligand complexes in the light of information about the
relative binding signals obtained with additional ligands makes
it possible to suggest how the speciﬁcity is achieved. Combin-
ing such information may provide a realistic and reliable basis
for predicting which ligands will bind to particular receptors as
well as for modeling of how they bind. It may also provide a
foundation for prediction and modeling of glycan ligand bind-
ing to other receptors for which structural information is not
available.

Glycan arrays and structures of receptor-glycan complexes

Fig. 3. Mechanisms of mannose-binding protein interaction with ligands. (A) Screening of the glycan array with the trimeric terminal fragment of rat serum
mannose-binding protein at a 250 μg/mL concentration. The oligosaccharides giving the 10 highest signals are illustrated at the top. Scale of the y-axis is expanded
compared to other ﬁgures. (B) Structure of a Man6 ligand complexed with the CRD of mannose-binding protein. (C and D) Diagrams illustrating the potential
effect of glycan spacing on the avidity with which mannose-binding protein trimers bind to dense clusters of sugars on bacterial or fungal surfaces compared to
their interaction with glycans on the array. The ﬁgure is based on data from CFG primscreen_1618 and structure 1kx1 in the PDB.

Funding

The Wellcome Trust (075565) and the National Institute of Gen-
eral Medical Sciences (GM62116 to the Consortium for Func-
tional Glycomics).

Acknowledgements

We thank Eliot Ward and Adri´an Quintero-Martinez for provid-
ing the human macrophage galactose receptor for glycan array
screening and David Smith of the Consortium for Functional
Glycomics for the array screening experiments. Funding to pay
the Open Access publication charges for this article was pro-
vided by the Wellcome Trust.

Conﬂict of interest statement

None declared.

Abbreviations

CFG, Consortium for
carbohydrate-recognition domain; PDB, Protein Data Bank.

Functional Glycomics; CRD,

References
Blixt O, Head S, Mondala T, Scanlan C, Huﬂejt ME, Alvarez R, Bryan MC,
Fazio F, Calarese D, Stevens J, et al. 2004. Printed covalent glycan array
for ligand proﬁling of diverse glycan binding proteins. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA. 101:17033–17038.

Bochner BS, Alvarez RA, Mehta P, Bovin NV, Blixt O, White JR, Schnaar RL.
2005. Glycan array screening reveals a candidate ligand for siglec-8. J Biol
Chem. 280:4307–4312.

Coombs PJ, Graham SA, Drickamer K, Taylor ME. 2005. Selective binding
of the scavenger receptor C-type lectin to Lewisx trisaccharide and related
glycan ligands. J Biol Chem. 280:22993–22999.

Engering A, Geijtenbeek TBH, van Vliet SJ, Wijers M, van Liempt E, Demaurex
N, Lanzacecchia A, Fransen J, Figdor CG, Piguet, V, et al. 2002. The
dendritic cell-speciﬁc adhesion receptor DC-SIGN internalizes antigen for
presentation to T cells. J Immunol. 168:2118–2126.

Feinberg H, Castelli R, Drickamer K, Seeberger PH, Weis WI. 2007. Multi-
ple modes of binding enhance the afﬁnity of DC-SIGN for high-mannose
N-linked glycans found on viral glycoproteins. J Biol Chem. 282:4202–
4209.

Feinberg H, Mitchell DA, Drickamer K, Weis WI. 2001. Structural basis for
selective recognition of oligosaccharides by DC-SIGN and DC-SIGNR.
Science. 294:2163–2166.

Feinberg H, Taylor ME, Weis WI. 2007. Scavenger receptor C-type lectin binds
to the leukocyte cell surface glycan Lewis x by a novel mechanism. J Biol
Chem. 282:17250–17258.

Feizi T, Fazio F, Chai W, Wong CH. 2003. Carbohydrate microarrays—A new
set of technologies at the frontiers of glycomics. Curr Opin Struct Biol.
13:637–645.

1161

M E Taylor and K Drickamer

Fukui S, Feizi T, Galustian C, Lawson AM, Chai W. 2002. Oligosaccharide
microarrays for high-throughput detection and speciﬁcity assignments of
carbohydrate–protein interactions. Nat Biotechnol. 20:1011–1017.

Geijtenbeek TBH, Torensma R, van Vliet SJ, van Duijnhoven GCF, Adema GJ,
van Kooyk Y, Figdor CG. 2000. Identiﬁcation of DC-SIGN, a novel dendritic
cell-speciﬁc ICAM-3 receptor that supports primary immune responses.
Cell. 100:575–585.

Gregg KJ, Finn R, Abbott DW, Boraston AB. 2008. Divergent modes of glycan
recognition by a new family of carbohydrate-binding modules. J Biol Chem.
283:12604–12613.

Guo Y, Feinberg H, Conroy E, Mitchell DA, Alvarez R, Blixt O, Taylor ME,
Weis WI, Drickamer K. 2004. Structural basis for distinct ligand-binding
and targeting properties of the receptors DC-SIGN and DC-SIGNR. Nat
Struct Mol Biol. 11:591–598.

Iobst ST, Drickamer K. 1996. Selective sugar binding to the carbohydrate-
recognition domains of rat hepatic and macrophage asialoglycoprotein re-
ceptors. J Biol Chem. 271:6686–6693.

Karamanska R, Clarke J, Blixt O, MacRae JI, Zhang JQ, Crocker PR, Laurent
N, Wright A, Flitsch SL, Russell DA, et al. 2008. Surface plasmon reso-
nance imaging for real-time, label-free analysis of protein interactions with
carbohydrate microarrays. Glycoconjugate J. 25:69–74.

Kolatkar AR, Leung AK, Isecke R, Brossmer R, Drickamer K, Weis WI. 1998.
Mechanism of N-acetylgalactosamine binding to a C-type animal lectin
carbohydrate-recognition domain. J Biol Chem. 273:19502–19508.

Manimala JC, Roach TA, Li Z, Gildersleeve JC. 2006. High-throughput carbo-
hydrate microarray analysis of 24 lectins. Angew Chem Int Ed. 45:3607–
3610.

Miller KE, Mukhopadhyay C, Cagas P, Bush CA. 1992. Solution structure of the
Lewis x oligosaccharide determined by NMR spectroscopy and molecular
dynamics simulations. Biochemistry. 31:6703–6709.

Neu U, Woellner K, Gauglitz G, Stehle T. 2008. Structural basis of GM1 gan-
glioside recognition by simian virus 40. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 105:5219–
5224.

Ng KK-S, Kolatkar AP, Park-Snyder S, Feinberg H, Clark DA, Drickamer K,
Weis WI. 2002. Orientation of bound ligands in mannose-binding proteins:
Implications of multivalent ligand recognition. J Biol Chem. 277:16088–
16095.

Paulson JC, Blixt O, Collins BE. 2006. Sweet spots in functional glycomics.

Nat Chem Biol. 2:238–248.

Perez S, Mouhous-Riou N, Nifant’ev NE, Tsvetkov YE, Bachet B, Imberty
A. 1996. Crystal and molecular structure of a histo-blood group antigen
involved in cell adhesion: The Lewis x trisaccharide. Glycobiology. 6:537–
542.

Petrescu AJ, Petrescu SM, Dwek RA, Wormald MR. 1999. A statistical anal-
ysis of N- and O-glycan linkage conformations from crystallographic data.
Glycobiology. 9:343–352.

Powlesland AS, Fisch T, Taylor ME, Smith DF, Tissot B, Dell A, P¨ohlmann S,
Drickamer K. 2008. A novel mechanism for LSECtin binding to Ebola virus
surface glycoprotein through truncated glycans. J Biol Chem. 283:593–602.
Powlesland AS, Ward EM, Sadhu SK, Guo Y, Taylor ME, Drickamer K. 2006.
Novel mouse homologs of human DC-SIGN: Widely divergent biochemical
properties of the complete set of mouse DC-SIGN-related proteins. J Biol
Chem. 281:20440–20449.

Rosen SD. 2004. Ligands for L-selectin: Homing, inﬂammation, and beyond.

Annu Rev Immunol. 22:129–156.

Somers WS, Tang J, Shaw GD, Camphausent RT. 2000. Insights into the molec-
ular basis of leukocyte tethering and rolling revealed by structures of P- and
E-selectin bound to SleX and PSGL-1. Cell. 103:467–479.

Taylor ME, Drickamer K. 2006. Introduction to Glycobiology. 2nd ed. Oxford:

Oxford University Press.

van Die I, van Vliet SJ, Schiphorst WECM, Bank CMC, Appelmelk B, Nyame
AK, Cummings RD, Geijtenbeek TBH, van Kooyk Y. 2002. The dendritic
cell speciﬁc C-type lectin DC-SIGN recognizes Lewis x, a major glycan
epitope of Schistosoma mansoni egg antigen. Glycobiology. 12:641–642.

van Liempt E, Bank CMC, Mehta P, Garcia-Vallejo JJ, Kawar ZS, Geyere
R, Alvarez RA, Cummings RD, van Kooyk Y, van Die I. 2006. Speci-
ﬁcity of DC-SIGN for mannose- and fucose-containing glycans. FEBS Lett.
580:6123–6131.

van Vliet SJ, van Liempt E, Saeland E, Aarnoudse CA, Appelmelk B, Irimura
T, Geijtenbeek TB, Blixt O, Alvarez R, van Die I, et al. 2005. Carbohy-
drate proﬁling reveals a distinctive role for the C-type lectin MGL in the
recognition of helminth parasites and tumor antigens by dendritic cells. Int
Immunol. 17:661–669.

Varki A, Cummings RD, Esko JD, Freeze HH, Stanley P, Bertozzi CR, Hart
GW, Etzler ME. 2009. Essentials of Glycobiology. 2nd ed. Cold Spring
Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor, Laboratory Press. Chapters 26-33.

Vestweber D, Blanks JE. 1999. Mechanisms that regulate the function of se-

lectins and their ligands. Physiol Rev. 79:181–213.

Wang D, Liu S, Trummer BJ, Deng C, Wang A. 2002. Carbohydrate microarrays
for the recognition of cross-reactive molecular markers of microbes and host
cells. Nat Biotechnol. 20:275–281.

Weis WI, Drickamer K. 1994. Trimeric structure of a C-type mannose-binding

protein. Structure. 2:1227–1240.

Weis, WI, Drickamer, K, Hendrickson, WA. 1992. Structure of a C-type
mannose-binding protein complexed with an oligosaccharide. Nature.
360:127–134.

1162

