Glycobiology vol. 21 no. 4 pp. 410–425, 2011
doi:10.1093/glycob/cwq173
Advance Access publication on November 2, 2010

Biochemical characterization of the Mycobacterium
tuberculosis phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate synthetase

Luke J Alderwick 2, Georgina S Lloyd 2, Adrian J Lloyd 3,
Andrew L Lovering 2, Lothar Eggeling 4, and Gurdyal
S Besra 1,2
2School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston Park Road,
Birmingham B15 2TT, UK; 3Department of Biological Sciences, University
of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK; and 4Institute of Biotechnology 1,
Forschungszentrum Julich GmbH, D-52425 Julich, Germany

Received on August 31, 2010; revised on October 21, 2010; accepted on
October 22, 2010

Mycobacterium tuberculosis arabinogalactan (AG) is an
essential cell wall component. It provides a molecular fra-
mework serving to connect peptidoglycan to the outer
mycolic acid layer. The biosynthesis of
the arabinan
domains of AG and lipoarabinomannan (LAM) occurs via
a combination of membrane bound arabinofuranosyltrans-
ferases, all of which utilize decaprenol-1-monophosphora-
binose as a substrate. The source of arabinose ultimately
destined for deposition into cell wall AG or LAM orig-
inates exclusively from phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate
(pRpp), a central metabolite which is also required for
other essential metabolic processes, such as de novo purine
and pyrimidine biosyntheses. In M. tuberculosis, a single
pRpp synthetase enzyme (Mt-PrsA) is solely responsible
for the generation of pRpp, by catalyzing the transfer of
pyrophosphate from ATP to the C1 hydroxyl position of
ribose-5-phosphate. Here, we report a detailed biochemical
and biophysical study of Mt-PrsA, which exhibits the most
rapid enzyme kinetics reported for a pRpp synthetase.

Keywords: arabinan / cell wall / Mycobacteria /
phosphoribosylpyrophosphate / polysaccharides

Introduction

into the second decade of

the twenty-ﬁrst
As we enter
century, tuberculosis (TB) continues to cause more deaths and
human suffering than any other
infectious disease (Dye
2006). The number of new TB cases is increasing at an
alarming pace, as does the prevalence of drug-resistant stains
of the causative agent, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, in the
form of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) and extensively

1To whom correspondence should be addressed: Tel: +44-121-415-8125; Fax:
+44-121-414-5925; e-mail: g.besra@bham.ac.uk

drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB; Madariaga et al. 2008). The
need for new drugs and vaccines to combat this major burden
to human health is overwhelming.

these cell wall

labeled as “persisters”, exhibit

represent excellent physiological

The unique hydrophobic cell wall of M. tuberculosis forms
a primary defensive barrier to the onslaught of toxic insult
during the host immune response. The current chemothera-
peutic regime used to treat TB includes the administration of
isoniazid and ethambutol, both of which target crucial steps
in the biosynthesis and the assembly of the M. tuberculosis
cell wall
(Banerjee et al. 1994; Belanger et al. 1996).
However, whilst
inhibitors are excellent at
effectively killing actively dividing cells, certain subpopu-
lations of bacilli,
transient
resistance to many of the drugs used to treat TB (Wayne and
Sohaskey 2001). The precise molecular mechanism of this
latent infection caused by persistent bacilli is poorly under-
stood. However, in the pursuit of identifying suitable cellular
targets and the development of new anti-TB chemotherapeutic
agents, we must address the phenomenon of persistence to
truly eradicate the disease. Recently, it has been shown that
certain processes of metabolic pathways involved in mycobac-
terial cellular energy metabolism, such as respiratory ATP
biosynthesis,
targets for
the effective killing of
latent populations of TB bacilli
(Koul et al. 2007, 2008; Rao et al. 2008; Bald and Koul
2010). Phospho-α-D-ribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (pRpp)
is a
central metabolite that links the pentose phosphate pathway to
the de novo and the salvage biosynthetic pathways of purine
and pyrimidine production, NAD and NADP cofactor biosyn-
thesis, as well as histidine and tryptophan biosynthesis
(Hove-Jensen 1988). It is therefore considered that pRpp is
required at all times during the life cycle of both prokaryotic
and eukaryotic cells (Hove-Jensen 1989; Tozzi et al. 2006).
In addition to these central metabolic processes, members
belonging to the Corynebacteriacae, such as mycobacteria,
have evolved an almost unique biochemical pathway, utilizing
pRpp as a high-energy biosynthetic precursor for cell wall
arabinan biosynthesis (Wojtkiewicz et al. 1988; Scherman
et al. 1995, 1996; Figure 1). The gene product of Rv3806c
encodes
pRpp:decaprenol-1-
monophosphate 5-phosphoribosyltransferase (DPPR synthase)
which catalyzes the formation of DPPR and pyrophosphate
from pRpp and decaprenol-1-monophosphate (DP; Huang
et al. 2005). DPPR then undergoes C5-dephosphorylation to
decaprenol-1-monophosphoribose (DPR) and epimerization
about the C2–OH position of the ribosyl moiety catalyzed by

a membrane

bound

for

 The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.5/), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

410

Mycobacterium tuberculosis pRpp synthetase

Fig. 1. Proposed metabolic pathway depicting the importance of Mt-PrsA for the generation of pRpp in M. tuberculosis. R5P is generated via the catabolism of
glucose through the pentose phosphate pathway, a process ubiquitous throughout nature. Like all pRpp synthetase enzymes, Mt-PrsA catalyses the transfer of
pyrophosphate from ATP to the C1–OH group of R5P forming pRpp and AMP. In a process unique to members belonging to the Corynebacteriaceae, such
as M. tuberculosis, pRpp is utilized as the sole metabolic intermediate in the formation of DPA, which is a crucial substrate required for mycobacterial
cell wall assembly. DP, decaprenol-1-monophosphate; DPA, decaprenol-1-monophosphoarabinose; DPR, decaprenol-1-monophosphoribose; DPPR,
decaprenol-1-monophosphoribose-5-phosphate; DPX, decaprenol-1-monophosphoryl-2-keto-β-erythro-pentofuranose; pRpp, phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate;
R5P, ribose -5-phosphate.

(DprE1)

In M.
FAD-containing

tuberculosis, Rv3790 encodes
oxidoreductase

a two-step heteromeric oxidation/reduction process (Mikusova
for
et al. 2005).
an
which
the ribosyl C2–OH group to the keto sugar
oxidizes
decaprenol-1-monophosphoryl-2-keto-β-erythro-pentofuranose
(DPX) which is subsequently reduced by DprE2 (encoded by
Rv3791) forming decaprenol-1-monophosphoarabinose (DPA;
Mikusova et al. 2005), which is the sole high-energy
lipid-linked substrate for the GT-C family arabinofuranosyl-
transferases (AraTs) which are involved in cell wall arabinan
polymerization (Alderwick et al. 2007).

Mycobacterial arabinan is a highly branched polysaccharide
consisting of arabinose units arranged into speciﬁc repeating
motifs, and it predominantly features in the heteropolysacchar-
ide arabinogalactan (AG), which is a crucial component of
the mycobacterial cell wall (Daffé et al. 1990; Besra et al.
1995). Three arabinan domains are covalently linked via an
Araf-α(1 → 5)-Galf glycosidic bond to the 8th, 10th and 12th

positions of a single linear polysaccharide composed of (cid:1)30
alternating β(1 → 5) and β(1 → 6) Galf residues forming the
galactan domain of AG (Alderwick et al. 2005). AG is a
structural macromolecule and serves to function as a molecu-
lar scaffold linking peptidoglycan to the mycolic acids,
forming a highly impermeable and hydrophobic layer sur-
rounding the mycobacterial cell
(McNeil et al. 1991).
Arabinan is also present in the form of lipoarabinomannan
(LAM), a highly immunogenic lipoglycan, which is involved
in modulating the host immune response (Briken et al. 2004).
In terms of chemical composition, arabinan represents (cid:1)18%
of mycobacterial cell wall biomass (Ortalo-Magne et al.
1995). Therefore, during cell elongation and division of the
mycobacterial bacilli, it is necessary for there to be a readily
available supply of pRpp for the efﬁcient incorporation of ara-
binose into newly synthesized cell wall material. During this
process, the metabolic demand for pRpp is likely to increase
dramatically and the elevated levels required for effective

411

LJ Alderwick et al.

arabinan biosynthesis must be maintained. The enzyme pRpp
synthetase (ATP:α-D-ribose-5-phosphate (R5P) pyrophospho-
transferase; EC2.7.6.1) belongs to a family of enzymes that
catalyze the transfer of the β,γ-diphosphate moiety from ATP
to the C1–OH group of α-D-R5P and the gene(s) encoding for
this enzyme(s) is present in all living organisms (Hove-Jensen
1985; Carter et al. 1997; Krath and Hove-Jensen 1999). It is
predicted that the M. tuberculosis H37Rv genome codes for
only one pRpp synthetase (Rv1017c), which is annotated as
Mt-PrsA (Cole and Barrell 1998).

In this study, we report a detailed biochemical characteriz-
ation of recombinant Mt-PrsA and provide evidence which
conﬁrms the essentiality of this gene for the maintenance of
cell growth, division and integrity. Mt-PrsA displays an absol-
ute requirement for inorganic phosphate for enzyme activation
and will accept either Mg2+ or Mn2+ as divalent cations,
which serve to coordinate the phosphate moieties of ATP
during enzyme catalysis. Using a continuous enzyme coupled
spectrophotometric assay, we report a detailed kinetic charac-
terization of Mt-PrsA, which displays the highest speciﬁc
activity measured for any pRpp synthetase studied to date. By
investigating the oligomeric state of Mt-PrsA in solution and
measuring the ligand-binding properties of its substrates, we
provide evidence suggesting that the mechanism by which
ADP inhibits Mt-PrsA activity, results from the binding of
ADP to an allosteric site, and as a consequence, induces the
stabilization of an inactive, hexameric oligomeric species.

Results
Evidence suggesting that Mt-prsA is an essential gene
for the maintenance of cellular integrity
Mt-prsA is predicted to be an essential gene as determined by
high-density transposon mutagenesis (Sassetti et al. 2003).
This is not unsurprising, considering the apparent physiologi-
cal
importance of Mt-PrsA in the provision of pRpp for
central metabolic pathways and the formation of the cell wall
biosynthetic precursor DPA (Wolucka et al. 1994; Scherman
et al. 1995). We have previously used Corynebacterium gluta-
micum as an excellent model system for the study of complex
cell wall biosynthetic processes, and we have reported the
phenotypic characterization of several cell wall mutants,
which would otherwise be essential in mycobacterial systems
(Gande et al. 2004; Alderwick et al. 2005; Alderwick, Dover,
et al. 2006; Alderwick, Seidel, et al. 2006; Seidel et al. 2007;
Birch
of
several Corynebacteriaceae genomes revealed that NCgl0945
(Cg-prsA) was the likely C. glutamicum ortholog of Mt-prsA
(Rv1017c). These corresponding gene products share 71%
identity (83% similarity), and the gene locus is conserved
within the Corynebacteriaceae indicating that this region is
syntenic. We attempted to inactivate Cg-prsA in C. glutami-
cum, by using the disruption vector pK18mob-Cg-prsA-int,
carrying 304 bp of Cg-prsA. In a control experiment, we used
the previously reported pK18mob-Cg-ppm1-int construct,
which affords the successful inactivation of the gene encoding
for the polyprenyl monophosphomannose synthase (ppm1) of
C. glutamicum, which is a gene of similar size to that of
Cg-prsA (Gibson et al. 2003). Both inactivation vectors were

2008). A bioinformatics

analysis

al.

et

412

used in parallel experiments for the transformation of wild-
type (WT) C. glutamicum to kanamycin resistance (KanR).
Whilst we were able to easily generate C. glutamicum KanR
colonies from the pK18mob-Cg-ppm1-int construct, we were
required to conduct several rounds of electroporation using
pK18mob-Cg-prsA-int before obtaining three separate C. glu-
tamicum KanR clones. This indicates that the recombination
events appeared to have taken place at unexpected and, as yet,
undeﬁned loci. From this analysis, we concluded that
Cg-prsA is an essential gene and its function is necessary for
the growth and integrity of C. glutamicum, even when grown
on rich Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) medium.

transfer

Overexpression, puriﬁcation and pRpp synthetase activity
of recombinant Mt-PrsA
Overexpression of Mt-PrsA in Escherichia coli C41 cells and
the subsequent puriﬁcation by IMAC resulted in a preparation
of Mt-PrsA that was stable in solution at a concentration of 2
mg/mL. A coomassie-stained 12% SDS–PAGE analysis of
Mt-PrsA revealed a band that migrated to a position of 35
kDa, which is in accordance with the expected molecular
weight of Mt-PrsA, and was estimated to be at least 98%
pure. To determine if recombinant Mt-PrsA was active, we
performed a radiochemical assay to measure the pyropho-
from ATP to the C1–OH group of
sphate
[14C]-uniformly labeled R5P (Boss et al. 1984). Starting with
[14C]-U-D-glucose and replicating the ﬁrst three enzymic reac-
tions of the pentose phosphate pathway in vitro using com-
mercially available enzymes (Roche and Sigma), we prepared
a source of puriﬁed [14C]-U-α-D-R5P as a substrate for sub-
sequent enzyme assays. In a time course assay, recombinant
Mt-PrsA exhibited rapid pRpp synthetase activity which was
dependent upon the presence of either of the divalent cations
Mg2+ and Mn2+, with slight preference for
the latter
(Figure 2A). During the assay, p[14C]Rpp is susceptible to
product degradation due to hydrolysis of the labile C1–OH
pyrophosphate bond, which accounts for the relatively small
increase in band density (relating to p[14C]Rpp) over the
course of the assay. Addition of EDTA to the reaction mix
inhibited the formation of p[14C]Rpp (data not shown) and
the inclusion of CaCl2, in replacement of MgCl2 or MnCl2,
also resulted in the loss of Mt-PrsA activity (Figure 2A).
Mt-PrsA was found to be most active at a pH of 6.5, but also
showed activity across a broad range of pH levels (4.5–9.5)
and was only found to be inactive at high pH (10.5; data not
shown). In accordance with previous studies of pRpp synthe-
tases (Prs) from other organisms, Mt-PrsA was strongly inhib-
ited by the presence of ADP, which has been shown to be an
allosteric modulator of this class of enzymes (Figure 2B)
(Switzer and Sogin 1973; Gibson et al. 1982; Arnvig et al.
1990; Eriksen et al. 2000; Willemoes et al. 2000).

Mt-PrsA-dependent metabolic channeling of R5P into
mycobacterial cell wall biosynthetic precursors
Apart from being a key metabolite in the de novo and salvage
pathways of purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis, as well as
histidine,
tryptophan, NAD and NADP metabolism, pRpp
serves as a high-energy intermediate in the formation of the
mycobacterial cell wall precursor DPR (Figure 1; Scherman

Mycobacterium tuberculosis pRpp synthetase

Fig. 2. Time course assay showing the Mt-PrsA catalyzed formation of p[14C]Rpp from [14C]R5P and ATP. Assays contained Mt-PrsA, 50 mM Pi, 2 mM ATP
supplemented with either 2 mM Mg2+, Mn2+ or Ca2+ as illustrated in (A), and in the presence of ADP at a ﬁnal concentration of 2 mM in (B). Assays were
incubated at 37°C, and aliquots were removed from the assay mix at 0, 10, 30 and 60 s and the reactions halted by quenching with the addition of formic acid.
Samples were applied to a glass-backed PEI-cellulose TLC plate and developed in 0.85 M KH2PO4 ( pH 3.4). The plate was inspected for radioactive spots
relating to p[14C]Rpp and [14C]R5P by autoradiography through the exposure of TLCs to X-ray ﬁlm (Kodak X-Omat).

Fig. 3. Analysis of Mt-PrsA-dependent [14C]-R5P incorporation into the M. smegmatis AraT substrate DPA via p[14C]Rpp. The basic assays mixture contained
(amongst other components described in the Materials and methods section) membranes prepared from M. smegmatis, 100,000 cpm [14C]-R5P, 50 µg of DP and
2 mM ATP. Individual assays were carried out at 37°C and included the addition of no further additive; lane 1, M. smegmatis P60; lane 2, Mt-PrsA; lane 3,
Mt-PrsA and NaWO4 and NaF both at a ﬁnal concentration of 2 mM; lane 4, Mt-PrsA and M. smegmatis P60; lane 5, Mt-PrsA, M. smegmatis P60 and 2 mM of
both NaWO4 and NaF; lane 6 and ﬁnally Mt-PrsA, M. smegmatis P60 and 2 mM ADP in lane 7. After an incubation at 37°C for 30 min, assays were quenched
and products extracted from the assay mix by organic solvent extraction as described in the Materials and methods section. Samples relating to each assay were
loaded onto a silica gel TLC plates, developed in CHCl3/CH3OH/CH3COONH4/NH4OH/H2O (180:140:9:9:23 v/v/v/v/v) and bands migrating to the position of
DPA, DPR, DPX and DPPR were visualized by autoradiography, exposure of TLCs to X-ray ﬁlm (Kodak X-Omat) and compared to previously isolated known
standards (Mikusova et al. 2005; Alderwick et al. 2006a).

et al. 1995). We investigated the conversion of [14C]-U-D-R5P
([14C]-R5P) into the cell wall AraT substrate DPA and its pre-
cursor, DPR. Assays were conducted using membranes pre-
pared from M. smegmatis which provided a source of DPPR
synthase (Huang et al. 2005), which was necessary to investi-
gate incorporation of [14C]-R5P into the lipid-linked organic
extractable material. When assays were performed with just
[14C]-R5P and membranes, no radioactive product was detect-
able in the organic phase, as depicted in Figure 3 (lane 1).

In this instance, all radioactivities remained in the aqueous
phase of the assay work-up (data not shown). In addition,
M. smegmatis P60 (a preparation of cell wall material rich in
proteins associated with cell wall processes) exhibited no
pRpp synthetase activity (Figure 3, lane 2). When recombi-
nant Mt-PrsA is included in the assay,
the formation of
DPPR and DPR can be clearly observed (Figure 3, lane 3). It
is
catalyzed
5’-dephosphorylation, resulting in the formation of DPR. In

that DPPR undergoes

enzyme

likely

413

LJ Alderwick et al.

to

directly

adjacent

M. tuberculosis, Rv3807c is an excellent candidate for this
enzyme since it codes for a putative membrane bound PAP2
phosphatase
the DPPR synthase
(Rv3806c; Figure 1; Cole and Barrell 1998). Mycobacterium
smegmatis has a direct ortholog of this phosphatase encoded
by MSMEG6402, which explains the apparent conversion of
DPPR to DPR observed in this assay. The combined addition
of sodium ﬂuoride and sodium tungstate (known phosphatase
inhibitors; Stankiewicz and Gresser 1988) to the assay mix,
results in a diminished level of DPR formation and a corre-
sponding increase in a band migrating to a lower position on
the TLC identiﬁed as being DPPR (Figure 3, lane 4). When
Mt-PrsA is used in combination with M. smegmatis P60, two
additional bands can be observed migrating in close proximity
to DPR, which correspond to the subsequent conversion of
DPR to DPX and DPA, by the endogenous P60 activity of
DprE1 and DrpE2, respectively (Figure 3, lane 5; Mikusova
et al. 2005). The inclusion of sodium ﬂuoride and sodium
tungstate dramatically reduced the conversion of DPPR to
DPA, suggesting that the two-step epimerization of the C2–
OH group of ribose by DprE1 and DprE2 occurs after 5’
dephosphorylation (Figure 3, lane 6). The inclusion of ADP
to the reaction mix completely ablated the formation of any
organic extractable material, clearly indicating that the ADP

inhibition of Mt-PrsA results in the total loss of DPPR for-
mation (Figure 3, lane 7).

In a separate experiment, assays were carried out

in
[Araf-α(1 →
the presence of a neoglycolipid acceptor
5)-Araf-O-(CH2)CH3], which is speciﬁc for measuring the
activity of the cell wall biosynthetic arabinofuranosyltrans-
ferases EmbA, EmbB, EmbC and AftB (Lee et al. 1997;
Seidel et al. 2007), all of which reside in the membrane due
to the polytopic nature of these GT-C family glycosyltrans-
ferases. AraT activity was measured after product isolation by
organic extraction and analysis by TLC and autoradiography.
AraT assays carried out in the absence of Mt-PrsA afforded
no AraT-dependent product formation (Figure 4,
lane 1).
Upon addition of Mt-PrsA, two closely migrating bands could
be observed with the top bad attributed to α(1 → 5)-Araf
transfer to the acceptor by either EmbA, EmbB, EmbC or a
combination and the lower band attributed to β(1 → 2)-Araf
transfer resulting from AftB activity (Figure 4, lane 2), as
described previously (Lee et al. 1997). Addition of
the
EmbA, EmbB and EmbC inhibitor ethambutol
(EMB),
resulted in the loss of the upper band with only the lower
band remaining, this being due to the noninhibitory effect of
EMB on the terminal β(1 → 2) capping enzyme, AftB (Seidel
et al. 2007; Figure 4, lane 3). As a consequence of allosteric
inhibition of Mt-PrsA and the resultant
in vitro
Mt-PrsA-dependent pRpp formation, the inclusion of ADP in
the assay mixture led to the inhibition of any AraT-dependent
product formation (Figure 4, lane 4).

loss of

to

release

Kinetic characterization of Mt-PrsA substrates and
inhibitors using a continuous spectrophotometric assay
Due to the rapid enzymic activity of recombinant Mt-PrsA
using the radioactive assay described previously, we sought to
link Mt-PrsA catalyzed AMP product
a
three-enzyme coupled assay system,
thus enabling us to
measure NADH oxidation at 340 nm in a continuous spectro-
photometric assay, which has been described similarly else-
where (Braven et al. 1984). This system (described in the
Materials and methods section) enabled us to record detailed
measurements of the steady-state enzyme kinetics of Mt-PrsA.
Plotting the steady-state reaction velocity (ν) calculated from
Eq. (1), as a function of increasing concentrations of R5P at
the saturating levels of ATP, results in a hyperbolic curve dis-
playing the Michelis–Menton kinetics (Figure 5A). Nonlinear
regression analysis using Eq. (2) derived a Km of 8.2 µM
(±2.72 SE) for R5P and a Vmax of 530 µmol−1 min−1 mg−1
and a speciﬁcity constant (Kcat/Km) of 7.43 × 106 M−1 s−1. As
previously described using the radiochemical assay, Mt-PrsA
requires the presence of Pi at a concentration of 50 mM for
full enzyme activation, which is illustrated in Figure 5A.
However, at reduced levels of Pi (5 mM),
the subsequent
addition of R5P results in partial substrate inhibition, an effect
that has been observed elsewhere [Willemoes et al. 2000; data
ﬁtted to Eq. (3)], with little or no activity recorded in the
absence of Pi (Figure 5A). This is likely due to Mt-PrsA
being incompletely activated by Pi at low [Pi], meaning that
at low R5P concentrations, the relatively high-afﬁnity catalytic
site for R5P is occupied and the normal Micheli–Menton kin-
etics occur until R5P reaches a concentration that results in

Fig. 4. AraT assays carried out via the Mt-PrsA-dependent conversion of
[14C]-R5P to p[14C]Rpp and subsequent chase into a neoglycolipid acceptor.
The absolute dependence of the cell wall AraT enzymes on the availability
of pRpp was investigated using the neoglycolipid acceptor Ara2. The basic
assay contained (amongst other components described in the Materials and
methods section) 0.5 mg of membranes and P60 from M. smegmatis, 2 mM
α-D-Araf-(1 → 5)-α-D-Araf-O-(CH2)7CH3, 100,000 cpm [14C]-R5P, 50 µg of
DP and 2 mM ATP. Assays were initiated by the addition of [14C]-R5P and
incubated for 1 h at 37°C. Individual assays carried out contained the addition
of no Mt-PrsA, lane 1; 30 µg of Mt-PrsA, lane 2; 30 µg of Mt-PrsA and 100
µg/mL of EMB, lane 3 and 30 µg of Mt-PrsA and 2 mM ADP, lane
4. [14C]-Araf-linked products were extracted from the assay mix as described
in the Materials and methods section and subsequently applied to a silica gel
TLC plates, developed in CHCl3:CH2OH:H2O:NH4OH (65:25:3.6:0.5, v/v/v/
v) and visualized by autoradiography from exposure of TLCs to X-ray ﬁlm
(Kodak X-Omat; Lee et al. 1997; Seidel et al. 2007).

414

Mycobacterium tuberculosis pRpp synthetase

Fig. 5. Enzyme activity of Mt-PrsA and kinetic characterization of R5P (A)
and ATP (B) using a continuous enzyme-coupled spectrophotometric assay.
(A) A plot of velocity (ν) of Mt-PrsA to increasing [R5P] in the presence of
50 mM Pi (ﬁlled circles), 5 mM Pi (ﬁlled squares) and no Pi (ﬁlled triangle).
Data for 50 mM Pi ﬁtted to Eq. (2), and data obtained for 5 mM Pi and no
Pi were ﬁtted to Eq. (3). (B) A plot of velocity (ν) of Mt-PrsA to increasing
[ATP] in the presence of 50 mM Pi (ﬁlled circles), 5 mM Pi (ﬁlled squares)
and no Pi (ﬁlled triangle), all of which were ﬁtted to Eq. (4) using nonlinear
regression analysis. All data points plotted (calculated mean) represent
experiments performed in triplicate using three independent preparations of
recombinant Mt-PrsA. Calculated standard errors (±SE) for kinetic constants
are reported in the manuscript where appropriate.

the occupancy of a second low-afﬁnity inhibitory site which
would otherwise be occupied by Pi at higher [Pi]. Kinetic
analysis of Mt-PrsA with increasing ATP concentrations at
saturating levels of R5P results in a sigmoidal
response
showing positive cooperativity (Figure 5B). Data obtained
from measuring ν against increasing concentrations of ATP at
various Pi concentrations was ﬁtted to Eq. (4). At activating
levels of [Pi] (50 mM), the S0.5 and the Vmax for ATP were
calculated as being 62.65 µM (±12.04 SE) and 601 µmol−1
min−1 mg−1 (±66.39 SE), respectively. An apparent Hill coef-
ﬁcient (n) of 1.68 indicates a strong positive cooperativity
during increasing [ATP]. However, when ﬁtted to Eq. (4)
using nonlinear regression analysis, this effect diminishes at
low [Pi] resulting in a ν vs. [ATP] response with altered
kinetic constants (Figure 5B). It has been reported elsewhere
that Prs enzymes from other organisms are allosterically
inhibited by the presence of ADP (Switzer and Sogin 1973;
Gibson et al. 1982; Arnvig et al. 1990; Eriksen et al. 2000;
Willemoes et al. 2000). We measured the effect of ADP on ν
as a function of increasing [R5P] and [ATP]. At saturating

Fig. 6. Inhibition of Mt-PrsA activity by the addition of ADP when titrated
with R5P (A) and ATP (B) using a continuous enzyme-coupled
spectrophotometric assay. (A) A plot of velocity (ν) of Mt-PrsA response to
increasing [R5P] in the presence of no ADP (ﬁlled circles), 0.1 mM ADP
(ﬁlled squares) and 2 mM ADP (ﬁlled triangle). Data were ﬁtted to Eq. (5)
using nonlinear regression analysis. (B) A plot of velocity (ν) of Mt-PrsA
response to increasing [ATP] in the presence of no ADP (ﬁlled circles), 0.1
mM ADP (ﬁlled squares) and 2 mM ADP (ﬁlled triangles). Data were ﬁtted
to Eq. (6) using nonlinear regression analysis. All data points plotted
(calculated mean) represent experiments performed in triplicate using three
independent preparations of recombinant Mt-PrsA. Calculated standard errors
(±SE) for kinetic constants are reported in the manuscript where appropriate.

concentrations of ATP, the addition of ADP resulted in non-
competitive inhibition of Mt-PrsA with a calculated Ki of 320
µM (±53.51 SE) against increasing [R5P] [data ﬁtted to Eq.
(5); Figure 6A]. When we measured the effect of ADP on the
kinetic response of Mt-PrsA to increasing [ATP] and sub-
sequent ﬁtting of the data to Eq. (6) (Figure 6B), we calcu-
lated a Ki of 522 µM (±45.78 SE).

Biophysical characterization of Mt-PrsA: oligomeric state
and ligand-binding studies
Mt-PrsA homologs from other organisms have been reported
to aggregate in solution in various homo-oligomeric states,
ranging from dimer to octamer (Schubert et al. 1975; Arnvig
et al. 1990; Li et al. 2007). Using analytical ultracentrifuga-
tion, we performed a set of sedimentation velocity exper-
iments on Mt-PrsA in the absence or the presence of R5P,
ATP and ADP at
(Figure 7).
Analysis of each experiment by interpretation of the molar
mass distribution c(M) indicates that Mt-PrsA in solution
alone reaches a dynamic equilibrium between two molecular
species with peaks centered over (cid:1)100,000 and (cid:1)205,000
415

saturating concentrations

LJ Alderwick et al.

Fig. 7. Mt-PrsA self-assembly analysis using analytical ultracentrifugation.
Sedimentation velocity experiments were conducted to investigate the
oligomeric state of Mt-PrsA in solution in the presence of no additional
ligands (black line), 5 mM R5P (red line), 5 mM ATP (blue line) and 5 mM
ADP (green line). Individual plots represent the molar mass distribution c(M)
vs. the apparent molecular weight (Da). Arrows indicate the calculated
oligomeric state of Mt-PrsA in each sedimentation velocity experiment.

Da, which relate to Mt-PrsA in a trimeric and hexameric
aggregation state, respectively (Figure 7, black line). The
inclusion of 5 mM R5P showed no apparent change in the
equilibrium or oligomeric state of Mt-PrsA in solution, and
the c(M) vs. Mw distribution aligned well with that of
Mt-PrsA in the absence of ligand (Figure 7, red line). The
addition of 5 mM ATP to Mt-PrsA resulted in an altered c(M)
distribution with a peak centered over (cid:1)70,000 Da, equating
to a Mt-PrsA homodimer, and concomitant reduction in the
intensity of
the hexameric species, when compared with
Mt-PrsA alone (Figure 7, blue line). Interestingly, when we
performed a similar experiment in combination with 5 mM
ADP, the ratio of c(M) distribution shifted toward an increase
in the hexameric state with a corresponding reduction in tri-
meric species (Figure 7, green line). Mt-PrsA contains within
its primary amino acid sequence,
three naturally occurring
tryptophan residues at position Trp 5, Trp 74 and Trp 188. We
used intrinsic tryptophan ﬂuorescence (ITF) spectroscopy to
probe the binding properties of R5P, ATP and ADP for
Mt-PrsA. We performed a ﬂuorescence emission (Femission)
scan of Mt-PrsA in solution by recording (Femission) output
between 300 and 400 nm, upon excitation at λ292nm. Mt-PrsA
gave a maximum ﬂuorescence emission ðFmax
Þ at a wave-
length of 335 nm, thus providing a basal Femission coordinate
for the collection of subsequent ITF data. The change in ﬂuor-
escence emission (ΔFemission) was calculated by subtracting
the Femission (recorded 5 min after each ligand titration) away
from ðF max
Þ, and the data were then plotted against [L].
Nonlinear regression analysis of ΔFemission vs. [R5P] using
Eq. (7) shows a hyperbolic isothermal ligand-binding curve
for R5P, with a calculated Kd of 24.8 µM (±6.77 SE;
Figure 8A). We sought to investigate what effect ATP might
have on the Kd for R5P; however, the inclusion of both ATP
and R5P would obviously result in enzyme catalysis and the
formation of pRpp and AMP. Due to the relatively high
speciﬁc activity of Mt-PrsA, the addition of R5P and ATP at
concentrations required for
the effective measurement of

emission

emission

416

Fig. 8. Binding kinetics of R5P (A) and the ATP analog (AMPPNP) (B) to
Mt-PrsA using ITF spectroscopy. ITF spectroscopy was used to determine the
binding properties of Mt-PrsA for its substrates R5P and ATP. Ligand-binding
assays were carried out as described in the Materials and methods section.
(A) A plot of ΔFemission vs. [R5P] in the presence of no AMPPNP (ﬁlled
squares) and 5 mM AMPPNP (ﬁlled circles) which was ﬁtted to Eq. (7). (B)
A plot of ΔFemission vs. [AMPPNP] in the presence of no R5P (ﬁlled squares)
and 5 mM R5P (ﬁlled circles) which was ﬁtted to Eq. (9).

ligand-binding constants by ITF would result in a reaction
that would go to completion within the 5 min time-frame
required to establish binding equilibrium. Therefore, due to
the stability of
the imidodiphophate moity and lack of
enzyme-catalyzed phosphate transfer, we used the ATP analog
5’-adenylyl-β,γ-imidodiphosphate (AMPPNP) as an ATP
ligand substitute for binding assays, when carried out in con-
junction with R5P. Mt-PrsA was titrated with increasing
[AMPPNP] using identical increments carried out during ATP
ligand-binding experiments. Subsequent nonlinear regression
analysis and comparison of the ΔFemission vs. [AMPPNP] and
ΔFemission vs. [ATP] plots (data not shown) resulted in a
strong correlation (R2 = 0.986) as well as extremely similar
dissociation constants of 28.29 µM (±0.54 SE) and 31.02 µM
(±0.62 SE) for ATP and AMPPNP, respectively. With the
similarly calculated Hill coefﬁcients (n) of (cid:1)4, the almost
identical binding properties of ATP and AMPPNP for
Mt-PrsA allowed us to conﬁdently substitute AMPPNP for
ATP during binding assays carried out in combination with
R5P. In this regard, when R5P was titrated against Mt-PrsA in
the presence of 5 mM AMPPNP, the apparent Kd for R5P
decreased to 21.36 µM (±4.84 SE). This data indicates that
the Mt-PrsA–AMPPNP complex exhibits a slightly higher
afﬁnity for R5P when compared with Apo–Mt-PrsA

(Figure 8A). In the reverse experiment where ΔFemission vs.
[AMPPNP] was measured in the presence or the absence of
the afﬁnity of Mt-PrsA–R5P for
5 mM R5P (Figure 8B),
AMPPNP increased slightly, as is evident from the reduction
in Kd to 28.22 µM (±0.54 SE) and an increase in the Hill
coefﬁcient (n) to 5 by a value of 1. In light of the previous
AUC experiment, which suggests that the addition of ADP
induces a shift toward Mt-PrsA hexamerization, we performed
an ITF experiment by titrating Mt-PrsA with increasing [ADP]
(Figure 9A). Unsurprisingly, the ΔFemission vs. [ADP] plot dis-
plays a sigmoidal cooperative-binding response with an appar-
ent Kd of 512.6 µM (±39.57 SE) and a Hill coefﬁcient of
2. Since ATP and ADP bind to Mt-PrsA at separate sites and
induce very different aggregation states, the apparent (cid:1)2-fold
difference in the Fmax recorded for ATP and ADP is most
likely due to the differing effects each of these ligands have
on the chemical environments surrounding the tryptophan
residues providing the source of Femission in Mt-PrsA (Eriksen
et al. 2000). The inclusion of ADP at
two different
in separate ITF [ATP]
concentrations (0.1 and 2.0 mM)
ligand-binding assays causes a signiﬁcant
increase in the
apparent Kd
site
¼ 31:22and90:1 mM at a concentration of 0.1 and 2.0
(KATP
allosteric
mM ADP,

its Mt-PrsA-binding

respectively),

illustrating

of ATP

clearly

for

d

Fig. 9. Binding kinetics of ADP and ATP to Mt-PrsA using ITF spectroscopy.
ITF spectroscopy was used to determine the binding properties of Mt-PrsA
for it’s allosteric inhibitor ADP in competition with ATP. Ligand-binding
assays were carried out as described in the Materials and methods section.
(A) A plot of ΔFemission vs. [ADP] (ﬁlled circles) which was ﬁtted to Eq. (8).
(B) A plot of ΔFemission vs. [ATP] in the presence of no ADP (ﬁlled squares),
0.1 mM ADP (ﬁlled triangles) and 2.0 mM ADP (ﬁlled inverted triangles)
which was ﬁtted to Eq. (10).

Mycobacterium tuberculosis pRpp synthetase

inhibition of Mt-PrsA–ATP complex formation (Figure 9B).
The change in the slope of the curve as a function of [ATP] in
separate ITF experiments carried out at increasing ADP con-
centrations, clearly illustrates a reduction in the homotropic
cooperative binding of ATP for Mt-PrsA, which was con-
ﬁrmed
coefﬁcients
(Figure 9B). The ligand-binding properties of ADP for
Mt-PrsA, in the presence of ATP, compare well with the inhi-
bition constant calculated for ADP [Ki = 522 µM (±45.78 SE)]
obtained from the kinetic analysis of ν vs. [ATP] at saturating
[R5P] (Figure 6B).

resultant Hill

calculating

the

by

all

coli

subtilis

between

sequence

(Ec_PrsA)

counterparts

conservation

(Bs_PrsA), E.

Structural model of Mt-PrsA
An alignment of Mt-PrsA with its related Corynebacterineae
PrsA orthologs as well as other bacterial Prs homologs from
Bacillus
and
Streptomyces coelicolor (Sc_PrsA), and the three human Prs
isoforms (Human_PrsA1–3) clearly illustrate the high level of
primary
variants
(Figure 10). Mt-PrsA shares very high sequence identity with
its Corynebacterineae
(92% Mycobacterium
leprae, 87% M. smegmatis and 71% C. glutamicum) and a
moderate level of sequence identity with Mt-PrsA homologs
in S. coleicolor (61%), E. coli (43%) and B. subtilis (43%).
Interestingly, the three human Prs isoforms also share 40%
sequence identity with Mt-PrsA. Both of the human type 1
and B. subtilis pRpp synthetase X-ray crystal structures have
been solved (Eriksen et al. 2000; Li et al. 2007). Each of
these structures was solved in the Apo form and in complex
with AMP, which is located in the ATP-binding pocket of the
active site. Interestingly, the Bs-PrsA structure was solved in
complex with an additional molecule of ADP, thus revealing
its position and mode of action in the allosteric regulatory site
of the enzyme (Eriksen et al. 2000). Since Mt-PrsA shares
highest sequence homology with Bs-PrsA, we constructed a
homology model of Mt-PrsA using the structure of Bs-Prs in
complex with AMP and ADP as a template (Eriksen et al.
2000; Figure 11). Using crystallographic symmetry data from
the Bs-Prs structure, we arranged the Mt-PrsA homology
model into its hexameric form (Figure 11A). Each monomer
is composed of two subunits, which is related by a 3-fold axis
perpendicular to an additional 2-fold planar rotational sym-
metry. Many of the residues involved in binding at the inter-
face between monomers are well conserved, with notable
differences highlighted by the position of red spheres in
Figure 11A. With only a few exceptions, the sequence align-
ment of Mt-PrsA and Bs-Prs indicates that most of the resi-
dues involved in enzyme catalysis and allosteric regulation are
conserved which,
in turn, are suitably positioned in the
Mt-PrsA homology model compared with Bs-Prs. A note-
worthy difference in the Mt-PrsA catalytic site is the presence
of Asn45, which is arranged to form contacts with the ADP
ligand (Figure 11B). In the Bs-Prs structure, the equivalent
residue is Asp42. In addition, further comparison of the two
structures suggests that the Mt-PrsA homology model retains
all of the important residues required for the regulatory site,
apart from Gly88 (Ala85 in Bs-Prs), which participates in the
formation of contacts to ADP with a neighboring Ser89
(Figure 11B). An interesting observation in the model of

417

LJ Alderwick et al.

Fig. 10. Sequence alignment of various prokaryotic pRpp synthetases. Protein sequences from M. tuberculosis (Mt_PrsA), M. smegmatis (Ms_PrsA), M. leprae
(Ml_PrsA), C. glutamicum (Cg_PrsA), S. coleicolor (Sc_PrsA), B. subtilis (Bs_PrsA), E. coli (Ec-PrsA) and the three PrsA isoforms (Human_PrsA1–3) were
aligned using CLUSTALW and annotated with ESPRIPT. Triangles represent residues involved in catalysis. Filled circles indicate conserved and open circles
highlight nonconserved residues involved in allosteric regulation. His109 and Gly111 are highlighted with stars, indicating two residues only found in the ﬂexible
loop region of Corynebacterianeae PrsA homologs. The diamonds indentify the location of the residues involved in the formation of a salt bridge in Bs-PrsA and
Human-PrsA1.

418

Mycobacterium tuberculosis pRpp synthetase

Fig. 11. Homology model of Mt-PrsA. (A) Mt-PrsA arranged into its hexameric quaternary conformation. Carbon atoms of the ADP ligands located at the
catalytic and regulatory sites of the Mt-PrsA hexamer are colored in orange and green, respectively. Red spheres located at K10, D169, G194, D205-V208 and
F322 indicate regions of the Mt-PrsA dimmer that include insertions or deletions with respect to the Bs-Prs structure. The triangle in the middle represents 3-fold
symmetry, where as the arrow parallel to the plane indicates 2-fold rotational symmetry. Catalytic (B) and regulatory (C) sites of the Mt-PrsA homology model.
The yellow and the blue spheres indicate A85/G88 and S109/G111 substitution between the Bs-Prs and Mt-PrsA structures, respectively.

Mt-PrsA is the presence of His109 in the “ﬂexible loop”
formed by Mt-PrsA residues Lys108–Arg112. Ala106 is the
equivalent residue in Bs-Prs, and it appears to play little if no
part in binding or coordination of the ADP ligand. This ﬂex-
ible loop region, which contains many conserved residues
(Figure 10), has been identiﬁed as displaying some of the
largest variation in backbone conformation, and the confor-
mational changes that occur upon substrate binding are con-
sidered to be important for catalysis (Eriksen et al. 2000). The
presence of a His residue in the Mt-PrsA ﬂexible loop region
might allow for multiple hydrogen bonding opportunities
between His109 and the ATP substrate in the catalytic site
(Figure 11B). Gly111 is another conserved residue located in
the ﬂexible loop of mycobacterial PrsA enzymes, which in
the majority of other bacterial homologs is typically replaced
by a Ser that makes H-bond interactions with the α-phosphate
of ADP in the allosteric site (Figure 11C). Both the
Human-PrsA1 and the Bs-PrsA homodimers are stabilized by
a salt bridge at the N-terminal interface formed between two
conserved residues (Asn114 and Asp139, and Asn120 and
Asp145, respectively) (Eriksen et al. 2000; Li et al. 2007).
From the sequence alignment and the Mt-PrsA homology
model, it is worth noting that the equivalent Asn residue is
replaced by an aspartic acid (Asp122) which would sit in
close proximity to Asp147. Therefore,
is reasonable to
assume that unlike Human-PrsA1 and Bs-PrsA, a salt bridge
does not occur at the Mt-PrsA dimer interface. Interestingly,
the Human-PrsA1 Asn114 (Asp122 in Mt-PrsA) is often
mutated to a Ser in the cells of patients suffering from gout

it

(Becker et al. 1995). It has been reported that the molecular
mechanism behind the 50% increase in N114S mutant
enzyme activity is caused by a disruption of a salt bridge,
which would otherwise stabilizes the dimer interface (Liu
et al. 2009).

Discussion

The presence of D-arabinose in living organisms is rarely
observed. Whilst the utilization of D-arabinopyranose seems to
be conﬁned to glycoconjugate formation in trypanosomatid
parasites (Turnock and Ferguson 2007), arabinose in the
furanose conﬁguration (Araf) is exclusively used by bacteria in
the formation of cell surface polysaccharides and the biosyn-
thesis of glycolipid antigens. Members belonging to the
Corynebacterineae, such as M. tuberculosis and C. glutami-
cum, contain large quantities of Araf in the form of arabinan,
which in turn, is covalently attached to galactan and mannan,
thus forming AG and LAM, respectively. Whilst LAM exerts
its biological activity by subverting the host immune response,
the primary function of AG is to provide a highly branched
molecular scaffold, linking the murein sacculus to the hydro-
phobic mycolate layer. Since arabinan is an essential com-
ponent of the TB cell wall and is targeted by treatment with
EMB, other enzymes involved in its formation might present
themselves as potential putative drug targets. In this regard,
DPPR synthetase (Rv3806c) is a novel enzyme catalyzing the
transfer of pRpp to decaprenol-1-monphosphate forming

419

LJ Alderwick et al.

DPPR (Figure 1), represents the ﬁrst committed step toward
the biosynthesis of DPA (an exclusive cell wall AraT substrate)
and, as a consequence of its genetic disruption in C. glutami-
cum (a model organism used to study M. tuberculosis cell wall
physiology), affords a phenotype displaying retarded growth,
and a severely altered cell wall composition which is comple-
tely deﬁcient in arabinan (Alderwick et al. 2005). In addition,
DprE1 (Rv3790) has been shown to be the molecular target of
benzothiazinones, a new class of antimycobacterial agents,
which can effectively kill MDR and XDR strains of TB by
blocking the C2–OH epimerization of DPR to DPA (Makarov
et al. 2009). Some of the current front line drugs used to treat
TB include cell wall inhibitors. However, the incidence of
MDR and XDR-TB cases is alarmingly high and continues to
rise (Madariaga et al. 2008). Since the M. tuberculosis cell
wall is a valid drug target, we must continue to investigate the
physiology, biochemistry and metabolic pathways involved in
its assembly to assist our efforts of developing new anti-TB
therapies. However, nondividing drug-tolerant populations of
“persistent” TB bacilli fail to be eradicated from the host,
giving rise to a latent infection as a result of subsequent granu-
loma formation (Barry et al. 2009). Inhibition of the cell wall
biosynthetic processes of TB bacilli responsible for latent
infections is of no consequence, this being due to the fact that
persistent TB bacilli are not undergoing active cell growth and
division. However, these “dormant” TB bacilli still require a
basal level of “energy” metabolites in order to maintain critical
cellular functions (Koul et al. 2008).

pRpp is a central metabolite ubiquitous in nature providing
a high-energy substrate for the biosynthesis of histidine, try-
phophan, NAD, NADP and both the de novo and the salvage
pathways involved in nucleoside metabolism (Hove-Jensen
1988; Figure 1). In addition to these central metabolic pro-
cesses, the Corynebacterineae have evolved a unique pathway
in which pRpp is siphoned into cell wall arabinan biosyn-
thesis (Figure 1). In M.
tuberculosis, Mt-PrsA is entirely
responsible for the provision of pRpp and its cellular function
bridges ﬁve different metabolic pathways (Figure 1). The
omphalic nature of Mt-PrsA places a heavy burden on its bio-
logical function, especially during cell growth and division,
when the cellular requirement for pRpp increases signiﬁcantly.
In this study, we describe the biochemical characterization of
Mt-PrsA, which displays the highest recorded speciﬁc activity
for a pRpp synthetase of 530 µmol−1 min−1 mg−1. The Km for
R5P was calculated to be in the submicromolar range of 8.2
µM, suggesting a rapid enzyme turnover with a calculated
speciﬁcity constant (Kcat/Km) of 7.4 × 106 M−1 s−1. This rela-
tively high efﬁciency of Mt-PrsA ﬁts well with the physio-
logical function of the enzyme during cell wall biosynthesis,
considering the increased demand for pRpp that is required
for antecedent DPA biosynthesis. Mt-PrsA displays clear
homotropic cooperativity for ATP, with an apparent S0.5
62.65 µM, which is extremely low considering the intracellu-
lar concentration of ATP is considered to be between 3 and 5
mM. The homology model generated for Mt-PrsA contains
many structural features of other pRpp synthetases that have
been solved to date. The majority of the active site residues
modeled in Mt-PrsA are conserved with those from other
Mt-PrsA homologs, and it appears that
the appropriate

420

is

an

interesting

observation

exclusively conserved within members of

conﬁguration of amino acid side chains compares well with
the B. subtilis structure. This is also the case for the regulatory
site in which ADP binds to allosterically modulate the
enzyme. However,
the
presence of His109 in the ﬂexible loop region of Mt-PrsA, a
residue
the
Corynebacterineae. Considering the close proximity of His109
to both the catalytic and the regulatory sites of Mt-PrsA, and
its potential to make direct contacts with both ATP and ADP
ligands, the presence of this conserved His in the ﬂexible
region of mycobacterial pRpp synthetases might provide some
explanation for
the relatively high Kcat. pRpp synthetase
superactivity is observed in human type-1 N114S mutants
(Becker et al. 1995). This increase in activity is a result of the
loss of a salt bridge formed between two monomers which
induces small but signiﬁcant changes to the catalytic and
regulatory sites of the enzyme (Liu et al. 2009). Interestingly,
the homology model of Mt-PrsA suggests that a salt bridge
between the equivalent residues does not occur thus reducing
the stability of the dimer interface. In mycobacteria, the bio-
synthesis of pRpp is required at a rate which is sufﬁcient to
not only supply central metabolic processes, such as de novo
nucleoside biosynthesis, but also at a necessary level to meet
the increased demands for pRpp during cell wall biosynthesis
(Scherman et al. 1995, 1996). It seems plausible that pRpp
synthetases from Corynebacterineae species have evolved a
highly efﬁcient version of the enzyme to account for the
increased metabolic ﬂux of pRpp, during various physiologi-
cal states. pRpp synthetases in other organisms undergo strin-
gent control by virtue of allosteric modulation from ADP. In
this regard, Mt-PrsA also appears to be no different, display-
ing clear inhibition of enzyme activity between 0.5 and 2.0
mM ADP. When taken together, the data relating to ADP inhi-
bition and the subsequent complex formation with Mt-PrsA
suggest that the mechanism employed for the allosteric regu-
lation of Mt-PrsA by ADP is through the formation of an
Mt-PrsA hexamer (Arnvig et al. 1990). This net increase in
Mt-PrsA hexamer oligomerization suggests that the efﬁcacy of
ATP for its Mt-PrsA catalytic site decreases, as a consequence
of ADP allosteric modulation. The three human PrsA iso-
identity (91–95%
forms
share
the subtle differences that do
between all
occur appear in the regions of the enzyme that are important
Inhibition studies
for catalysis and allosteric regulation.
using two aminopyrimidopyrimidine nucleotide
analogs
4-methoxy-8-(β-D-ribofuranosylamino)-pyrimido-[5,4-d]-pyri-
midine and 4-amino-8-(β-D-ribofuranosylamino)
-pyrimido-
[5,4-d]-pyrimidine show differential
levels of inhibition of
human pRpp synthetases (Fry et al. 1995). Carbocyclic
analogs of R5P are another class of compounds that show
differential inhibition when tested against Salmonella typhi-
murium, B. subtilis and human pRpp synthetases (Parry et al.
1996). In this regard, the development of a similar library of
compounds targeted for the speciﬁc inhibition of Mt-PrsA
might warrant further investigation. Understanding the meta-
bolic pathways that are essential for persistent TB infections,
such as mycobacterial energy metabolism,
in combination
with pathways involved in cell wall assembly seems a plaus-
ible strategy for the development of new antimycobacterial
drugs.

a very high sequence

three); however,

Materials and methods
Bacterial strains cloning procedures
Escherichia coli top 10 cells (Invitrogen) were used to propa-
gate plasmids during all cloning experiments, and the
overexpression of Mt-PrsA was carried out in E. coli C41
(DE3) (Lucigen). Phusion DNA polymerase was purchased
from New England Biolabs, and all restriction enzymes and
T4 DNA ligase were
from Fermentas.
Oligonucleotides were purchased from Euroﬁns-MWG and
PCR fragments were puriﬁed using QIAquick Gel Extraction
(Qiagen). Plasmids were puriﬁed using the Qiaprep
Kit
Puriﬁcation Kit (Qiagen).

purchased

pNCgl0945_intfor

Generation of C. glutamicum prsA-null mutant
For the genomic disruption of NCgl0945 (Cg-prsA), we con-
structed the plasmid pK18mob-Cg-prsA-int, using the primer
pair
(GCGAGCCAATTTCTGCTCGC)
and pNCgl0945_intrev (GACAACCTGGTTTGCTACCTC),
to amplify C. glutamicum WT chromosomal DNA. The result-
ing DNA fragment was treated with AvaI/KpnI and ligated
into the nonreplicative vector pK18mob (Schafer et al. 1994),
which was similarly treated with AvaI/KpnI. The DNA integ-
rity of the resulting construct pK18mob-Cg-prsA-int was con-
ﬁrmed by sequencing and used for the transformation of C.
glutamicum by electroporation and selected for resistance to
kanamycin at 25 µg/mL on BHIS medium.

Construction of Mt-PrsA expression vector
The 981 bp coding region for Mt-PrsA (annotated as
Rv1017c) in the M. tuberculosis H37Rv genome was ampli-
ﬁed by PCR using the following primer pairs (restriction sites
underlined) GATCGATCGCTAGCTTGAGCCACGACTGGA
CCGATAATCGC (forward)
and GATCGATCCTCGAG
TGCGTCCCCGTCGAAAAGTCCTGTTAC (reverse). This
DNA fragment was restricted with the appropriate enzymes
(NheI and XhoI) and ligated into pET23b digested with identi-
cal enzymes, thus yielding pET23b-Mt-prsA, which encodes
for a C-terminal His6-tagged protein. DNA sequencing and
construct veriﬁcation were carried out at the University of
Birmingham School of Bioscience Genomics Facility.

Expression and puriﬁcation of Mt-PrsA
Escherichia coli C41 (DE3) cells were transformed with
pET23b-Mt-prsA and selected on the LB agar supplemented
with 100 µg/mL of amplicillin. Recombinant E. coli cells har-
boring pET23b-Mt-prsA were used to inoculate an overnight
of 5 mL LB supplemented with 100 µg/mL of amplicillin.
This overnight was then used to inoculate 2 × 1 L LB medium
supplemented with 100 µg/mL of amplicillin and incubated at
37°C with shaking until A600 reached 0.5. IPTG was then
added at a ﬁnal concentration of 1 mM and growth continued
for an additional 12 h at 16°C with shaking. Cells were har-
vested by centrifugation at 6000 × g for 15 min and washed
with 20 mL of phosphate buffered saline. Pellets were then
further use. For puriﬁcation, one pellet was
frozen until
thawed and resuspended into 50 mM KH2PO4 ( pH 7.9), 300
mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, one complete protease inhibitor
cocktail tablet (Roche) and DNAse and RNAse both at a ﬁnal

Mycobacterium tuberculosis pRpp synthetase

concentration of 50 µg/mL. The cell suspension was disrupted
by sonication at a pulse rate of 30 s ON and 30 s OFF for a
total of 10 cycles. The cell slurry was centrifuged for 30 min,
28,000 × g at a temperature of 4°C. The supernatant was
collected and passed over a 5 mL HiTrap Ni2+-NTA agarose
column (GE Healthcare), which was previously equilibrated
with 50 mM KH2PO4 (pH 7.9), 300 mM NaCl and 20
mM imidazole. Elution occurred via a stepwise gradient of
50–500 mM imidazole in 50 mM KH2PO4 ( pH 7.9), 300 mM
NaCl and 10 mL of fractions were collected. Mt-PrsA was
detected to be present and (cid:1) 98% pure in the 250 mM imida-
zole fraction, as determined by 12% SDS–PAGE analysis.
The 250 mM imidazole fractions of Mt-PrsA was ﬁrst dia-
lyzed against 2 L of KH2PO4 ( pH 7.9), 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM
EDTA and 1 mM DTT at 4°C and then against 2 L of
KH2PO4 (pH 7.9), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT and 10% gly-
cerol. After dialysis, the protein concentration was determined
using the bicinchoninic acid procedure (Pierce) and bovine
serum albumin as a standard.

dehydrogenase

Preparation of [14C]-R5P
We prepared a source of [14C]-R5P using a modiﬁed process
as described in Boss et al. (1984), for the subsequent use in
[14C]-U-D-
Mt-PrsA assays. One hundred microcuries of
glucose (100 µL in 70% ethanol; ARC Radiochemicals) was
dried in a 14 mL glass tube under compressed nitrogen and
then resuspended in 500 µL of 50 mM KH2PO4 (pH 7.9), 150
mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2 and 0.5 mM MnCl2. Twenty microli-
ters of ATP (100 mM stock) and 20 µL of NADP (100 mM
stock) was added to the suspension. Twenty microliters of hex-
okinase/glucose-6-phosphate
enzyme mix
(Roche) was added and incubated at 37°C for 15 min. A few
grains of 6-phosphogluconic dehydrogenase (Sigma) and a
further 20 µL of NADP (100 mM stock) were added and incu-
bated for 15 min at 37°C. A few grains of phosphoribose
mutase (Sigma) were added to the reaction mix and incubated
for a further 15 min at 37°C followed by another addition of
20 µL of NADP (100 mM stock) and ﬁnal incubation at 37°C
for 15 min. The reaction mix was then diluted with H2O to a
ﬁnal volume of 3 mL and passed through a 10 kDa MWCO
centrifugal ﬁltration device (Millipore). The ﬁltrate ((cid:1)3 mL)
was then loaded onto a 3 mL LC-SAX anion exchange car-
tridge (Supelco) pre-equilibrated with H2O. The column was
then washed three times with 3 mL of H2O. The column was
then washed with a 100–1000 mM stepwise gradient of
sodium acetate (3 mL of fractions of 100 mM increments).
Each fraction (1 µL) was
applied to a glass-backed
PEI-cellulose TLC plate and developed in 0.85 M KH2PO4
(pH 3.4). After drying, the TLC plate was exposed overnight
to a Kodak autoradiography ﬁlm for visualization of
[14C]-R5P eluted as a single
radioactive phospho-sugars.
band (when compared with the known standards) in the
200 mM sodium acetate fraction with a speciﬁc activity of
33,333 cpm/µL.

Radiochemical assay of Mt-PrsA activity
The enzymatic activity of Mt-PrsA was determined by moni-
toring the transfer of PPi from ATP to the C1–OH group of
enzymatically synthesized [14C]-R5P forming p[14C]Rpp and

421

LJ Alderwick et al.

AMP. The basic reaction mix contained 50 mM KH2PO4 ( pH
7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 10% glycerol, varying
amounts of [14C]-D-R5P [stored in 200 mM sodium acetate
(33,333 cpm/µL)], 2 mM ATP and 30 µg of Mt-PrsA (15 µL)
in a ﬁnal volume of 100 µL. On occasions, MgCl2, MnCl2,
CaCl2, ADP and EDTA were included in the reaction mix
either separately or in combination, all at a ﬁnal concentration
of 2 mM. Reactions were initiated by the addition of Mt-PrsA
and incubated at 37°C for 10 min. Reactions were quenched
by the addition of 10 µL of 0.4 M formic acid. The mixture
(1.1 µL) was applied to a glass-backed PEI-cellulose TLC
plate and developed in 0.85 M KH2PO4 ( pH 3.4). After
drying, the plate was inspected for radioactive spots by either
exposure to a Kodak ﬁlm followed by autoradiography or a
PhosphorImager (Molecular Dynamics). All experiments were
repeated in triplicate.

Metabolism of [14C]-R5P into mycobacterial cell wall
biosynthetic precursors
Membranes (containing membrane bound enzymes involved
in lipid-linked cell wall biosynthetic processes) and “P60”
[a percoll-derived cell-free fraction-rich carbohydrate and
enzymes associated with cell wall processes as described in
Besra et al. (1997)] fractions from M. smegmatis were pre-
pared as described previously (Besra et al. 1997; Lee et al.
1997; Alderwick, Dover, et al. 2006) and resuspended
in buffer A [50 mM MOPS ( pH 7.9), containing 5 mM
β-mercaptoethanol and 10 mM MgCl2] to a ﬁnal concen-
tration of 15 and 10 mg/mL for membrane and P60 fractions,
respectively. Fifty micrograms of DP [Larodan Lipids,
Malmo, Sweden; 5 mg/mL stored in CHCl3/CH3OH (2:1,
v/v)] was dried in a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube under compressed
nitrogen and was resuspended by the addition of 10 µL of a
solution of 50 mM MOPS ( pH 7.9), 50 mM KH2PO4, 150
mM NaCl, 1 mM MnCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT and 1%
IgePal CA-630 (Sigma) followed by bath sonication. The
basic assay mix consisted of 0.5 mg of M. smegmatis mem-
branes (33 µL), 2 mM ATP, 50 mM MOPS ( pH 7.9), 50 mM
KH2PO4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MnCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM
DTT, 100,000 cpm [14C]-R5P (3 µL) in a ﬁnal volume of
200 µL. NaWO4 and NaF as well as ADP were included in
separate assay reactions at a ﬁnal concentration of 2 mM for
all inhibition studies. 0.5 mg of M. smegmatis P60 (50 µL)
was added where appropriate. Reactions were initiated by the
addition of 30 µg of Mt-PrsA (15 µL) and incubated at 37°C
for 30 min. Assays were quenched by the addition of 1.33 mL
of CHCl3/CH3OH (1:1, v/v), mixed for 30 min and centri-
fuged at 27,000 × g to remove the precipitated proteinaceous
material. The supernatant was removed to a separate tube and
combined with 670 µL of CHCl3 and 287 µL of H2O, mixed
for 15 min and centrifuged for 5 min at 4000 × g to form a
biphase. The lower organic phase was removed and washed
twice with 765 µL of CHCl3/CH3OH/H2O (3:47:48, v/v/v)
and then dried under compressed nitrogen. Samples were then
resuspended in 100 µL of CHCl3/CH3OH (2:1, v/v) and an
aliquot subject to TLC analysis using silica gel plates (5735
silica gel 60F254, Merck) developed in CHCl3/CH3OH/
CH3COONH4/NH4OH/H2O (180:140:9:9:23, v/v/v/v/v) and

422

visualized by autoradiography by exposure of TLCs to X-ray
ﬁlm (Kodak X-Omat) as described in Mikusova et al. (2005).

Metabolism of [14C]-R5P into mycobacterial cell wall
biosynthetic precursors and the subsequent AraT-dependent
transfer to a neoglycolipid acceptor.
Membranes and P60 from M. smegmatis were prepared as
described in Materials and Methods. The neoglycolipid accep-
tor used in this study was the disaccharide α-D-Araf-(1 →
5)-α-D-Araf-O-(CH2)7CH3 (Ara2), which has been previously
reported by us (Lee et al. 1997; Seidel et al. 2007). In individ-
ual assays,
the 8 µL of Ara2 acceptor (stored in CHCl3/
CH3OH, 2:1, v/v at 20 mM) and 50 µg of DP [Larodan Lipids;
5 mg/mL stored in CHCl3/CH3OH (2:1, v/v)] was aliquoted
into 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes and dried under nitrogen. The
AraT assay was carried out as described previously (Lee et al.
1997; Seidel et al. 2007) with modiﬁcations.
IgePal™
(Sigma-Aldrich) was added (0.1%, v/v) with the appropriate
amount of buffer A (ﬁnal volume of 100 µL). Tubes were
sonicated for 15 min to resuspend lipid-linked substrates and
then mixed with the remaining assay components, which
included 0.5 mg of M. smegmatis membranes (33 µL), 0.5 mg
of M. smegmatis P60 (50 µL), 30 µg of Mt-PrsA (15 µL), 1
mM ATP, 1 mM NADP and in some cases EMB (100 µg/mL).
Assays were incubated for 1 h at 37°C and quenched by the
addition of 633 µL of CHCl3/CH3OH (1:1, v/v). After mixing
and centrifugation at 27,000 × g for 15 min at 4°C, the super-
natant was removed and dried under nitrogen. The residue was
then resuspended in 700 µL of CH3CH2OH/H2O (1:1, v/v)
and loaded onto a 1 mL LC-SAX strong anion exchange car-
tridge (Supelco), pre-equilibrated with CH3CH2OH/H2O (1:1,
v/v). The column was washed with 2 mL of CH3CH2OH and
the eluate collected, dried and partitioned between the two
phases arising from a mixture of n-butanol (3 mL) and water
(3 mL). The resulting organic phase was recovered following
centrifugation at 3500 × g and the aqueous phase again
extracted twice with 3 mL of water-saturated n-butanol. The
pooled
with
n-butanol-saturated water (3 mL). The n-butanol fraction was
dried and resuspended in 200 µL of butanol. The extracted
radiolabeled material was quantiﬁed by liquid scintillation
counting using 10% of the labeled material and 5 mL of
EcoScintA (National Diagnostics, Atlanta). The incorporation
of [14C]-Araf into Ara2 was determined by subtracting counts
present in control assays (incubations in the absence of accep-
tor). The remaining labeled material was subjected to TLC
using CHCl3:CH2OH:H2O:NH4OH (65:25:3.6:0.5, v/v/v/v) on
aluminum-backed silica gel plates (5735 silica gel 60F254,
Merck) and products were visualized by autoradiography,
exposing the TLCs to X-ray ﬁlm (Kodak X-Omat).

back-washed

extracts

twice

were

Continuous enzyme-coupled spectrophotometric assay
and kinetic characterization of Mt-PrsA substrates
By using a modiﬁed assay described by Braven et al. (1984),
the amount of AMP produced as a product of Mt-PrsA cataly-
sis was measured indirectly by monitoring the decrease in the
absorbance of NADH at 340 nm via the following enzyme
couple: 1. R5P + ATP → pRpp + AMP, catalyzed by Mt-PrsA;
2. AMP + ATP → 2 ADP, catalyzed by myokinase (MK); 3. 2

ADP + 2 phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) → 2 pyruvate + 2 ATP,
catalyzed by pyruvate kinase (PK) and 4. 2 pyruvate + 2
NADH + 2 H+ → 2 lactate + 2 NAD+, catalyzed by lactate
dehydrogenase
couple
immediately replenishes the pool of ATP and results in a stoi-
chiometry of 1 mol NADH oxidized by LDH for every 2 mol
AMP produced by Mt-PrsA. The following formula was used
to calculate the rate of reaction thus allowing for a detailed
kinetic characterization of Mt-PrsA

(LDH). This

perpetual

enzyme

 1

v ¼ DA s
2

 6220 M

 1

ð1Þ

in triplicate (from three different

where ν is the steady-state rate of the reaction, ΔA the change
in absorbance at 340 nm and 6220 M−1 the molecular extinc-
tion coefﬁcient of NADH measured at 340 nm. The reaction
mixture comprised of 50 mM KH2PO4 ( pH 7.9), 150 mM
NaCl, 0.25 mM DTT, 2 mM MnCl2, 2.0 mM PEP, 1.0 mM
NADH and 5 mM NaF, MK, PK and LDH were added to the
mix all at a concentration of 0.2 U/mL. Variable amounts of
ATP, R5P and ADP were added to the reaction mix for
enzyme kinetic and inhibitor studies. Reactions were initiated
by the addition of R5P. All kinetic experiments were carried
out
independent protein
preparations of puriﬁed recombinant Mt-PrsA), and data
points (calculated mean) and standard errors (±SE) relating to
(µmol min−1 mg−1)
the enzyme steady-state velocities (ν)
derived from Eq. (1) under various substrate and inhibitor
conditions were analyzed by nonlinear regression analysis and
ﬁtted to the appropriate Eqs. (2)–(6) using the GraphPad
is the Michelis–Menten
Prism software package. Eq.
equation for hyperbolic substrate saturation kinetics and Eq.
(3) applies to the nonlinear regression of substrate inhibition.
Eq. (4) is the Hill equation for calculating cooperative sub-
strate saturation kinetics, Eq. (5) applies to noncompetitive
enzyme inhibition of a hyperbolic enzyme response and
Eq. (6) is derived from combining Eqs. (4) and (5) to give an
expression for noncompetitive
a
cooperative sigmoidal response to increasing substrate concen-
trations.

inhibition of

enzyme

(2)

n ¼ Vmax  S

Km þ S

n ¼ Vapp 

S

Km þ S  ð1 þ S=KiÞ

n ¼ Vapp 

Sn
þ Sn

Sn
0:5

n ¼ Vapp 

S

Kmð1 þ I=KisÞ þ SðI þ I=KiiÞ

n ¼ Vapp 

Sn

ð1 þ I=KisÞ þ Snð1 þ I=KiiÞ

Sn
0:5

ð2Þ

ð3Þ

ð4Þ

ð5Þ

ð6Þ

Mycobacterium tuberculosis pRpp synthetase

where Vmax is the maximum enzyme velocity, Vapp the appar-
ent maximal enzyme velocity, S the concentration of the sub-
I the inhibitor concentration, Km the
strate being varied,
apparent Michelis–Menten constant
for S, S0.5 the half-
saturation concentration for S, n the apparent Hill coefﬁcient
for S, Kis and Kii the dissociation constants of the [I] for E
and ES, respectively.

Analytical ultracentrifugation
Sedimentation velocity experiments were performed using a
Beckman Optima XL-A analytical ultracentrifuge equipped
with absorbance optics. Mt-PrsA [dialyzed into 50 mM
KH2PO4 (pH 7.9), 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT] was loaded
into cells with two channel Epon center pieces and quartz
windows. A total of 100 absorbance scans (280 nm) were
recorded (40,000 rpm, 4°C) for each sample, representing the
full extent of sedimentation of the sample. Data analysis was
performed using the SEDFIT software ﬁtting a single friction
coefﬁcient (Schuck 2004).

ITF spectroscopy
ITF experiments were carried out using a PTI QuantaMaster™
40 spectroﬂuorimeter and data recorded using the FeliX32
software. The excitation wavelength was set at 292 nm, and
the ﬂuorescence emission (Femission) spectra were recorded
between 300 and 400 nm for each ligand aliquot added to a
200 µL solution containing 70 µM Mt-PrsA. 50 mM KH2PO4
(pH 7.9), 150 mM NaCl, 0.25 mM DTT, 2 mM MnCl2 was
used as a buffer for the measurement of R5P, ATP and
AMPPNP ligand binding (or a combination) to Mt-PrsA. A
plot of the change in ﬂuorescence emission (ΔFemission) inten-
sity at λ335nm vs. [L] was ﬁtted to Eq. (7) for R5P, Eq. (8) for
ATP and ADP for independent additions, Eq. (9) for R5P in
combination with AMPPNP and Eq. (10) for ATP and ADP in
combination using GraphPad Prism software

DFemission ¼ Fmax 

L

ðKd þ LÞ

DFemission ¼ Fmax 

Ln
þ LnÞ

ðKn

d

DFemission ¼ Fa

max



La

ðKd þ LaÞ þ Fb

max



Lnb
þ LnbÞ

ðKnb

d

ð7Þ

ð8Þ

ð9Þ

d

max

max





Lna

Lnb

ðKnb

ðKna

DFemission ¼ Fa

þ LnaÞ þ Fb

þ LnbÞ ð10Þ
where Fmax indicates the maximum change in ﬂuorescence
emission, Kd the concentration of ligand required to achieve
half maximum ﬂuorescence, L the concentration of ligand and
n the Hill coefﬁcient. Both a and b relate to the relative par-
ameters determined for two separate ligands included in a
binding assay.

d

423

LJ Alderwick et al.

Generation of a Mt-PrsA homology model
A homology model of the molecular structure of Mt-PrsA was
derived based on the crystal structure of B. subtilis Prs
(Eriksen et al. 2000). Models were obtained from several
web-based modeling servers,
including SWISS-MODEL
(Schwede et al. 2003), Geno3D (Combet et al. 2002) and
3D-JIGSAW (Bates et al. 2001). The homology models were
analyzed in comparison with the Bs-Prs structures in complex
− or mADP (PDB entry 1DKR and 1DKU; Eriksen
with SO4
et al. 2000).

Acknowledgements

G.S.B. acknowledges support
Research Chair
Wolfson Research Merit Award,
Institute-Jenner Research Fellow,
Council and The Wellcome Trust (081569/Z/06/Z).

in the form of a Personal
from Mr. James Bardrick, Royal Society
former Lister
the Medical Research

as

a

Conﬂict of interest
None declared.

Ara2,

arabinofuranosyltransferase;

Abbreviations
AG, arabinogalactan; AMPPNP, ATP analog 5’-adenylyl-β,
α-D-Araf-(1 → 5)-α-D-Araf-O-
γ-imidodiphosphate;
[14C]-R5P,
(CH2)7CH3; AraT,
[14C]-U-D-R5P; DP,
decaprenol-1-monophosphate; DPA,
decaprenol-1-monophosphorarabinose; DPR,
decaprenol-1-
decaprenol-1-monophosphori
monophosphoribose; DPPR,
bose-5-phosphate; DPX,
decaprenol-1-monophosphoryl-2-
keto-β-erythro-pentofuranose; EMB, ethambutol; ITF, intrinsic
tryptophan ﬂuorescence; LAM,
lipoarabinomannan; LDH,
lactate dehydrogenase; MDR, multidrug resistant; MK, myoki-
nase; Mt-PrsA, Mycobacterium tuberculosis phosphoribosyl-1-
pyrophosphate synthetase; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; PK, pyr-
uvate kinase; pRpp, phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate; R5P,
ribose-5-phosphate; TB,
tuberculosis; WT, wild type; XDR,
extensively drug resistant.

References

Alderwick LJ, Birch HL, Mishra AK, Eggeling L, Besra GS. 2007. Structure,
function and biosynthesis of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis cell wall:
Arabinogalactan and lipoarabinomannan assembly with a view to discover-
ing new drug targets. Biochem Soc Trans. 35:1325–1328.

Alderwick LJ, Dover LG, Seidel M, Gande R, Sahm H, Eggeling L, Besra
GS. 2006. Arabinan-deﬁcient mutants of Corynebacterium glutamicum and
the consequent ﬂux in decaprenylmonophosphoryl-D-arabinose metabolism.
Glycobiology. 16:1073–1081.

Alderwick LJ, Radmacher E, Seidel M, Gande R, Hitchen PG, Morris HR,
Dell A, Sahm H, Eggeling L, Besra GS, et al. 2005. Deletion of Cg-emb
in Corynebacterianeae leads to a novel truncated cell wall arabinogalactan,
whereas inactivation of Cg-ubiA results in an arabinan-deﬁcient mutant
with a cell wall galactan core. J Biol Chem. 280:32362–32371.

Alderwick LJ, Seidel M, Sahm H, Besra GS, Eggeling L. 2006. Identiﬁcation
of a novel arabinofuranosyltransferase (AftA)
involved in cell wall
arabinan biosynthesis in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. J Biol Chem.
281:15653–15661.

Arnvig K, Hove-Jensen B, Switzer RL. 1990. Puriﬁcation and properties of
subtilis. Eur J

phosphoribosyl-diphosphate synthetase from Bacillus
Biochem. 192:195–200.

424

Bald D, Koul A. 2010. Respiratory ATP synthesis: The new generation of

mycobacterial drug targets? FEMS Microbiol Lett. 308:1–7.

Banerjee A, Dubnau E, Quemard A, Balasubramanian V, Um KS, Wilson T,
Collins D, de Lisle G, Jacobs WR, Jr. 1994. inhA, a gene encoding a target
for isoniazid and ethionamide in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Science.
263:227–230.

Barry CE, 3rd, Boshoff HI, Dartois V, Dick T, Ehrt S, Flynn J, Schnappinger
D, Wilkinson RJ, Young D. 2009. The spectrum of latent tuberculosis:
Rethinking the biology and intervention strategies. Nat Rev. 7:845–855.

Bates PA, Kelley LA, MacCallum RM, Sternberg MJ. 2001. Enhancement of
protein modeling by human intervention in applying the automatic pro-
grams 3D-JIGSAW and 3D-PSSM. Proteins. 45(Suppl. 5):39–46.

Becker MA, Smith PR, Taylor W, Mustaﬁ R, Switzer RL. 1995. The genetic
and functional basis of purine nucleotide feedback-resistant phosphoribo-
sylpyrophosphate synthetase superactivity. J Clin Invest. 96:2133–2141.

Belanger AE, Besra GS, Ford ME, Mikusova K, Belisle JT, Brennan PJ,
Inamine JM. 1996. The embAB genes of Mycobacterium avium encode an
arabinosyl transferase involved in cell wall arabinan biosynthesis that is the
target for the antimycobacterial drug ethambutol. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
93:11919–11924.

Besra GS, Khoo KH, McNeil MR, Dell A, Morris HR, Brennan PJ. 1995. A
new interpretation of the structure of the mycolyl-arabinogalactan complex
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis as revealed through characterization of
oligoglycosylalditol
fragments by fast-atom bombardment mass spec-
trometry and 1H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Biochemistry.
34:4257–4266.

Besra GS, Morehouse CB, Rittner CM, Waechter CJ, Brennan PJ. 1997.
J Biol Chem.

lipoarabinomannan.

of mycobacterial

Biosynthesis
272:18460–18466.

Birch HL, Alderwick LJ, Bhatt A, other authors. 2008. Biosynthesis of myco-
bacterial arabinogalactan: Identiﬁcation of a novel α(1→3) arabinofurano-
syltransferase. Mol Microbiol. 69:1191–1206.

Boss GR,

Idriss SD, Willis RC, Seegmiller

JE. 1984. Synthesis of
(14C)-ribose-5-phosphate and (14C)-phosphoribosylpyrophosphate and their
use in new enzyme assays. Adv Exp Med Biol. 165(Pt B):11–13.

Braven J, Hardwell TR, Seddon R, Whittaker M. 1984. A spectrophotometric
assay of phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate synthetase. Ann Clin Biochem. 21
(Pt 5):366–371.

Briken V, Porcelli SA, Besra GS, Kremer L. 2004. Mycobacterial lipoarabino-
mannan and related lipoglycans: From biogenesis to modulation of the
immune response. Mol Microbiol. 53:391–403.

Carter AT, Beiche F, Hove-Jensen B, Narbad A, Barker PJ, Schweizer LM,
Schweizer M. 1997. PRS1 is a key member of the gene family encoding
phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol
Gen Genet. 254:148–156.

Cole ST, Barrell BG. 1998. Analysis of the genome of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis H37Rv. Novartis Found Symp. 217:160–172; discussion 172–
177.

Combet C,

Jambon M, Deleage G, Geourjon C. 2002. Geno3D:
Automatic comparative molecular modelling of protein. Bioinformatics.
18:213–214.

Daffé M, Brennan PJ, McNeil M. 1990. Predominant structural features of the
cell wall arabinogalactan of Mycobacterium tuberculosis as revealed
through characterization of oligoglycosyl alditol fragments by gas chrom-
atography/mass spectrometry and by 1H and 13C NMR analyses. J Biol
Chem. 265:6734–6743.

Dye C. 2006. Global epidemiology of tuberculosis. Lancet. 367:938–940.
Eriksen TA, Kadziola A, Bentsen AK, Harlow KW, Larsen S. 2000.
the function of Bacillus subtilis phosphoribosyl-

Structural basis for
pyrophosphate synthetase. Nat Struct Biol. 7:303–308.

Fry DW, Becker MA, Switzer RL.

5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate
D-ribofuranosylamino)-pyrimido[5,4-d]pyrimidine-5’-monophosphate:
Evidence for
47:810–815.

the ADP allosteric site. Mol Pharmacol.

interaction at

1995.
synthetase

Inhibition
by

human
4-amino-8-(beta-

of

Gande R, Gibson KJ, Brown AK, other authors. 2004. Acyl-CoA carboxy-
lases (accD2 and accD3),
together with a unique polyketide synthase
(Cg-pks), are key to mycolic acid biosynthesis in Corynebacterianeae such
as Corynebacterium glutamicum and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. J Biol
Chem. 279:44847–44857.

Gibson KJ, Eggeling L, Maughan WN, Krumbach K, Gurcha SS, Nigou J,
Puzo G, Sahm H, Besra GS. 2003. Disruption of Cg-Ppm1, a polyprenyl

monophosphomannose
of
lipoglycan-less mutants in Corynebacterium glutamicum. J Biol Chem.
278:40842–40850.

generation

synthase,

and

the

Gibson KJ, Schubert KR, Switzer RL. 1982. Binding of the substrates and
the allosteric inhibitor adenosine 5’-diphosphate to phosphoribosylpyropho-
sphate
J Biol Chem.
257:2391–2396.

from Salmonella

typhimurium.

synthetase

Hove-Jensen B. 1985. Cloning and characterization of the prs gene encoding
phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase of Escherichia coli. Mol Gen
Genet. 201:269–276.

Hove-Jensen B. 1988. Mutation in the phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthe-
tase gene (prs) that results in simultaneous requirements for purine and
pyrimidine nucleosides, nicotinamide nucleotide, histidine, and tryptophan
in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol. 170:1148–1152.

Hove-Jensen B. 1989. Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP)-less mutants of

Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol. 3:1487–1492.

Huang H, Scherman MS, D’Haeze W, Vereecke D, Holsters M, Crick DC,
McNeil MR. 2005. Identiﬁcation and active expression of the Mycobacterium
5-phospho-α-D-ribose-1-diphosphate:
tuberculosis
Decaprenyl-phosphate 5-phosphoribosyltransferase, the ﬁrst enzyme com-
mitted to decaprenylphosphoryl-D-arabinose synthesis. J Biol Chem.
280:24539–24543.

encoding

gene

Koul A, Dendouga N, Vergauwen K, other authors. 2007. Diarylquinolines
subunit c of mycobacterial ATP synthase. Nat Chem Biol.

target
3:323–324.

Koul A, Vranckx L, Dendouga N, other authors. 2008. Diarylquinolines are
bactericidal for dormant mycobacteria as a result of disturbed ATP homeo-
stasis. J Biol Chem. 283:25273–25280.

Krath BN, Hove-Jensen B. 1999. Organellar and cytosolic localization of four
phosphoribosyl diphosphate synthase isozymes in spinach. Plant Physiol.
119:497–506.

Lee RE, Brennan PJ, Besra GS. 1997. Mycobacterial arabinan biosynthesis:
The use of synthetic arabinoside acceptors in the development of an arabi-
nosyl transfer assay. Glycobiology. 7:1121–1128.

Li S, Lu Y, Peng B, Ding J. 2007. Crystal structure of human phosphoribosyl-
pyrophosphate synthetase 1 reveals a novel allosteric site. Biochem J.
401:39–47.

Liu H, Peng X, Zhao F, Zhang G, Tao Y, Luo Z, Li Y, Teng M, Li X, Wei S.
2009. N114S mutation causes loss of ATP-induced aggregation of human
phosphoribosylpyrophosphate
1. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun. 379:1120–1125.

synthetase

Madariaga MG, Lalloo UG, Swindells S. 2008. Extensively drug-resistant

tuberculosis. Am J Med. 121:835–844.

Makarov V, Manina G, Mikusova K, other authors. 2009. Benzothiazinones
kill Mycobacterium tuberculosis by blocking arabinan synthesis. Science.
324:801–804.

McNeil M, Daffe M, Brennan PJ. 1991. Location of the mycolyl ester
J Biol Chem.

of mycobacteria.

cell walls

the

substituents
266:13217–13223.

in

Mikusova K, Huang H, Yagi T, other authors. 2005. Decaprenylphosphoryl
arabinofuranose, the donor of the D-arabinofuranosyl residues of mycobac-
terial arabinan, is formed via a two-step epimerization of decaprenylpho-
sphoryl ribose. J Bacteriol. 187:8020–8025.

Ortalo-Magne A, Dupont MA, Lemassu A, Andersen AB, Gounon P, Daffe
M. 1995. Molecular composition of the outermost capsular material of the
tubercle bacillus. Microbiology. 141 (Pt 7):1609–1620.

Parry RJ, Burns MR, Skae PN, Hoyt JC, Pal B. 1996. Carbocyclic
behavior with

of D-ribose-5-phosphate: Synthesis

analogues

and

Mycobacterium tuberculosis pRpp synthetase

5-phosphoribosyl α-1-pyrophosphate synthetase. Bioorg Med Chem. 4
(7):1077–1068.

Rao SP, Alonso S, Rand L, Dick T, Pethe K. 2008. The protonmotive force is
required for maintaining ATP homeostasis and viability of hypoxic, nonre-
plicating Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
105:11945–11950.

Sassetti CM, Boyd DH, Rubin EJ.

for
mycobacterial growth deﬁned by high density mutagenesis. Mol Microbiol.
48:77–84.

2003. Genes

required

Schafer A, Tauch A, Jager W, Kalinowski J, Thierbach G, Puhler A. 1994.
Small mobilizable multi-purpose
from
the Escherichia coli plasmids pK18 and pK19: Selection of deﬁned
deletions in the chromosome of Corynebacterium glutamicum. Gene.
145:69–73.

cloning

derived

vectors

Scherman MS, Kalbe-Bournonville L, Bush D, Xin Y, Deng L, McNeil M.
1996. Polyprenylphosphate-pentoses in mycobacteria are synthesized from
5-phosphoribose pyrophosphate. J Biol Chem. 271:29652–29658.

Scherman M, Weston A, Duncan K, Whittington A, Upton R, Deng L,
Comber R, Friedrich JD, McNeil M. 1995. Biosynthetic origin of myco-
bacterial cell wall arabinosyl residues. J Bacteriol. 177:7125–7130.

Schubert KR, Switzer RL, Shelton E. 1975. Studies of the quaternary struc-
ture and the chemical properties of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthe-
tase from Salmonella typhimurium. J Biol Chem. 250:7492–7500.

Schuck P.

2004. A model

inhomogeneous
media. I. Dynamic density gradients from sedimenting co-solutes. Biophys
Chem. 108:187–200.

sedimentation

for

in

Schwede T, Kopp J, Guex N, Peitsch MC. 2003. SWISS-MODEL: An
server. Nucleic Acids Res.

homology-modeling

protein

automated
31:3381–3385.

Seidel M, Alderwick LJ, Birch HL, Sahm H, Eggeling L, Besra GS. 2007.
Identiﬁcation of a novel arabinofuranosyltransferase AftB involved in a
terminal step of cell wall arabinan biosynthesis in Corynebacterianeae,
such as Corynebacterium glutamicum and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. J
Biol Chem. 282:14729–14740.

Stankiewicz PJ, Gresser MJ. 1988. Inhibition of phosphatase and sulfatase by

transition-state analogues. Biochemistry. 27:206–212.

Switzer RL, Sogin DC. 1973. Regulation and mechanism of phosphoribosyl-
pyrophosphate synthetase. V. Inhibition by end products and regulation by
adenosine diphosphate. J Biol Chem. 248:1063–1073.

Tozzi MG, Camici M, Mascia L, Sgarrella F, Ipata PL. 2006. Pentose phos-
J.

catabolism. FEBS

interconversion

nucleoside

and

phates
273:1089–1101.

in

Turnock DC, Ferguson MA. 2007. Sugar nucleotide pools of Trypanosoma
brucei, Trypanosoma cruzi, and Leishmania major. Eukaryot Cell.
6:1450–1463.

Wayne LG,

Sohaskey CD.

2001. Nonreplicating

persistence

of

Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Annu Rev Microbiol. 55:139–163.

Willemoes M, Hove-Jensen B, Larsen S. 2000. Steady state kinetic model
the binding of substrates and allosteric effectors to Escherichia
275:

phosphoribosyl-diphosphate

Biol Chem.

synthase.

J

for
coli
35408–35412.

Wojtkiewicz B, Szmidzinski R, Jezierska A, Cocito C. 1988. Identiﬁcation of
a salvage pathway for D-arabinose in Mycobacterium smegmatis. Eur J
Biochem. 172:197–203.

Wolucka BA, McNeil MR, de Hoffmann E, Chojnacki T, Brennan PJ. 1994.
Recognition of the lipid intermediate for arabinogalactan/arabinomannan
biosynthesis and its relation to the mode of action of ethambutol on myco-
bacteria. J Biol Chem. 269:23328–23335.

425

