Glycobiology vol. 21 no. 4 pp. 493–502, 2011
doi:10.1093/glycob/cwq188
Advance Access publication on November 23, 2010

EUROCarbDB: An open-access platform for
glycoinformatics

Claus-Wilhelm von der Lieth 2,†, Ana Ardá Freire 3,
Dennis Blank 4, Matthew P Campbell 5,6,11, Alessio Ceroni 7,
David R Damerell 7, Anne Dell 7, Raymond A Dwek 6,
Beat Ernst 8, Rasmus Fogh 9,12, Martin Frank 2,
Hildegard Geyer 4, Rudolf Geyer 4, Mathew J Harrison 9,13,
Kim Henrick 9,14, Stefan Herget 2, William E Hull 2,
John Ionides 9,14, Hiren J Joshi 2,9, Johannis P Kamerling 3,
Bas R Leeﬂang 3, Thomas Lütteke 3,12,
Magnus Lundborg 10, Kai Maass 4,15, Anthony Merry 9,
René Ranzinger 2,16, Jimmy Rosen 3, Louise Royle 5,6,
Pauline M Rudd 5,6, Siegfried Schloissnig 2,
Roland Stenutz 10, Wim F Vranken 9,14, Göran Widmalm 10,
and Stuart M Haslam 1,7
2Core Facility, Molecular Structure Analysis, German Cancer Research
Center, Heidelberg, Germany; 3Bijvoet-Center for Biomolecular Research,
University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; 4Institute of Biochemistry,
Faculty of Medicine, Justus, Liebig University, Giessen, Germany; 5Dublin-
Oxford Glycobiology Laboratory, National Institute for Bioprocessing
Research and Training (NIBRT), Conway Institute, University College
Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; 6Department of Biochemistry, Oxford Glycobiology
Institute, University of Oxford, UK; 7Division of Molecular Biosciences,
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Biochemistry Building, Imperial College
London, South Kensington Campus, London SW7 2AZ, UK; 8Department of
Pharmaceutical Science, University of Basel, Basel Switzerland; 9European
Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, UK; and 10Organic Chemistry, Stockholm
University, Stockholm, Sweden

Received on August 19, 2010; revised on November 3, 2010; accepted on
November 3, 2010

The EUROCarbDB project is a design study for a technical
framework, which provides sophisticated, freely accessible,
open-source informatics tools and databases to support
glycobiology and glycomic research. EUROCarbDB is a

1To whom correspondence should be addressed: Tel: +44-20-75945222; Fax:
+44-20-72250458; e-mail: s.haslam@imperial.ac.uk
†Claus-Wilhelm von der Lieth deceased 16 November 2007.
11Present address: Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Sciences,
Biomelecular Frontiers Research Centre, Macquarie University, Sidney,
Australia.
12Present address: Institute of Biochemistry und Endocrinology, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Justus, Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.
13Present
Camperdown, Australia.
14Present address: Protein Data Bank in Europe (PDBe), EMBL-EBI,
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK.
15Present address: Institute for Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of
Biology and Chemistry, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.
16Present address: Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, University of
Georgia, GA, USA.

address: Centenary Institute, Royal Prince Alfred Institute,

relational database containing glycan structures,
their
biological context and, when available, primary and
interpreted analytical data from high-performance liquid
chromatography, mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic
resonance experiments. Database content can be accessed
via a web-based user interface. The database is complemen-
ted by a suite of glycoinformatics tools, speciﬁcally designed
to assist the elucidation and submission of glycan structure
and experimental data when used in conjunction with con-
temporary carbohydrate research workﬂows. All software
tools and source code are licensed under the terms of the
Lesser General Public License, and publicly contributed
structures and data are freely accessible. The public test
version of the web interface to the EUROCarbDB can be
found at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/eurocarb.

Keywords: databases / glycoinformatics / informatics tools /
open-source

Introduction

The inherent complexity of glycan structures and the microhe-
terogeneity in naturally occurring glycans make analysis of
glycoconjugates very challenging. A complete and detailed
characterization of glycan structures is a time-consuming
analytical process that typically requires a complex approach
for detecting small quantities of glycans on low-abundance gly-
coproteins. It is widely accepted that glycosylation is the most
complex and prevalent post-translational modiﬁcation, which is
important
for protein folding, stability and function, with
implications in signal transduction, differentiation, immunity,
inﬂammation, cancer and other disease progressions (Rudd
et al. 2001; Morelle and Michalski 2007; Arnold et al. 2008;
Marth and Grewal 2008; Zaia 2008; An et al. 2009; Dennis
et al. 2009; Taniguchi et al. 2009; Tharmalingam et al. 2010).
Our understanding of glycan function is rapidly expanding
through our improved understanding of the molecular glycosy-
lation machinery and with advances
in high-throughput
glycomic strategies and glycoinformatics.

Over the past decade, there has been rapid progress in the
development and availability of glycoanalytical technologies
(Morelle and Michalski 2007; Widmalm 2007; Royle et al.
2008; Zaia 2008; Bielik and Zaia 2009; Blow 2009; North
et al. 2009; Tharmalingam et al. 2010; Vanderschaeghe et al.
increasing
2010). These
and the
amounts of data generated by high-throughput
techniques

innovations

technical

 The Author 2010. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.5/), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com

493

C-W von der Lieth et al.

tools, either web-based or standalone,

allow for the rapid structural analysis of complex glycans.
The complexity and volume of data routinely generated now
necessitate bioinformatic solutions in the form of databases
and analytical
to
support data interpretation and data storage (von der Lieth
et al. 2004, 2006; Frank and Schloissnig 2010). Thus, new
ideas are required for the development of universally accepted
mechanisms and standards for storing both structural and
experimental data and for improved data annotation and disse-
mination of the conclusions drawn from such experiments.

In contrast to the genomics and proteomics ﬁelds, the gly-
cosciences lack accessible, curated and comprehensive data
collections that summarize the structure, characteristics, bio-
logical origin and potential function of glycans which have
been experimentally veriﬁed and reported in the literature.
Over the past
two decades, efforts in the development of
bioinformatic resources have increased, including projects by
international consortia (Table I
in Frank and Schloissnig
2010) to develop databases that support the growing require-
ment for storing and presenting data to address the needs of
the glycobiology community.

A majority of these databases have been derived, in part,
from the ﬁrst international effort to set up a carbohydrate data-
base, the Complex Carbohydrate Structure Database (CCSD),
commonly referred to as CarbBank, which was developed by
the Complex Carbohydrate Research Center (Doubet et al.
1989; Doubet and Albersheim 1992). The project started in
the late 1980s but ceased in 1997 due to lack of funding
support. The ﬁnal database contained (cid:1)50,000 records com-
prising 23,000 unique sequences in the CarbBank notation
with associated biological background, chemical data and
publication information. This data set has been used by recent
initiatives to seed new databases with a basic set of glycan
structure records.

et

al.

and

2006)

(CFG; Raman

Three prominent initiatives are the Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Glycan (Aoki et al. 2004;
Hashimoto et al. 2006),
the US consortium for functional
glycomics
the
GLYCOSCIENCES.de portal (Lütteke et al. 2006). Brieﬂy,
KEGG Glycan is an integrated knowledge base of protein net-
works with genomic and chemical information and provides
access to sugar
structures through the manually drawn
pathway maps representing the current knowledge of glycan
biosynthesis and metabolism for various species. The CFG
databases have been designed to host and integrate experi-
mental data produced by the various core groups of the
consortium. The GLYCOSCIENCES.de portal is a resource
for
linking glycan-related data originating from various
resources through a unique structure description. Special
emphasis has been made to provide easy access to the avail-
able experimentally determined spatial structures of glycans
and to analyze their interactions with proteins. The CFG and
GLYCOSCIENCES.de
of
experimental data from mass spectrometry (MS) proﬁles and
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments.

collections

databases

contain

carbohydrate

Although many

been
implemented (Cooper et al. 2001, 2003; Campbell et al. 2008),
the desirable features for structure-based cross-linking and
automated exchange of data between established resources are

databases

have

494

lacking. This weakness arises from the use of different
database-speciﬁc structure encoding formats that are difﬁcult or
impossible to cross-translate in a facile manner due to semantic
and syntactic nuances that are intractable to automatic trans-
lation (Doubet and Albersheim 1992; Bohne-Lang et al. 2001;
Aoki et al. 2004; Kikuchi et al. 2005; Campbell et al. 2008).
Thus, we are faced with a variety of incomplete databases
characterized by disconnected and incompatible collections of
experimental and structural data. This situation not only
hinders the development of bioinformatic tools but also the
realization of platforms for large-scale glycomics and glycopro-
teomics studies. As glycan-related databases improve in cover-
age and quality, it is of growing interest to consider criteria and
solutions that maximize the value that can be extracted. Recent
reviews highlight the approaches and difﬁculties the glycoinfor-
matics community is facing and those steps being taken to
create well-curated and annotated databases and efﬁcient tools
(Aoki-Kinoshita 2008; Packer et al. 2008).

for

(structure

carbohydrate-related data

Here, we present EUROCarbDB (http://www.eurocarbdb.
org), an Infrastructure Design Study funded under the sixth
EU framework program,
to establish the technical require-
ments for developing a centralized and standardized database
architecture
and
analytical data). The study focused on the evaluation and
development of a robust infrastructure that supports the estab-
lished analytical methods. The initial implementation of the
EUROCarbDB outlined here includes workﬂows and tools
developed speciﬁcally for the key analytical
techniques of
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), MS and
NMR spectroscopy. The platform offers the following fea-
tures: (i) an introduction and/or recommendation of formats
and nomenclatures
for encoding carbohydrate structures;
(ii) relational database schemas for storing curated structural
and experimental data together with a web-based user inter-
face designed to populate and curate that data; (iii) various
web-based tools for visualizing and querying all stored infor-
mation and (iv) bioinformatics research tools designed to
expedite aspects of glycan analysis and structural elucidation.
Lastly, software libraries and bioinformatics tools produced by
the project are available at http://eurocarb.googlecode.com,
under the terms of the Lesser General Public License (http://
www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html).

Results and discussion

The design goals and concepts of the EUROCarbDB are far-
reaching and by no means limited to the resources presented
here. A speciﬁc design objective of the architecture of the
database was to allow for the extension and incorporation of
new modules and tools to support further types of experimen-
tal data and workﬂows. In this fashion, the emphasis through-
out
the project has been to develop a comprehensive
framework that promotes accessibility and longevity through a
modular design approach and by adopting an open-source
philosophy. It is our hope that this will in turn drive the con-
tinued growth and promotion of uniﬁed glycoinformatic tools
analogous to those that have facilitated the rapid uptake of
proteomics and genomics and will allow future integration

with other complementary database resources such as the
PDBe: Protein Data Bank in Europe (Velankar et al. 2010).

Glycan structure encoding
A review of current and discontinued database projects ident-
iﬁed that a major issue in the design of a robust and future-
oriented data resource is the availability of an infrastructure
which can conveniently handle structural data at both the
internal database and user levels. The main goal of these
developments was to simplify the manual input of structures
while providing the capabilities for encoding all structural
characteristics of a glycan sequence in a unique and
computer-readable form. Note that throughout this report the
term “structure” will be used to refer to the more or less
detailed constitution, sequence (linkage) and stereochemistry
information available for a particular glycan and will gener-
ally not be used to denote a particular 3D spatial structure
(atomic coordinates) in the molecular modeling sense.

of

precise monosaccharide
for

To motivate scientists to use newly designed resources, we
developed a rapid and intuitive glycan structure editor (see
the GlycanBuilder section) that is embedded with a controlled
set
the
the rapid generation of
MonosaccharideDB section)
glycan structures. The analysis of existing structures and
formats indicated that a new, more comprehensive format
(Table I) was required for the accurate encoding of structural
details in a form that can be read by the human user, as well
as by computer algorithms, and can serve as a unique identi-
ﬁer for database entries.

descriptions

(see

GlycoCT. The analysis of previous encoding formats (Table I)
showed that none of them is capable of dealing with the full
complexity to be
experimentally derived
carbohydrate sequence data. Therefore, we developed a new
encoding scheme for complex carbohydrates, named GlycoCT
(Herget et al. 2008).

expected for

This format utilizes a connection table (CT) approach,
instead of a linear encoding scheme, and features a controlled
vocabulary for monosaccharide building blocks and substitu-
ents, according to the IUPAC nomenclature. GlycoCT uses a
block concept to describe residues, linkages and frequently

An open-access platform for glycoinformatics

features, such as repeating units. The
occurring special
implementation of sorting rules and the ability to encode
ambiguous or only partially deﬁned structures (e.g. uncertain
terminal residue positions) as well as fully resolved structures
assures the uniqueness of the GlycoCT signature for each
given structure. It exists in two variants, a condensed form
and a more verbose XML syntax, which are described in
detail elsewhere (Herget et al. 2008) and http://www.
eurocarbdb.org/recommendations/encoding. The main intent
of GlycoCT is to be used as a unique encoding of a glycan
structure that may be readily translated to other existing text
formats
such as Oxford
University format, CFG notation and IUPAC text format.

representations,

and graphical

a

seed for

translation. As

Structure
initial database
development, 50,000 entries were imported from the public
CarbBank repository to EUROCarbDB via an internally
developed routine. After removal of any aglyca (e.g. amino
acids or lipids, which are part of the sequence in CarbBank),
the remaining carbohydrate moiety was exported into the
GlycoCT sequence
and subsequently stored in
EUROCarbDB.

format

et

GlycanBuilder. Given the nonlinear and frequently complex
nature of carbohydrate sequences, many researchers prefer to
visualize glycans graphically, rather than as textual sequence
strings. The GlycanBuilder is an embeddable software tool
(Java applet), which can be used to visually compose glycan
structures from a set of monosaccharide building blocks
(Ceroni
al. 2007; http://www.glycoworkbench.org/wiki/
GlycanBuilder). The “view” menu of the GlycanBuilder tool
allows sequences to be generated and viewed in any of the ﬁve
graphical display schemes illustrated in Figure 1. The user can
rapidly specify a glycan structure by simply selecting
successive residues and their points of attachment. The
growing structure is displayed using one of the selectable
symbolic notations. The list of structural constituents comprises
an
substituents,
reducing-end markers and saccharide modiﬁcations. All of the
stereochemical information about a saccharide, e.g. anomeric
conﬁguration,
linkage
positions, can be speciﬁed. The GlycanBuilder is used in the

conﬁguration

saccharides,

exhaustive

collection

chirality,

ring

and

of

Table I. Comparison of carbohydrate structure encoding formats in terms of structural features, which can be encoded in an unrestricted manner (+), restricted
manner (o) or not at all (–).

GlycoCT

KCF

LINUCS

CarbBank
format

BCSDB
format

GlycoBase
(Dublin)

Linear
Code®

CabosML

Glycosuite
format

Encodable features

Unknown linkage positions
Repeat units
Cyclic sugars
Undeterminded terminal
residues
Alternative residues
Nonstoichometric
modifications
Compositions
Unique sequences
Multiple connections

+
+
+
+

+
+

+
+
+

+
+
−
−

−
−

+
−
+

+
+
+
−

−
−

−
0
−

+
+
+
+

−
+

−
−
−

+
0
−
−

+
+

−
+
+

+
−
−
+

−
−

−
+
−

+
+
+
+

+
−

−
+
−

−
+
+
−

−
−

−
−
−

+
+
−
0

+
0

−
+
−

495

C-W von der Lieth et al.

Fig. 1. Carbohydrate representations used in GlycanBuilder. Users can select from ﬁve graphical display schemes for glycan structures. As an example structure a
complex N-glycan is shown in the IUPAC Text mode, the CFG symbolic format with linkage labels, the CFGL format with linkage positions shown
geometrically and the Oxford black & white (UOXF) and color (UFOXCOL) schemes, where linkage positions are shown by geometry and anomeric
conﬁgurations are denoted by dashed (α) or solid (β) lines. Note that this structure is indeﬁnite since the linkage positions of the terminal GalNAc residues are
not deﬁned.

web interface of the EUROCarbDB as the standard input
facility for structures in all contribute, browse and search
pages. Furthermore, the GlycanBuilder is embedded into the
GlycoWorkbench software (Ceroni et al. 2008) as a component
for drawing structure candidates in the process of annotating
MS spectra (see the Software tools section below). Herein,
sequences can be exported in GlycoCT as an XML ﬁle or in
any of several standard text or graphical formats. Finally,
following the open-source character of
the EUROCarbDB
project, the GlycanBuilder was used in other database projects
(see http://www.glycome-db.org) as a structure input facility for
search functions (Ranzinger et al. 2008, 2009).

or

e.g.

problem with

Fuc/6-deoxy-Gal

previous
MonosaccharideDB. A major
carbohydrate databases has been the
frequent use of
nonuniform residue names (aliases or synonyms) for a given
monosaccharide,
2-deoxy-Glc/
2-deoxy-Man/2-deoxy-araHex. This problem can be solved by
using a controlled vocabulary of unique monosaccharide
names. In view of the large number of known monosaccharides
and the even larger number
is
to adequately deﬁne a static dictionary with all
impractical
possible monosaccharides
in
EUROCarbDB,
the dynamic, self-extensible dictionary and
routines of MonosaccharideDB are implemented to ensure
residue name consistency. The dictionary can also be accessed
independently at http://www.monosaccharidedb.org.

and synonyms. Therefore,

theoretically feasible,

it

In addition to its own internal format (closely related to
GlycoCT), MonosaccharideDB currently supports six different
notation schemes for carbohydrates: GlycoCT (Herget et al.
2008);
the LinearCode® used by the CFG (Raman et al.
2006)
the LINUCS notation
and Glycominds Ltd.;
(Bohne-Lang et al. 2001) used in GLYCOSCIENCES.de
(Lütteke et al. 2006); the schemes of the CCSD (Doubet et al.
1989; the extended IUPAC notation of CarbBank); the Protein

496

Data Bank (PDB) (Henrick et al. 2008); and the Bacterial
Carbohydrate Structure Database (BCSDB; Toukach and
Knirel 2005). To ensure unambiguous encoding of glycans,
MonosaccharideDB is capable of
translating carbohydrate
residue names from different encoding schema into a unique
notation and vice versa.

EUROCarbDB database
The central aim of the EUROCarbDB design study was to
develop a comprehensive, relational database of experimen-
tally determined carbohydrate structures, supported by bio-
logical context information, literature references and empirical
structural evidence. For the purpose of the initial design
study, MS, HPLC and NMR data were designed by the
EUROCarbDB. The interaction of these database sections is
summarized in Figure 2. Here, we outline the central glycan
structure domain as well as the three evidence domains (and
the experimental features they support). Technical details will
be described in subsequent publications.

Core database. The purpose of the core database is to act as a
central resource of glycan structures, associated biological
contexts and references. Glycan structures are considered to
be the focal point of the core database and they are used to
connect the evidence domains to the core domain (Figure 2).
The initial version of the EUROCarbDB was seeded with
glycan structures as described in the Structure translation
section. Additional
structures and data have also been
incorporated by EUROCarbDB partners, for example, from
the GlycoBase database (Campbell et al. 2008). Each
structure entry in EUROCarbDB is encoded in the database in
GlycoCT format as described previously.

The association of structure to biological source is captured
by the shared biological context module. A biological context

An open-access platform for glycoinformatics

Fig. 2. Architecture of EUROCarbDB. The core database contains the four components structure, biological context, (experimental) evidence and references.
Biological context comprises several categories (blue) which utilize the controlled vocabularies obtained from external databases (NCBI, MeSH). References
(green) are also obtained from external databases such as PubMed. A key feature of EUROCarbDB is the internal storage of experimental evidence (right) for a
glycan sequence.

within the EUROCarbDB is deﬁned as the amalgamation of a
speciﬁc taxonomy and tissue, together with a varying number
of disease and perturbation associations. EUROCarbDB
exclusively uses controlled vocabularies derived from and
linked directly to the public domain ontologies of NCBI
Taxonomy (Sayers et al. 2009), and the MeSH categories A,
C and D (“Anatomy”, “Diseases” and “Chemicals and Drugs”
respectively; Lowe and Barnett 1994). These controlled voca-
bularies are also innately hierarchical, such that a structure
linked to “Homo sapiens”, “Hepatocytes” and “Hepatic
cellular carcinoma” is hierarchically related to and therefore
searchable by reference to the more general nodes for
“Mammalia”, “Liver” and “Neoplasms”.

EUROCarbDB can store references for both glycan struc-
tures and experimental evidence in the form of PubMed IDs,
external database identiﬁers and other internet resources. The
current EUROCarbDB policy for submission of a unique
glycan sequence requires that at least one published literature
reference be supplied which describes the structure elucidation
process, a link to an external database or that experimental
evidence be submitted.

The ability to associate any structure entry with correspond-
ing properties or features results in a fully annotated database
of sequence information and metadata collections, which in
turn provides the technical basis for sophisticated querying
the database via the user interface.

Experimental evidence. A key design objective of
the
EUROCarbDB was the creation of a database infrastructure
which supports the deposition, analysis, annotation and
curation of experimental data from the analytical techniques
of HPLC, MS and NMR—the most popular techniques for
the structure elucidation of carbohydrates. The experimental
data section of EUROCarbDB currently supports the input
(archival) of raw data, and the interpretation of these data can
for one or more
provide
the
carbohydrate
context.
However, EUROCarbDB can also accept new structures for

experimental
structures

in a given biological

evidence

which the evidence (raw or interpreted data) is no longer
available. In this case, at
least one published article in a
peer-reviewed journal or the link to an external database entry
must be provided.

High-performance liquid chromatography. One major aim of
the EUROCarbDB design study was to develop and provide a
framework for algorithms and tools to facilitate the deposition
and interpretation of HPLC data. Here, an innovative
glycoinformatic suite of well-curated databases and analytical
tools has been developed to support the growing demand for
HPLC data processing resources, such as GlycoBase and
auto-glucose unit (GU; Campbell et al. 2008). These tools are
complemented by a series of data entry and processing
workﬂows supported by a robust database framework with
interfaces for retrieving structural and experimental data.

The data model is composed of one experimental evidence
section and one metadata section—allowing for the complete
description of an HPLC experiment. The experimental evi-
dence section is used to associate glycan sequences (stored
within the central EUROCarbDB sequence database) with
their HPLC elution positions (normalized retention times,
expressed as GU values). The metadata section allows for
the storage of the following information:
type,
chromatographic conditions and data processing. In addition,
the associated biological context metadata can be stored for
each HPLC experiment—using the previously deﬁned facili-
ties of the core component of the EUROCarbDB.

instrument

Mass spectrometry. Is a widely used experimental technique
for
the elucidation of glycan structures, either as found
attached to speciﬁc entities or within complex samples
(Harvey 1999, 2006, 2008). Therefore, an extensive collection
of tools and databases has been created.

The MS data model and interface are completely integrated
within the facilities of the EUROCarbDB core database and
were designed to provide comprehensive workﬂows from the
acquisition of raw MS data to the ﬁnal deposition of data into

497

C-W von der Lieth et al.

Fig. 3. Proposed experimental workﬂow for uploading MS data into EUROCarbDB. Starting from acquired raw data, the subsequent use of MS vendor’s
software (top row) and the newly developed tools Glyco-Peakﬁnder (middle row) and GlycoWorkbench (bottom row) allows the user to perform structure
determination, peak assignments and annotation and data submission to EUROCarbDB.

the database (Figure 3).
In combination with the tools,
described in the software tools section, the workﬂows allow
experimentalists to cascade all steps of structure identiﬁcation.
Starting with the generation of peak lists (using existing MS
software), the new tool called Glyco-Peakﬁnder is used to cal-
culate monosaccharide compositions from which structure can-
didates are generated. The GlycoWorkbench tool is then used
to match the peak lists with the structure candidates—produ-
cing fully annotated spectra. Finally, the web interface of the
EUROCarbDB (discussed subsequently) is used to upload the
results into the MS evidence domain, which has been designed
to store raw spectra, their subsequent annotations and the meta-
data required to fully describe each experiment, including bio-
logical context, experimental conditions and other parameters.

Nuclear magnetic resonance. The inherent volume and
complexity of the raw and interpreted NMR data generated for
glycan structure elucidation requires a sophisticated data model.
After the evaluation of various alternatives, it was decided to
use the CCPN data model (Collaborative Computing Project
for NMR, http://www.ccpn.ac.uk/index.html), for storing NMR
evidence in EUROCarbDB (Vranken et al. 2005). At
the
moment only complete CCPN projects can be submitted to the
database, but
input of experimental data and
assignments would be easy to implement.

the manual

Glycan structures may be queried by a variety of structural,
reference and biological context criteria. Queries may also be
cascaded, in which results from previous queries may be nar-
rowed further by a subsequent query. EUROCarbDB also per-
forms substructure queries entirely within the database via a
novel algorithm, which allows for very fast searches.

Users initiate queries of the database using the top naviga-
tion bar that provides links for: browse, search, contribute and
tools. Below the navigation bar is the main content area that
is used for, query input and result set display. Panels on the
right-hand side of the interface allows for XML export and
the selection of glycan structure visual representation. This
component displays links to other databases and components
of the EUROCarbDB that are related to the currently dis-
played information. For example, the results of an automatic
substructure search are displayed on this component when a
glycan information page is being viewed.

For the upload of structures and data to the EUROCarbDB,
contributors are guided through a sequence of input pages.
Beginning with drawing the glycan structure, followed by
selecting the biological context, entering the reference data
and, ﬁnally, uploading spectra and/or chromatograms in a
step-by-step fashion. The GlycanBuilder tool
is also used
extensively throughout the user interface as an input mechan-
ism wherever structural inputs are required.

The EUROCarbDB web portal (www.ebi.ac.uk/eurocarb). The
web-based user interface of the EUROCarbDB allows for
searching and browsing deposited information as well as for
submitting new structures and experimental data to the
database. Users can browse the database by various aspects of
structure, experimental evidence,
tissue, disease
and perturbation. Each glycan structure has an individual
“entry” page (Figure 4) that can be accessed either by its
EUROCarbDB identiﬁer or via links from browsing and
querying pages.

taxonomy,

Software tools
From the beginning, it was obvious that the development of
tools for semi-automatic interpretation of MS spectra, NMR
data or HPLC proﬁles was fundamental to the aims of the
the software tools Glyco-Peakﬁnder and
project. Therefore,
GlycoWorkbench for the interpretation of MS data, autoGU for
HPLC analysis and ProSpectND and CASPER (Computer-
Assisted SPectrum Evaluation of Regular polysaccharides) for
NMR analysis were produced. Figure 5 displays the relation-
ships that exist between these tools and the EUROCarbDB.

498

An open-access platform for glycoinformatics

Fig. 4. EUROCarbDB web portal. Screenshot demonstrates the information shown for each glycan structure within the database. Features of note include: links
to evidence, annotated biological contexts and references, control panel to change graphical representation of structures, automatic superstructure search and main
navigation bar.

is

an

glycan

2-aminobenzamide-labelled

GlycoBase and autoGU. GlycoBase (http://glycobase.nibrt.ie:
8080/database/show_glycobase.action)
evidence
database containing the normalized HPLC elution positions
for
structures. A
standalone release of the database was described previously
(Campbell et al. 2008), which has now been extended and
fully integrated within the EUROCarbDB framework. Brieﬂy,
GlycoBase contains GU values for deﬁned glycans obtained
from a variety of
sources. The information concerning
biological source, exoglycosidase digestions (enzymes used,
glycan products) and supporting publications is available
through the EUROCarbDB core database model. All
structures were determined by a combination of normal-phase
HPLC with exoglycosidase sequencing and/or were conﬁrmed
by MS, e.g. MALDI-MS, ESI-MS, ESI-MS/MS, LC-ESI-MS
and LC-ESI-MS/MS.

An intuitive workﬂow allows users to upload a series of
retention values and percentage areas from propriety HPLC
software. When combined with exoglycosidase information
using a simple step-by-step workﬂow a GlycoBase search (all
data or a speciﬁed subset) can be performed. Initial putative
structure assignments for the undigested retention list are pro-
gressively analyzed and subsequently reﬁned with supporting
exoglycosidase data, using the autoGU tool. Using data from
a series of exoglycosidases, autoGU creates a reﬁned list of
structural assignments that match the supporting digest foot-
print, i.e. observed shifts in GU values are due to the cleavage
of
terminal monosaccharides whose identities depend on

Fig. 5. Relationships between analysis tools and the EUROCarbDB. The
ﬁgure represents the analytical workﬂows designed for EUROCarbDB,
speciﬁcally highlighting the central role of the developed tools.

enzyme speciﬁcity. GlycoBase in combination with autoGU
can be used to interpret and assign HPLC proﬁles; providing
an invaluable tool
is frequently used by international
biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, as well as
academic institutions (Saldova et al. 2007; Abd Hamid et al.

that

499

C-W von der Lieth et al.

2008; Royle et al. 2008; Liu et al. 2010; Marino et al. 2010;
Tharmalingam et al. 2010).

Glyco-Peakﬁnder

Glyco-Peakﬁnder.
(http://www.glyco-
peakﬁnder.org; Maass et al. 2007) is a web-based software tool
for semi-automatic de novo composition analysis of glycans,
providing computer assistance in the analysis of fragmentation
patterns and the laborious manual annotation of all kinds of
carbohydrate MS spectra. Thus, the software can be used for
the prediction and veriﬁcation of the annotations which can be
entered into EUROCarbDB, and workﬂows have been deﬁned
which integrate Glyco-Peakﬁnder into the input strategy for
MS evidence in EUROCarbDB. The software functionalities
are also available within GlycoWorkbench.

with

GlycoWorkbench

fragment masses

(http://www.
GlycoWorkbench.
glycoworkbench.org; Ceroni et al. 2008)
is a standalone
desktop application that provides a suite of tools for the routine
annotation and computer-assisted interpretation of glycan mass
spectra. A key feature is the semi-automated correlation of
observed
computer-generated
fragmentation patterns on input structures proposed by the
researcher. The graphical interface provides an environment in
which structure models can be rapidly assembled using
GlycanBuilder, automatically matched with MSn data and
compared with assess the best candidate. GlycoWorkbench
provides a fully integrated workﬂow to generate an annotated
list of peaks from an MS experiment and to upload the results
to the database. The software supports a wide variety of
structural constituents and annotation options, as well as an
exhaustive collection of fragmentation types.

Glyco-Peakﬁnder and GlycoWorkbench software tools have
been widely used for calculation of monosaccharide compo-
sitions, annotation of mass spectra and identiﬁcation of oligo-
saccharide fragments obtained by tandem MS. Examples are,
inter alia, the structural characterization of N-glycans from the
freshwater snail Biomphalaria glabrata (Lehr et al. 2007),
glycomic analyses of N- and O-linked carbohydrate epitopes
of the neural cell adhesion molecule CD24 from mouse brain
(Bleckmann, Geyer, Lieberoth, et al. 2009; Bleckmann,
Geyer, Reinhold, et al. 2009),
the characterization of the
acidic N-glycans of the zona pellucida of prepuberal pigs (von
Witzendorff et al. 2009), glycomic analyses of human neutro-
phil N- and O-linked carbohydrate epitopes from Babu et al.
(2009), analysis of the human seminal plasma glycome (Pang
et al. 2009) and structural elucidation of glycosaminoglycans
(Tissot et al. 2008).

Computer-assisted spectrum evaluation of regular
polysaccharides
CASPER
(http://www.casper.organ.su.se/eurocarbdb/casper.
action) is a software tool which uses empirical increment rules
based on experimental reference data to perform 1H and 13C
NMR chemical shift prediction for oligo- and polysaccharides
(Jansson et al. 2006; Stenutz 2009). The reference database has
been derived from standardized measurements on a representa-
tive collection of mono-, di- and trisaccharides (substructures).
The data for
the constituent monosaccharides comprising
any glycan are used to create a zero-order prediction set.

500

(glycosylation

shifts), whereas

Differences between the observed chemical shifts for mono-
and disaccharides provide a set of ﬁrst-order chemical shift
increments
trisaccharides
provide additional second-order chemical shift corrections for
vicinal branch points. This means that CASPER can be used
both as a reference tool to retrieve chemical shifts of monosac-
charides as well as to calculate the chemical shifts of complex
oligo- and polysaccharides for comparison with experimental
data and thereby aid in structure assignment.

In a complementary manner, CASPER can be used for
glycan structure prediction on the basis of NMR data. As input
CASPER accepts uncorrelated 1H and 13C chemical shifts, or
correlated pairs of 13C/1H chemical shifts (e.g. from 2D-NMR
experiments). In addition, information about coupling constants
at the anomeric centers (3JHH and 1JCH) can be entered to limit
the number of possible structures and shorten the calculation
times. CASPER can deal with uncertain linkage positions and
unknown residue identities for cases where chemical analysis is
incomplete, but the calculations will require more time. First,
the software generates all possible structures consistent with
data provided by the user. The chemical shifts for each struc-
ture are then predicted as described above and compared with
the experimental chemical shifts of the unknown glycan. The
structures are ranked according to the quality of agreement
between observed and predicted chemical shifts. When necess-
ary, the user can then more efﬁciently plan additional experi-
ments for unambiguous structure conﬁrmation.

CASPER is also used directly by the EUROCarbDB to check
the consistency of new data during submission to the NMR
evidence database and can warn the user about possible mistakes
in NMR signal assignments (large deviations between observed
and predicted chemical shifts). CASPER can use CCPN projects
as data input and can also save results in that format.

for

the

features

an open-source,

end-user
ProSpectND. ProSpectND is
software for
the processing and evaluation of one- and
multidimensional NMR data (http://sourceforge.net/projects/
prospectnd/). It runs natively on all major platforms (Unix/
X-windows, Microsoft Windows and Mac OSX). Through
versatile scripting tools, raw data from both Bruker and Varian
NMR spectrometers can be handled. ProSpectND provides
comprehensive
entire data processing
workﬂow. The optimally processed spectra can then be
transferred to the CCPN analysis
the signal
assignment phase. In addition, ProSpectND can be used to
carry
one-dimensional
1H-NMR spectrum simulations for deﬁned spin systems. Such
simulations, which include the second-order effects of strong
coupling, have been shown to be of great assistance in
conﬁrming the details of carbohydrate signal assignments,
especially in the case of overlapping multiplets. ProSpectND
is feature rich and open source, making it a good alternative
to commercial processing software.

quantum-mechanical

exact

tools

out

for

Outlook

Recent experience clearly indicates that, following in the foot-
steps of genomics and proteomics, the next explosively devel-
oping ﬁelds in the biosciences will be glycomics and

metabolomics. The EUROCarbDB initiative has removed one
of the key stumbling blocks impeding progress in glycomics
by providing the glycobiology community with (i) universal
standards for
the representation of monosaccharides and
complex glycans, (ii) a freely accessible database of known
glycan structures and experimental evidence, which embodies
these standards,
tools for
carbohydrate researchers and (iv) a technical framework of
open-source code libraries and applications for carbohydrate
bioinformatics.

(iii) freely accessible analytical

Funding

(http://www.eurocarbdb.org,
The EUROCarbDB initiative
Design Studies Related to the Development of Distributed,
Web-based European Carbohydrate Databases) was funded by
the European Union as a Research Infrastructure Design Study
implemented as a Speciﬁc Support Action under the FP6
Research Framework Program (RIDS Contract number 011952).
D.R.D. is funded by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council (BBF0083091 to A.D., S.M.H.).

Acknowledgements

We also thank the many developers who have contributed
time and effort to produce the multitude of open-source code
libraries used by EUROCarbDB.

Conﬂict of interest
None declared.

Abbreviations

CASPER, computer-assisted spectrum evaluation of regular
polysaccharides; CCPN, Collaborative Computing Project for
NMR; CCSD, Complex Carbohydrate Structure Database;
CFG, consortium for functional glycomics; CT, connection
table; GU, glucose unit; HPLC, high-performance liquid
chromatography; KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes; LGPL, Lesser General Public License; MS, mass
spectrometry; NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance.

References

Abd Hamid UM, Royle L, Saldova R, Radcliffe CM, Harvey DJ, Storr SJ,
Pardo M, Antrobus R, Chapman CJ, Zitzmann N, et al. 2008. A strategy to
reveal potential glycan markers from serum glycoproteins associated with
breast cancer progression. Glycobiology. 18:1105–1118.

An HJ, Kronewitter SR, de Leoz ML, Lebrilla CB. 2009. Glycomics and

disease markers. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 13:601–607.

Aoki-Kinoshita KF. 2008. An introduction to bioinformatics for glycomics

research. PLoS Comput Biol. 4:e1000075.

Aoki KF, Yamaguchi A, Ueda N, Akutsu T, Mamitsuka H, Goto S, Kanehisa M.
2004. KCaM (KEGG Carbohydrate Matcher): A software tool for analyz-
ing the structures of carbohydrate sugar chains. Nucleic Acids Res. 32:
W267–W272.

Arnold JN, Saldova R, Hamid UM, Rudd PM. 2008. Evaluation of the serum
N-linked glycome for the diagnosis of cancer and chronic inﬂammation.
Proteomics. 8:3284–3293.

Babu P, North SJ, Jang-Lee J, Chalabi S, Mackerness K, Stowell SR,
Cummings RD, Rankin S, Dell A, Haslam SM. 2009. Structural character-
isation of neutrophil glycans by ultra sensitive mass spectrometric glyco-
mics methodology. Glycoconj J. 26:975–986.

An open-access platform for glycoinformatics

Bielik AM, Zaia J. 2009. Historical overview of glycoanalysis. Methods Mol

Biol. 600:9–30.

Bleckmann C, Geyer H, Lieberoth A, Splittstoesser F, Liu Y, Feizi T,
Schachner M, Kleene R, Reinhold V, Geyer R. 2009. O-glycosylation
pattern of CD24 from mouse brain. Biol Chem. 390:627–645.

Bleckmann C, Geyer H, Reinhold V, Lieberoth A, Schachner M, Kleene R,
Geyer R. 2009. Glycomic analysis of N-linked carbohydrate epitopes from
CD24 of mouse brain. J Proteome Res. 8:567–582.

Blow N. 2009. Glycobiology: A spoonful of sugar. Nature. 457:617–620.
Bohne-Lang A, Lang E, Forster T, von der Lieth CW. 2001. LINUCS: Linear
notation for unique description of carbohydrate sequences. Carbohydr Res.
336:1–11.

Campbell MP, Royle L, Radcliffe CM, Dwek RA, Rudd PM. 2008.
for HPLC-based glycan analysis.

and autoGU: Tools

GlycoBase
Bioinformatics. 24:1214–1216.

Ceroni A, Dell A, Haslam SM. 2007. The GlycanBuilder: A fast, intuitive
and ﬂexible software tool for building and displaying glycan structures.
Source Code Biol Med. 7:2–3.

Ceroni A, Maass K, Geyer H, Geyer R, Dell A, Haslam SM. 2008.
GlycoWorkbench: A tool for the computer-assisted annotation of mass
spectra of glycans. J Proteome Res. 7:1650–1659.

Cooper CA, Harrison MJ, Wilkins MR, Packer NH. 2001. GlycoSuiteDB: A
new curated relational database of glycoprotein glycan structures and their
biological sources. Nucleic Acids Res. 29:332–335.

Cooper CA, Joshi HJ, Harrison MJ, Wilkins MR, Packer NH. 2003.
GlycoSuiteDB: A curated relational database of glycoprotein glycan struc-
tures and their biological sources. 2003 update. Nucleic Acids Res.
31:511–513.

Dennis JW, Lau KS, Demetriou M, Nabi IR. 2009. Adaptive regulation at the

cell surface by N-glycosylation. Trafﬁc. 10:1569–1578.

Doubet S, Albersheim P. 1992. CarbBank. Glycobiology. 2:505.
Doubet S, Bock K, Smith D, Darvill A, Albersheim P. 1989. The Complex

Carbohydrate Structure Database. Trends Biochem Sci. 14:475–477.

Frank M, Schloissnig S. 2010. Bioinformatics and molecular modeling in gly-

cobiology. Cell Mol Life Sci. 67:2749–2772.

Harvey DJ. 1999. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spec-

trometry of carbohydrates. Mass Spectrom Rev. 18:349–450.

Harvey DJ. 2006. Analysis of carbohydrates and glycoconjugates by matrix-
assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry: An update covering
the period 1999–2000. Mass Spectrom Rev. 25:595–662.

Harvey DJ. 2008. Analysis of carbohydrates and glycoconjugates by matrix-
assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry: An update covering
the period 2001–2002. Mass Spectrom Rev. 27:125–201.

Hashimoto K, Goto S, Kawano S, Aoki-Kinoshita KF, Ueda N, Hamajima M,
Kawasaki T, Kanehisa M. 2006. KEGG as a glycome informatics resource.
Glycobiology. 16:63R–70R.

Henrick K, Feng Z, Bluhm WF, Dimitropoulos D, Doreleijers JF, Dutta S,
Flippen-Anderson JL, Ionides J, Kamada C, Krissinel E, et al. 2008.
Remediation of the protein data bank archive. Nucleic Acids Res. 36:
D426–D433.

Herget S, Ranzinger R, Maass K, von der Lieth CW. 2008. GlycoCT-a unify-

ing sequence format for carbohydrates. Carbohydr Res. 232:2162–2171.

Jansson PE, Stenutz R, Widmalm G. 2006. Sequence determination of oligo-
saccharides and regular polysaccharides using NMR spectroscopy and a
novel web-based version of the computer program CASPER. Carbohydr
Res. 341:1003–1010.

Kikuchi N, Kameyama A, Nakaya S, Ito H, Sato T, Shikanai T, Takahashi Y,
Narimatsu H. 2005. The carbohydrate sequence markup language
(CabosML): An XML
structures.
Bioinformatics. 21:1717–1718.

carbohydrate

description

of

Lehr T, Geyer H, Maass K, Doenhoff MJ, Geyer R. 2007. Structural charac-
terization of N-glycans from the freshwater snail Biomphalaria glabrata
cross-reacting with Schistosoma mansoni glycoconjugates. Glycobiology.
17:82–103.

Liu L, Telford JE, Knezevic A, Rudd PM. 2010. High-throughput glycoanaly-
glycobiology. Biochem Soc Trans.

technology

systems

for

tical
38:1374–1377.

Lowe HJ, Barnett GO. 1994. Understanding and using the medical subject
headings (MeSH) vocabulary to perform literature searches. JAMA.
271:1103–1108.

Lütteke T, Bohne-Lang A, Loss A, Goetz T, Frank M, von der Lieth CW.
2006. GLYCOSCIENCES.de: An Internet portal to support glycomics and
glycobiology research. Glycobiology. 16:71R–81R.

501

C-W von der Lieth et al.

Maass K, Ranzinger R, Geyer H, von der Lieth CW, Geyer R. 2007.
Glyco-Peakﬁnder – de novo composition analysis of glycoconjugates.
Proteomics. 7:4435–4444.

Marino K, Bones J, Kattla JJ, Rudd PM. 2010. A systematic approach to
protein glycosylation analysis: A path through the maze. Nat Chem Biol.
6:713–723.

Marth JD, Grewal PK. 2008. Mammalian glycosylation in immunity. Nat Rev

Stenutz R. 2009. Automatic spectrum interpretation based on increment rules.
In von der Lieth CW, Lütteke T, et al., editors. Bioinformatics for
Glycobiology
Introduction. Wiley-Blackwell.
p. 311–320.

and Glycomics: An

Taniguchi N, Hancock W, Lubman DM, Rudd PM. 2009. The second golden
age of glycomics: From functional glycomics to clinical applications. J
Proteome Res. 8:425–426.

Tharmalingam T, Marino K, Rudd PM. 2010. Platform technology to identify
potential disease markers and establish heritability and environmental
determinants
of
serum N-glycome. Carbohydr Res.
345:1280–1282.

human

the

Tissot B, Ceroni A, Powell AK, Morris HR, Yates EA, Turnbull JE,
Gallagher
the
structural determination of glycosaminoglycans by mass spectrometry.
Anal Chem.

JT, Dell A, Haslam SM. 2008. Software tool

for

Toukach FV, Knirel YA. 2005. New database of bacterial carbohydrate struc-
Symposium on

International

the XVIII

of

Proceeding

tures.
Glycoconjugates, 216–217.

Vanderschaeghe D, Festjens N, Delanghe J, Callewaert N. 2010. Glycome
proﬁling using modern glycomics technology: Technical aspects and appli-
cations. Biol Chem. 391:149–161.

Velankar S, Best C, Beuth B, Boutselakis CH, Cobley N, Sousa Da Silva AW,
Dimitropoulos D, Golovin A, Hirshberg M, John M, et al. 2010. PDBe:
Protein Data Bank in Europe. Nucleic Acids Res. 38:D308–D317.

von der Lieth CW, Bohne-Lang A, Lohmann KK, Frank M. 2004.
Bioinformatics for glycomics: Status, methods, requirements and perspec-
tives. Brief Bioinform. 5:164–178.

von der Lieth CW, Lütteke T, Frank M. 2006. The role of informatics in gly-
cobiology research with special emphasis on automatic interpretation of
MS spectra. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1760:568–577.

von Witzendorff D, Maass K, Pich A, Ebeling S, Kolle S, Kochel C,
Ekhlasi-Hundrieser M, Geyer H, Geyer R, Topfer-Petersen E. 2009.
Characterization of the acidic N-linked glycans of the zona pellucida of
prepuberal pigs by a mass spectrometric approach. Carbohydr Res.
344:1541–1549.

Vranken WF, Boucher W, Stevens TJ, Fogh RH, Pajon A, Llinas P, Ulrich
EL, Markley JL, Ionides J, Laue ED. 2005. The CCPN data model for
NMR spectroscopy: Development of a software pipeline. Proteins.
59:687–696.

Widmalm G. 2007. General NMR spectroscopy of carbohydrates and confor-
mational analysis in solution. In Kamerling JP, editor. Comprehensive
Glycoscience. Oxford: Elsevier, p. 101–132.

Zaia J. 2008. Mass spectrometry and the emerging ﬁeld of glycomics. Chem

Biol. 15:881–892.

Immunol. 8:874–887.

Morelle W, Michalski JC. 2007. Analysis of protein glycosylation by mass

spectrometry. Nat Protoc. 2:1585–1602.

North SJ, Hitchen PG, Haslam SM, Dell A. 2009. Mass spectrometry in the
analysis of N-linked and O-linked glycans. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 19:498–506.
Packer NH, von der Lieth CW, Aoki-Kinoshita KF, Lebrilla CB, Paulson JC,
Raman R, Rudd P, Sasisekharan R, Taniguchi N, York WS. 2008. Frontiers
in glycomics: Bioinformatics and biomarkers in disease. An NIH white
paper prepared from discussions by the focus groups at a workshop on the
NIH campus, Bethesda MD (September 11–13, 2006). Proteomics. 8:8–20.
Pang PC, Tissot B, Drobnis EZ, Morris HR, Dell A, Clark GF. 2009.
Analysis of the human seminal plasma glycome reveals the presence of
immunomodulatory carbohydrate functional groups. J Proteome Res.
8:4906–4915.

Raman R, Venkataraman M, Ramakrishnan S, Lang W, Raguram S,
Sasisekharan R. 2006. Advancing glycomics: Implementation strategies at
the consortium for functional glycomics. Glycobiology. 16:82R–90R.

Ranzinger R, Frank M, von der Lieth CW, Herget S. 2009. Glycome-DB.org:
A portal for querying across the digital world of carbohydrate sequences.
Glycobiology. 19:1563–1567.

Ranzinger R, Herget S, Wetter T, von der Lieth CW. 2008. GlycomeDB - inte-
gration of open-access carbohydrate structure databases. BMC Bioinformatics.
9:384.

Royle L, Campbell MP, Radcliffe CM, White DM, Harvey DJ, Abrahams JL,
Kim YG, Henry GW, Shadick NA, Weinblatt ME, et al. 2008.
HPLC-based analysis of serum N-glycans on a 96-well plate platform with
dedicated database software. Anal Biochem. 376:1–12.

Rudd PM, Elliott T, Cresswell P, Wilson IA, Dwek RA. 2001. Glycosylation

and the immune system. Science. 291:2370–2376.

Saldova R, Royle L, Radcliffe CM, Abd Hamid UM, Evans R, Arnold JN,
Banks RE, Hutson R, Harvey DJ, Antrobus R, et al. 2007. Ovarian cancer
is associated with changes in glycosylation in both acute-phase proteins
and IgG. Glycobiology. 17:1344–1356.

Sayers EW, Barrett T, Benson DA, Bryant SH, Canese K, Chetvernin V,
Church DM, DiCuccio M, Edgar R, Federhen S, et al. 2009. Database
resources of the National Center for Biotechnology Information. Nucleic
Acids Res. 37:D5–15.

502

