Experimental  Neurobiology
Vol.  19,  pages  71∼74,  September  2010

Isolation  and  Characterization  of  Chicken  NPAS3

Jiheon  Shin,  Hye  Yun  Jeong,  Kyung  Eun  Lee  and  Jaesang  Kim*

Division  of  Life  and  Pharmaceutical  Sciences,  Ewha  Womans  University, 

Seoul  120-750,  Korea

ABSTRACT

Here  we  describe  characterization  of  chicken  neuronal  Per-Arnt-Sim  domain  3 
(NPAS3)  gene  during  embryogenesis  including  examinations  of  expression  pattern  and 
function  of  the  gene.  RTPCR  assay  showed  that  the  primary  tissue  of  expression  for 
this  gene  is  the  central  nervous  system  (CNS)  while  RNA  in  situ  hybridization  assay 
confirmed  that  NPAS3  was  expressed  in  the  ventricular  zone  of  developing  neural  tube 
as  early  as  Hamburger-Hamilton  (HH)  stage  20.  Ectopic  over-expression  of  the  gene 
in  ovo  in  the  developing  chicken  neural  tube  by  electroporation  had  little  effect  on 
stem  cell  population,  overall  neurogenesis,  and  motor  neuron  differentiation.  We 
discuss  the  implications  of  our  observation.

Key  words:  NPAS3,  CNS,  neural  tube,  chicken,  in  ovo  electroporation

INTRODUCTION

    Neuronal  PAS  domain  protein  1  (NPAS1)  and 
NPAS3  belong  to  the  basic  helix-loop-helix  (bHLH) 
family  of  transcription  factors  (Erbel-Sieler  et  al., 
2004).  The  presence  of  PAS  (Per-Arnt-Sim)  domain, 
which  mediates  protein-protein  interaction,  defines 
this  subfamily  within  the  larger  bHLH  gene  family 
(Partch  and  Gardner,  2010).  NPAS3  has  recently 
gained  much  attention  due  to  its  possible  association 
with  schizophrenia.  Specifically,  a  translocation  between 
chromosomes  9  and  14,  resulting  in  disruption  of 
NPAS3,  has  been  associated  with  schizophrenia 
and  learning  disability  (Pickard  et  al.,  2005;  Pickard 
et  al.,  2006).  In  addition,  NPAS3  knockout  mice 
show  behavioral  abnormalities,  indicating  a  possible 
developmental  and  regulatory  role  of  NPAS3  that 

*To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed.
TEL:  82-2-3277-3414,  FAX:  82-2-3277-3760
e-mail:  jkim1964@ewha.ac.kr
Received  September  20,  2010
Accepted  for  publication  September  29,  2010

may  be  etiologically  relevant  to  various  forms  of  psy-
chosis  (Erbel-Sieler  et  al.,  2004).  Such  hypothesis 
is  further  bolstered  by  that  NPAS3  is  expressed  in 
inhibitory  interneuron  (Erbel-Sieler  et  al.,  2004)  and 
that  NPAS3  knockout  mice  show  significant  defi-
ciency  in  adult  neurogenesis  in  the  hippocampal 
dentate  gyrus  (Pieper  et  al.,  2005).
    Remarkably,  little  is  known  about  the  function  of 
NPAS3  during  embryogenesis.  This  is  despite  the 
fact  that  NPAS3  is  widely  expressed  in  the  de-
veloping  CNS  in  mouse  (Brunskill  et  al.,  1999)  and 
that  adult-stage  phenotype  of  the  NPAS3  knockout 
mouse  may  be  affected  by  early  developmental  role 
of  NPAS3.  Clearly,  the  lack  of  visible  neural  pheno-
type  during  development  limited  extent  of  interest 
thus  far,  and  other  approaches  than  gene  targeting 
in  mouse  may  be  required  for  functional  analysis  of 
NPAS3.  To  this  end,  we  sought  to  use  the  chicken 
system  in  which  neural  tube  development  and  neuro-
genesis  therein  are  relatively  well  characterized  and 
gain-of-function  assays  are  possible  (Nakamura  and 
Funahashi,  2001).  We  present  our  preliminary  results 

72 Jiheon  Shin,  et  al.

from  RTPCR,  RNA  in  situ  hybridization  and  in  ovo 
electroporation  assays.

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS

RTPCR

    Total  RNA  preparations  were  obtained  from  neural 
tube,  heart,  liver  and  limb  of  a  HH  stage  29  chicken 
embryo  with  TRIzol  (Invitrogen).  Random  hexamer- 
primed  reverse  transcription  was  performed  on  each 
RNA  preparation  with  SuperScriptTM  First-Strand 
Synthesis  System  for  RT-PCR  (Invitrogen)  following 
the  manufacturer's  protocol.  First-strand  cDNAs  thus 
generated  served  as  templates  for  PCR  amplifica-
tion.  For  the  amplification  of  NPAS3  cDNA,  a  pair 
of  primers,  5'-AGTTGTTGCCACTGCCTGC-3'  and 
5'-CATGTGGCAGTCAATCCTGAC-3',  was  used  for 
a  single  22-cycle  round  of  PCR.  For  GAPDH,  primers 
were  5'-GAAACCAGCCAAGTATGATGA-3'  and  5'-T 
CACTCCTTGGATGCCATG-3'.  The  annealing  tem-
perature  was  58oC.

RNA  in  situ  hybridization

    RNA  in  situ  hybridization  on  frozen  embryo  sections 
was  performed  using  the  methods  described  by  Ma 
et  al.  (1998)  with  minor  modifications.  Detailed  pro-
tocol  is  available  upon  request.  The  probe  template 
for  NPAS3  was  derived  from  the  RTPCR  assay 
described  above.  The  probe  for  Sox2  was  derived 
from  a  full  length  chicken  Sox2  cDNA  clone  (Bylund 
et  al.,  2003).  Embryo  sections  were  from  the  fore-
limb  level.

In  ovo  electroporation  and  immunohistochemistry
    In  ovo  electroporation  into  chicken  embryo  was 
performed  using  methods  described  by  Nakamura 
and  Funahashi  (2001)  with  minor  modifications.  De-
tailed  protocol  is  available  upon  request.  Full  length 
Xenopus  NPAS3  cDNA  (accession  number:  BC123-
929)  in  pCMV-SPORT6  was  purchased  from  Open 
Biosystems.  A  GFP  expression  plasmid,  pEGFP-N1 
(Clontech)  was  co-electroporated  for  assessment  of 
electroporation.  Embryos  were  harvested  48  hours 
after  electroporation,  fixed  in  4%  paraformaldehyde 
and  embedded  in  30%  sucrose  and  OCT  prior  to 
sectioning.  Primary  antibodies  used  and  titres  were: 
mouse  anti-GFP  (Molecular  Probes,  1：400),  mouse 
anti-Tuj1  (Covance,  1：400),  mouse  anti-isl1/2  (De-

velopmental  Studies  Hybridoma  Bank,  1：20)  and 
rabbit  anti-Sox2  (Millipore,  1：500).  Secondary  anti-
bodies  were  goat  anti-rabbit-IgG  Alexa  594  and  goat 
anti-mouse-IgG  Alexa  594  (Molecular  Probes).  Em-
bryo  sections  were  from  the  forelimb  level.

RESULTS

    We  first  sought  to  examine  the  spatiotemporal 
expression  pattern  of  chicken  NPAS3.  Based  on  the 
predicted  chicken  NPAS3  sequence  (NCBI  Reference 
Sequence:  XM_421232.2),  we  were  able  to  designed 
a  pair  of  oligonulcleotide  primers  that  spanned  mul-
tiple  exons  for  PCR  amplification  of  a  partial  cDNA 
fragment.  For  RTPCR  examination,  we  prepared 
cDNAs  from  neural  tube,  heart,  liver,  and  limbs  of 
Hamburger-Hamilton  stage  29  chicken  embryo.  A 
strong  expression  was  readily  detected  from  the 
neural  tube  while  a  much  weaker  expression  was 
seen  in  limb  and  heart  but  no  expression  was  seen 
in  liver  (Fig.  1).  This  is  consistent  with  the  neural  ti-
ssue  being  the  principal  tissue  of  NPAS3  expre-
ssion  during  embryogenesis. 
    For  more  detailed  examination  of  spatiotemporal 
expression  pattern,  we  utilized  RNA  in  situ  hybridi-
zation.  Embryos  from  HH  stages  20  and  25  were 
examined.  Sox2,  a  transcription  factor  expressed  in 
the  ventricular  zone  of  developing  CNS  was  used 
for  comparison.  Clear  expression  was  seen  in  the 
ventricular  zone  of  neural  tube  for  both  Sox2  (Fig. 
2A)  and  NPAS3  (Fig.  2B)  in  HH  stage  20  embryo. 
The  two  genes  showed  significant  overlap  in  ex-
pression.  HH  stage  25  embryo  also  showed  a  si-
milar  pattern  of  overlap  (Fig.  2C,  D)  for  both  genes 
although  by  HH  stage  25  the  relative  extent  of 
expression  significantly  dwindled  for  both  genes. 

Fig.  1.  RTPCR  analysis  of  the  NPAS3  expression.  Agarose  gel 
electrophoresis  of  the  PCR  products  is  shown.  cDNAs  derived 
from  indicated  tissues  were  amplified  with  gene  specific  primers 
for  NPAS3  and  GAPDH.

Chicken  NPAS3 73

         

Fig.  2.  NPAS3  expression  in  developing  neural  tube  of  HH  stage 
20  (A,  B)  and  HH  stage  25  (C,  D)  chicken  embryo  examined  by 
RNA  in  situ  hybridization  assay.  The  adjacent  sections  shown  are 
hybridized  with  antisense  RNA  probes  for  Sox2  (A,  C)  and 
NPAS3  (B,  D).  The  former  was  used  as  a  marker  of  the 
ventricular  zone  of  developing  neural  tube.

These  results  are  highly  reminiscent  of  the  ex-
pression  pattern  seen  in  mouse  embryos  (Brunskill 
et  al.,  1999)  and  indicate  that  function  during  neu-
rogenesis  is  likely  conserved.
    As  the  full  length  cDNA  for  chicken  NPAS3  is  not 
as  yet  available,  we  obtained  from  a  commercial 
source  an  expression  plasmid  vector  harboring  the 
full  length  Xenopus  laevis  NPAS3  cDNA.  The  plas-
mid  was  electroporated  into  one  side  of  the  neural 
tube  along  with  a  plasmid  expressing  EGFP.  The 
expression  of  EGFP  was  readily  detected  indicating 
a  successful  electroporation  (Fig.  3A).  In  this  pre-
liminary  study,  we  sought  to  determine  the  gross 
effect  of  NPAS3  over-expression  on  neurogenesis 
by  immunostaining  for  Sox2  (Fig.  3B),  a  marker  for 
undifferentiated  neural  stem  cells,  Tuj1  (Fig.  3C),  a 
pan-neuronal  marker,  and  Isl1  (Fig.  3D),  a  marker 
for  motor  neurons  which  are  the  predominant  neu-
ronal  type  produced  during  early  CNS  development. 
Compared  to  the  contra-lateral  control  side,  little  if 
any  alterations  in  expression  of  the  above  three 

Fig.  3.  Expression  of  neural  tube  cell  markers  shows  unaltered 
expression  after  over-expression  of  NPAS3.  (A)  GFP  was  used 
as  a  marker  for  electroporation.  (B)  Sox2  positive  cells  represent 
neural  stem  cells.  (C,  D)  Tuj1  is  a  pan-neuronal  marker,  and 
Isl1/2  marks  differentiated  motor  neurons.

markers  resulted  from  NPAS3  over-expression  (see 
below).

DISCUSSION

    All  functional  analyses  of  a  given  gene  in  a  given 
in  vitro  or  in  vivo  system  have  inherent  limitations. 
For  example,  reporter  assay,  a  representative  in 
vitro  assay  for  analyzing  function  of  transcription 
factors  typically  utilizes  partial  target  promoter,  hete-
rologous  host  cell,  and  over-expression  of  the  tran-
scription  factor.  Even  gene  targeting  in  vivo,  typically 
carried  out  using  mouse,  has  problems.  A  fre-
quently  encountered  one  is  the  lack  of  phenotypic 
alterations  usually  attributed  to  the  functional  redun-
dancy  of  homologues.  Another  is  the  problem  of 
early  lethality  which  can  prevent  spatiotemporal  func-
tional  analysis.  Even  more  subtle  problem  is  dis-
tinguishing  between  actual  function  of  the  targeted 
gene  and  the  indirect  consequences  of  lacking  the 
gene  from  the  beginning  of  development.

74 Jiheon  Shin,  et  al.

    In  this  regard,  additional  functional  assays  that 
can  avoid  problems  from  other  assays  should  rep-
resent  a  valuable  complement.  In  ovo  electroporation 
using  chicken  embryos  has  long  been  used  for 
examining  gene  function  in  the  developing  central 
nervous  system,  particularly  in  the  neural  tube  (Je-
ssell,  2000).  The  accessibility  of  in  vivo  tissue  for 
de  facto  genetic  manipulation  meant  availability  of 
spatiotemporally-specific  technique  in  analyzing  gene 
function  in  developing  neural  system.  Numerous 
genes  involved  in  proliferation  and  differentiation, 
particularly transcription factors,  have  been functionally 
characterized  in  developing  chicken  neural  tube 
(Jessell,  2000).
    Here,  we  have  shown  for  the  first  time  that 
chicken  NPAS3  is  expressed  in  the  ventricular  zone 
of  developing  central  nervous  system.  The  expre-
ssion  pattern  is  highly  similar  to  that  of  mouse 
which  in  turn  strongly  indicates  functional  conser-
vation.  We  have  also  examined  the  potential  role  of 
NPAS3  by  ectopically  expressing  NPAS3  into  the 
developing  neural  tube.  The  results  indicate  that  the 
effect  of  over-expression  on  gross  neurogenesis  at 
this  stage  is  minimal.  One  of  the  strong  possibilities 
is  that  NPAS3  is  already  at  a  saturating  level,  and 
the  presence  of  additional  NPAS3  has  little  effect 
as  a  consequence.  Another  possibility  is  that  NPAS3 
regulates  not  overt  differentiation  of  neurons  but 
expression  of  subset  of  genes  therein.  In  fact,  it 
has  been  reported  that  although  NPAS3  is  ex-
pressed  in  inhibitory  neurons,  viability  and  anato-
mical  distribution  of  these  neurons  are  not  affected 

in  NPAS3  −/−  mouse  (Erbel-Sieler  et  al.,  2004). 

Rather  gene  targeting  led  to  diminished  expression 
of  reelin,  a  protein  secreted  from  inhibitory  neurons 
(Erbel-Sieler  et  al.,  2004).  Thus,  the  results  from 
this  preliminary  study  notwithstanding,  a  careful 
gene  expression  study  should  be  carried  out  down 
the  road  to  determine  the  function  of  NPAS3.  All 
together,  our  results  establish  basic  conditions  which 
justify  using  chicken  for  future  functional  analysis  of 

NPAS3  during  embryonic  development.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

    This  study  was  supported  by  grants  from  Brain 
Research  Center  of  the  21st  Century  Frontier  Re-
search  Program  (2010K000803)  to  JK.

REFERENCES

Brunskill  EW,  Witte  DP,  Shreiner  AB  and  Potter  SS  (1999) 
Characterization  of  Npas3,  a  novel  basic  helix-loop-helix 
PAS  gene  expressed  in  the  developing  mouse  nervous 
system.  Mech  Dev  88:237-241.

Bylund  M,  Andersson  E,  Novitch  BG  and  Muhr  J  (2003) 
Vertebrate  neurogenesis  is  counteracted  by  Sox1-3  activity. 
Nat  Neurosc  6:1162-1168.

Erbel-Sieler  C,  Dudley  C,  Zhou  Y,  Wu  X,  Estill  SJ,  Han  T, 
Diaz-Arrastia  R,  Brunskill  EW,  Potter  SS  and  McKnight  SL 
(2004)  Behavioral  and  regulatory  abnormalities  in  mice 
deficient  in  the  NPAS1  and  NPAS3  transcription  factors. 
Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  101:13648-13653.

Jessell  TM  (2000)  Neuronal  specification  in  the  spinal  cord: 
inductive  signals  and  transcriptional  codes.  Nat  Rev  Genet 
1:20-29.

Ma  Q,  Chen  Z,  del  Barco  Barrantes  I,  de  la  Pompa  JL  and 
the 
Anderson  DJ  (1998)  neurogenin1 
determination  of  neuronal  precursors  for  proximal  cranial 
sensory  ganglia.  Neuron  20:469-482.

is  essential 

Nakamura  H  and  Funahashi  J  (2001)  Introduction  of  DNA  into 
chick  embryos  by  in  ovo  electroporation.  Methods  24: 
43-48.

Partch  CL  and  Gardner  KH  (2010)  Coactivator  recruitment:  a 
new  role  for  PAS  domains  in  transcriptional  regulation  by 
the  bHLH-PAS  family.  J  Cell  Physiol  223:553-557.

Pickard  BS,  Malloy  MP,  Porteous  DJ,  Blackwood  DH  and 
Muir  WJ  (2005)  Disruption  of  a  brain  transcription  factor, 
NPAS3, 
learning 
disability.  Am  J  Med  Genet  B  Neuropsychiatr  Genet  136B: 
26-32.

is  associated  with  schizophrenia  and 

Pickard  BS,  Pieper  AA,  Porteous  DJ,  Blackwood  DH  and  Muir 
WJ  (2006)  The  NPAS3  gene-emerging  evidence  for  a  role 
in  psychiatric  illness.  Ann  Med  38:439-448.

Pieper  AA,  Wu  X,  Han  TW,  Estill  SJ,  Dang  Q,  Wu  LC, 
Reece-Fincanon  S,  Dudley  CA,  Richardson  JA,  Brat  DJ 
and  McKnight  SL 
(2005)  The  neuronal  PAS  domain 
protein  3  transcription  factor  controls  FGF-mediated  adult 
hippocampal  neurogenesis  in  mice.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci 
USA  102:14052-14057.

for 

