Experimental  Neurobiology
Vol.  19,  pages  165∼172,  December  2010

ZigBee-based  Wireless  Neuro-Stimulator  for 

Improving  Stroke  Recovery

Gookhwa  Kim1,  Hyojeong  Yun2,  Munho  Ryu3,  Yongil  Shin4, 

Hyoungihl  Kim5  and  Yoonseok  Yang3*

1Electronics  and  Telecommunication  Research  Institute  (ETRI),  Daejeon  305-700, 

2Korea  Institute  of  Industrial  Technology  (KITECH),  Cheonan  330-825, 

3Department  of  Biomedical  Engineering,  Chonbuk  National  University,  Jeonju 
561-756,  4Department  of  Rehabilitation  Medicine,  Pusan  National  University 
School  of  Medicine  and  Pusan  National  University  Hospital  Medical  Research 
Institute,  Yangsan  626-770,  5Institute  of  Medical  System  Engineering,  Gwangju 

Institute  of  Science  and  Technology  (GIST),  Gwangju  500-712,  Korea

ABSTRACT

Stroke  is  a  leading  cause  of  adult  disability  and  the  second-leading  cause  of  death 
in  Korea.  It  is  also  the  third-leading  cause  of  death  in  the  United  States,  leading  to  a 
serious  demand  for  new  interventions  to  improve  the  quality  of  life  in  stroke  survivors. 
To  this  end,  direct  cortical  stimulation  using  an  epidural  electrode  has  been  reported 
with  promising  results  in  animal  and  human  studies,  showing  the  potential  for  en-
hancing  the  recovery  in  chronic  stroke  patients.  For  optimal  results,  doctors  must  be 
able  to  modify  the  stimulation  pattern  as  frequently  as  needed  over  a  period  of  time 
for  a  given  patient.  However,  severe  aftereffects  caused  by  stroke  limit  patients’  ac-
tivities,  making  regular  doctor  visits  for  treatment  difficult.  This  study  aims  to  develop 
a  prototype  of  a  telemedicine  system  to  enhance  stroke  recovery  by  using  a  ZigBee- 
based  wireless  neuro-stimulator.  The  ZigBee  is  a  stable  platform  for  many  low-power 
wireless  applications.  To  allow  stroke  patients  to  remotely  obtain  neuro-stimulation  treat-
ments  from  their  doctors,  we  connected  the  ZigBee  to  the  internet.  The  system  also 
allows  doctors  to  personalize  treatment  based  on  the  history  of  the  stimulation  para-
meters.  The  system  developed  here  can  also  be  beneficial  as  a  common  platform  for 
a  wide  range  of  brain  diseases  and  clinical  care  for  which  electric  stimulation  is  used.

Key  words:  electrical  brain  stimulation,  stroke  recovery,  rehabilitation,  ZigBee,  neural 

stimulation

*To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed.
TEL:  82-63-270-4068,  FAX:  82-63-270-2247
e-mail:  ysyangg@gmail.com
Received  September  16,  2010
Accepted  for  publication  December  17,  2010

INTRODUCTION

    Stroke  is  a  leading  cause  of  adult  disability  and 
the  second-leading  cause  of  death  in  Korea.  It  is 
also  the  third-leading  cause  of  death  in  the  United 
States.  Approximately  two-thirds  of  individuals  su-
ffering  a  stroke  survive  and  require  rehabilitation 

166 Gookhwa  Kim,  et  al.

(Hendricks  et  al.,  2002;  Kim  et  al.,  2006a).  The 
natural  plasticity  of 
the  human  brain  generally 
allows  some  nervous  system  recovery  between  3 
and  6  months  after  the  stroke,  and  stroke  patients 
usually  expect  progressive  recovery  during 
that 
time.  Medication  and  physical  therapy  are  common 
treatments  for  strokes  to  facilitate  nerve  recovery 
(Beck  et  al.,  2000;  Neville  et  al.,  2000;  Kim  et  al., 
2006b).  While  early  rehabilitation  treatment  does 
help  patients  regain  pre-stroke  functions,  recovery 
slowly  subsides  after  the  first  month  following  the 
stroke  and  tends  to  level  off  and  stagnate  in  the 
long  term  (Bonita  and  Beaglehole,  1988;  Duncan, 
1992;  Brown  et  al.,  2003;  Calautti  and  Baron,  2003; 
Brown,  2006;  Canavero,  2006).  After  about  six 
months,  stroke  survivors  benefit  little  from  reha-
bilitative  training  and  are  left  impaired  (Duncan, 
2000).  Long-term  interventional  strategies  to  im-
prove  the  quality  of  life  in  stroke  survivors  are 
therefore  in  great  demand.
    Recent  studies  have  shown  that  electrical  cur-
rents  delivered  to  the  cortex  through  transcranial 
magnetic  stimulation  (TMS)  or  transcranial  direct 
current  stimulation  (tDCS)  cause  cortical  stimulation 
that  can  modulate  the  cortical  excitability  of  the 
human  brain  noninvasively  (Calautti  and  Baron, 
2003;  Canavero,  2006).  These  techniques  can  also 
be  used  as  therapeutic  interventions  to  enhance 
recovery  in  patients  suffering  from  the  long-term 
aftereffects  of  stroke  (Uy,  2003;  Khedr  et  al.,  2005; 
Kim  et  al.,  2006c).  It  has  been  suggested  that 
direct  cortical  stimulation  through  an  epidural  elect-
rode  may  produce  similar  effects,  possibly  with 
more  advantages  (Kim  et  al.,  2006c).  To  test  this 
hypothesis,  extradural  cortical  stimulation  (ECS)  to 
enhance  recovery  has  been  studied  and  has  shown 
promising  results  in  animal  and  human  studies  for 
enhancing 
in  chronic  stroke  patients 
(Brown  et  al.,  2003;  Brown  et  al.,  2006;  Canavero 
et  al.,  2006;  Moon  et  al.,  2007;  Huang  et  al.,  2008; 
Kim  et  al.,  2008;  Levy  et  al.,  2008).  The  underlying 
process  of  the  recovery  improvements  has  not  been 
fully  understood.  Possible  explanations  include  im-
proved  neural  plasticity  due  to  the  increase  in 
neural  activity  with  electrical  stimulation  as  well  as 
the  reduction  in  the  death  rate  of  normal  tissues 
around  the  lesion  during  the  inflammatory  period. 
    The  application  of  direct  electric  stimulation  for 

recovery 

to  closely  approach 

stroke  recovery  is  in  an  early  stage,  in  contrast  to 
the  abundant  research  and  clinical  studies  on  com-
mercial  deep  brain  stimulators  (DBS)  for  Parkin-
son’s  disease  and  epilepsy  (Agnew  et  al.,  1990; 
Luders,  2004;  Theodore  and  Fisher,  2004;  Weaver 
et  al.,  2006).  To  directly  stimulate 
the  cortical 
region,  stimulating  electrodes  are  implanted  in  the 
brain  and  an  electric  stimulator  which  is  wired  to 
the  electrodes  is  shielded  under  the  skin,  requiring 
a  wireless  link  for  convenient  operation  of  the 
implanted  pulse  generator  (IPG).  The  commercial 
DBS  systems  provide  magnetic  and  proximity  RF 
links  for  the  doctors  to  configure  the  IPG  and 
control  its  operation.  The  spatial  range  of  control, 
however,  is  limited  to  the  extent  that  a  dedicated 
controller  device  has 
the 
patient’s  skin  to  access  the  IPG  in  clinical  ap-
plication. 
    Moreover,  electrical  stimulation  therapy  for  stroke 
implies  not  just  temporary  diminishment  of  symp-
toms  but  also  gradual  recovery  of  the  impaired 
functions.  Ongoing  modification  of  the  stimulation 
pattern  is  essential  during  treatment.  The  stroke 
patients  need  intensive  administration  by  doctors  for 
optimal  recovery.  However,  severe  stroke  after-
effects  often  limit  patients’  activities,  making  regular 
doctor  visits  for  treatment  difficult.   
    The  stimulator  proposed  in  this  study  adopts  a 
widely  known  low-power  wireless  communication 
standard  ZigBee  in  order  to  extend  the  control 
range  of  IPG  in  space,  reaching  as  far  as  remote 
hospitals  or  clinics  through  the  internet.  The  pro-
posed  stimulator  also  provides 
for  bidirectional 
communication,  enabling  continuous  monitoring  of 
nerve  tissue  and  its  surroundings,  and  consequently 
allows  traditional  rehabilitation  methods  to  be  aug-
mented  by  neuro-modulation  therapy.  In  this  study, 
we  aim  to  develop  a  prototype  miniaturized  electric 
stimulator  for  stroke  recovery  and  a  wireless  com-
munication  pathway  for  extended  and  flexible  use  of 
the  IPG.

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS

Preliminary  animal  experiment

    The  effect  of  electric  stimulation  was  studied  on 
focal  brain 
the  rat.  Photo-
thrombotic  lesion  were  made  in  20  rats  on  their 

ischemic  model 

in 

A 

B

C

D

Wireless  Neuro-Stimulator 167

the  skull  for  2  min,  and  a  photosensitive  dye  Rose 
Bengal  (20  mg/kg)  was  injected  through  a  femoral 
vein,  followed  by  additional  illumination  for  18  min. 
Then,  a  stimulating  electrode  was  implanted  im-
mediately  after  induction  of  cortical  lesions  in  all 
rats.  A  small  (∼3  mm  circular)  craniotomy  was 
made  at  the  anterior  border  of  the  illumination  area 
to  expose  the  peri-infarct  cortex.  A  3  mm  diameter 
circular  stimulating  electrode  (Oscor,  Tampa,  Flo-
rida,  USA)  was  placed  on  the  exposed  dura  and  a 
reference  screw  on  posterior  parietal  bone.  The  rats 
were  divided  in  3  different  subject  groups,  which 
are,  sham  group  (w/electrodes  and  w/o  electric 
stimulation,  n=10),  anodal  electric  stimulation  group 
(n=5)  and  cathodal  electric  stimulation  group  (n=5). 
Stimulation  amplitude  was  set  to  half  the  movement 
threshold  for  individual  animals,  while  50  Hz  fre-
quency  and  194  ms  pulse  duration  were  uniformly 
used.  To  measure 
function 
recovery,  the  kinetic  ability  of  the  rats  are  evaluated 
quantitatively  using  single  pellet 
task 
(SPRT)  as  shown  in  Fig.  1B  before  and  after 
stroke.  Success  rate  in  SPRT  is  measured  by  the 
percentage  rate  of  perfectly  eating  pieces  as  in 
Eq.  (1). 

the  rate  of  motor 

reaching 

Success

rate

of

SPRT

=

perfectly
all

eating
ate
units

units

100×

  (1)

 

Fig.  1.  Preliminary  animal  experiment  to  verify  the  effect  of 
cortical  electric  stimulation.  (A)  The  brain  map  of  a  rat.  (B)  Single 
pellet  reaching  task  (SPRT)  method  to  evaluate  motor  ability.  (C) 
Stroke  model  by  photo-thrombotic  infarction.  (D)  Recovery  rate  of 
3  groups  of  stroke  induced  rat  SHAM,  ANODAL  stimulation, 
CATHODAL  stimulation  group.

primary  motor  cortex  (M1)  which  is  responsible  for 
handling  hand  (forearm)  movement  as  shown  in 
Fig.  1A,  C.  Photothrombotic  infarction  was  induced 
in  the  cortex  opposite  the  preferred  paw.  Rats  were 
anesthetized  with  a  mixture  of  ketamine  hydro-
chloride  (100  mg/kg)  and  xylazine  (10  mg/kg), 
heads  fixed  in  a  small  animal  stereotaxic  frame  and 
a  skin  incision  was  made  in  the  frontoparietal  area. 
A  fiber  optic  cold  illumination  light  source  with  3 
mm  aperture  (Fiberoptic  Korea  Co.,  Cheonan,  Korea) 
was  stereotaxically  positioned  1  mm  anterior  to 
bregma  and  3  mm  lateral  to  midline  on  the  skull, 
covering  the  area  representing  forelimb  motor  and 
part  of  sensory  cortex.  Cold  light  was  irradiated  on 

    Fig.  1D  shows  the  measured  daily  success  rates 
of  the  3  groups  during  3  weeks  after  the  focal 
lesion  was  induced.  The  results  show  that  the 
cathodal  stimulation  group  recovered  their  motor 
ability  up  to  80%  of  their  normal  values  after 
treatment.  ANOVA  showed  that  there  is  significant 
difference  between 
the 
stimulation  groups  (p＜0.05).  Therefore,  the  ele-
ctrical  stimulation  is  thought  to  help  the  brain  to 
recover  motor 
function  after  stroke.  Further  re-
searches  to  find  better  stimulation  methods  are 
ongoing. 

the  sham  group  and 

IPG  model  and  ZigBee  communication  system
    Two  types  of  pulses  were  used  (anodal  and 
cathodal)  in  the  stimulation  of  brain  tissue  in  the 
preliminary  animal  experiments  (Kim  et  al.,  2008). 
Chronic  electrical  stimulation  of  nerve  tissue  with 
only  a  monopolar  pulse  might  damage  some  ti-
ssues  and  corrode  the  interfacing  electrode.  Such 

168 Gookhwa  Kim,  et  al.

to 

the  neural 

corrosion  significantly  distorts  the  stimulation  wave-
form  (Theodore  and  Fisher,  2004)  which  makes  it 
difficult  to  deliver  the  intended  electric  voltages  or 
currents 
tissues  concerned.  The 
developed  IPG  model  is  capable  of  bi-phasic  pulse 
generation.  A  bipolar  or  biphasic  pulse  can  reduce 
cell  damage  and  electrode  corrosion.  The  bipolar 
pulse  consists  of  pairs  of  main  phase  and  com-
pensating  phase  with  opposite  polarities  for  charge 
balance.  It  can  furthermore  selectively  stimulate  a 
cell  body  or  axon  under  certain  conditions  if  ne-
cessary  (Theodore  and  Fisher,  2004).  The  H-bridge 
circuit  can  generate  3  different  polarities  with  a 
single  power  supply.  The  amplitude  of  stimulation  is 
adjustable  with  a  D/A  converter,  DAC7617  (TI, 
USA).  The  IPG  model  includes  the  H-bridge,  D/A 
converter,  and  microcontroller  unit  Atmega128L 
(Atmel,  USA) 
for  accurate  generation  and  ad-
justment  of  stimulation  waveforms.  The  Atme-
ga128L 
is  an  8-bit  microcontroller  with  RISCH 
architecture  and  low  power  consumption  charac-
teristics.  Fig.  2A  shows  the  developed  stimulation 
circuit.  The  IPG  model  has  dimensions  of  50×37×8 
mm3  and  a  weight  of  7.4  g.
    It  should  be  noted  that  the  animal  experiments 
found  no  remarkable  increase  in  recovery  ratio  after 
about  1  month  of  direct  cortical  electric  stimulation 
treatment.  For  humans,  it  is  expected  that  the 
implanted  system  should  operate 
for  about  6 
months  to  cover  the  period  in  which  functional 
recovery  is  most  active.
    The  ZigBee  link  enables  bi-directional  communi-
cation  between  the  neural  stimulator  and  controlling 
equipment  on  outside.  ZigBee  is  a  standard  small, 
low  power  radio-frequency  communication  protocol 
based  on  the  IEEE  802.15.4  standard,  designed  for 
use  in  wireless  personal  area  networking  (WPAN) 
applications  (Jung  and  Jeon,  2004).  The  low  power 
characteristic  is  essential  to  the  electrical  system 
implanted  in  the  body  because  battery  replacement 
requires  an  additional  surgical  operation.  Moreover, 
most  of  the  electric  power  should  be  used  for 
neural  stimulation,  while  power  consumption  in  the 
other  parts  of  the  system,  including  communication, 
should  be  minimized.  A  small  ZigBee  transceiver 
module  was  developed  based  on  the  design  re-
ference  given  with  a  commercial  CC2420  ZigBee 
Development  Kit  (Chipcon,  Norway).  The  CC2420  is 

A

B

Fig.  2.  (A)  The  miniaturized  electrical  neuro-stimulator  circuit 
board  composed  of  a  microcontroller  unit,  H-bridge  and  D/A 
converter.  Size  of  50×37  mm2  and  weighing  7.4  g.  (B)  The 
ZigBee  communication  module.  Size  of  45×40×12  mm3  and 
weighing  12.7  g.

integrated  with 

to  enabling  wireless  control, 

an  RF  communication  chip  which  supports 
the 
2.4GHz  IEEE  802.15.4  standard  protocol.  The  RF 
chip  was 
the  Atmega128L  mi-
crocontroller  unit  on  a  discrete  IC  level.  A  software 
protocol  stack  was  embedded  in  the  microcontroller 
unit  to  support  ZigBee.  Fig.  2B  shows  the  trans-
ceiver  module.  The  developed  circuit  board  has 
physical  dimension  of  45×40×12  mm3,  which  is  the 
size  of  a  small  matchbox,  and  its  weight  is  12.7  g. 
    In  addition 
the 
ZigBee  can  connect  the  neuro-modulation  system  to 
a  widespread  communication  network  such  as  the 
internet  or  a  mobile  network.  This  network-based 
neuro-modulation  system  can  provide  a  remote  or 
tele-rehabilitation  program  exampled  by  Fig.  3A. 
    The  ZigBee  is  also  capable  of  handling  a  large 
number  of  wireless  connections  within  small  range 
of  area  at  the  same  time.  Therefore,  a  ZigBee- 
based  wireless  rehabilitation  program  could  manage 
many  patients  simultaneously  in  a  local  area.  A 
relatively  small  number  of  doctors  or  certified 
personnel 
local  rehabilitation  center  could 
therefore  manage  many  stroke  patients  at  a  time, 
even  during  their  training  activities.
    The  IPG  model  was  combined  with  the  trans-

in  a 

A

C

Wireless  Neuro-Stimulator 169

B

Fig.  3.  A  remote  rehabilitation  ser-
vice 
for  stroke  recovery  using  a 
ZigBee-based  neuro-modulation  sys-
tem.  (A)  The  patient’s  IPG  is  con-
nected  to  doctors  at  a  remote  site 
through  the  internet  and  PC.  (B)  GUI 
for  configuring  the  electrical  stimula-
tor.  (C)  Various  configurations  of  sti-
mulation.

ceiver  module  to  examine  the  possibility  of  future 
implantation,  especially  considering  its  size  with  all 
the  functionalities  of  the  wireless  neuro-stimulation 
device  enclosed  in  one  small  device.

Remote  and  wireless  configuration  of  neuro- 
stimulator

    The  brain  stimulation  parameters  can  be  con-
figured  by  doctors  from  a  remote  site.  The  de-
veloped  telemedicine  system  consists  of  the  wire-
less  IPG  model  linked  to  the  TCP/IP  via  the  ZigBee 
link  mounted  at  a  PC.  The  neuro-stimulator  can  be 
configured  by  selecting  its  ID  and  several  para-
meters  in  a  graphical  user  interface  (GUI)  software 
shown  in  Fig.  3B. 
    The  neuro-stimulator  configuration  window  pro-
vides  the  selection  of  such  stimulation  parameters 
as  period,  pulse  width,  amplitude  and  overall  run-
ning 
time.  The  stimulation  waveform  can  have 
different  polarities  and  modes.  Monopolar,  bipolar 
and  DC  modes  are  as  shown  in  Fig.  3C.  Bipolar 
stimulation  can  be  either  even  or  eccentric.  Both 
consist  of  charge  balanced  pulse  pairs  as  men-
tioned  above.  The  period  and  the  pulse  width  are  in 

for  neuro-stimulators 

the  range  of  several  or  tens  of  microseconds.  The 
amplitude  has  values  of  several  millivoltages.  The 
overall  running  time  is  usually  about  an  hour  per 
one  day  in  regular  operation.  Since  there  are  no 
commercial  standards 
for 
stroke,  the  ranges  of  parameters  appropriate  for 
neural  tissue  stimulation  were  selected  based  on 
those  used  in  the  preliminary  animal  experiments  or 
based  on  a  clinically  available  DBS  Soletra  Model 
7426  (Medtronic)  used  for  treating  other  movement 
disorder 
like  Parkinson’s  disease  and  essential 
tremor. 
    The  configuration  parameters  are  loaded  in  a 
data  packet 
for  efficient  and  accurate  wireless 
transmission  over  the  air  between  the  PC  and  the 
neuro-stimulator.  The 
then  correctly 
repeats  the  configured  stimulation  waveforms.

IPG  model 

Chronic  data  management  for  optimal  stimula-
tion  therapy

    The  periodic  electrical  stimulation  treatment  given 
by  the  proposed  system  would  be  also  monitored 
continuously  by  the  remote  doctors.  A  record  of  the 
stimulation  and  the  gradual  recovery  process  is  a 

170 Gookhwa  Kim,  et  al.

valuable  resource  in  this  type  of  neuro-stimulation 
therapy.  The  collection  of  data  includes  background 
information  specific  to  the  patient  and  the  disease 
such  as  the  times  of  attack,  operation,  and  im-
plantation  of  the  neuro-electrodes  and  stimulator. 
The  main  objective  of  the  system  is  to  produce  an 
easily  visualized  history  of  each  patient’s  treatment 
containing  quantitative  data  stored  in  a  database  as 
illustrated  in  Fig.  4.  Clinical  neurosurgeons  can 
make  use  of  this  tool  to  gain  insight  into  effective 
treatment  programs.  Doctors  can  correlate 
the 
history  of  the  changes  in  stimulation  parameters 
with  the  gradual  recovery  process  of  the  patient. 
    Stimulation  parameters  are  organized  in  the  GUI 
according  to  their  significance  and  effects.  Since  it 
is  generally  accepted  that  the  amplitude  of  the 

Fig.  4.  Graphical  visualization  of  the 
stimulation  parameters.  Each  color 
indicates  the  polarity  of  stimulation  in 
the  amplitude-based  display  of  ch-
ronic  data.

Fig.  5.  Wireless  configuration  of  the 
stimulator  and  its  output  waveforms 
measured  by  oscilloscope.

impact  on 

the  strongest 

pulse  has 
the  brain, 
amplitude  is  marked  on  the  vertical  axis.  Each 
circle  indicates  one  dose  given  by  the  doctor.  The 
radius  of  the  circle  corresponds  to  the  duration  of 
each  dose.  The  color  shows  the  polarity  and  mode 
of  stimulation;  red  is  for  anodal  stimulation,  green 
for  cathodal,  black  for  DC,  blue  for  even  anodal, 
light  blue  for  even  cathodal,  yellow  for  eccentric 
anodal,  and  purple  for  eccentric  cathodal.  Additional 
details  are  shown  when  the  mouse  cursor  moves 
over  the  circle. 

RESULTS  AND  DISCUSSION

    The  prototype  neuro-stimulator  developed  in  this 
work  is  configured  remotely  through  ZigBee  and  the 

the  waveform.  Another  drawback 

internet  to  generate  the  selected  waveforms  exactly, 
including  DC,  monopolar  and  bipolar  pulses,  as 
shown  in  Fig.  5.  The  wireless  configuration  worked 
reliably  within  a  radius  of  about  10  m. 
    The  connection  to  each  patient  was  made  using 
a  direct  database  link  and  the  ongoing  information 
about  stimulation  was  stored  in  the  corresponding 
database.
    For  an  extended  use  of  a  neuro-stimulator 
implanted  in  the  body,  most  of  the  battery  power 
should  be  concentrated  on  electrical  stimulation  of 
neural  tissues  rather  than  on  communication.  We 
therefore  decided  to  transmit  only  the  shape  pa-
rameters  of  the  waveforms  instead  of  all  the  data 
points  of 
to 
transmitting  all  the  data  points  is  that  this  requires  a 
long  communication  time  via  RF  transmission.  A 
complete  set  of  points  would  allow  us  to  generate 
arbitrary  waveforms;  however, 
is  some 
potential  risk  in  using  high  frequency  RF  trans-
mission  through  the  skin.  The  parametric  trans-
mission  needs  only  about  10  bytes  while  the  entire 
data  point  transmission  requires  about  400  bytes. 
The  proposed  method  achieved  both 
reduced 
power  consumption  and  minimal  RF  exposure  time. 
Table  1(a)  shows  the  current  consumption  of  the 
device  under  various  stimulation  configurations.  The 
definition  of  the  duty  ratio  is  shown  in  Fig.  5.  Table 
1(b)  shows  the  performance  of  our  neuro-stimulator 
prototype  compared  with  the  technical  specification 
of 
two 
systems  have  different  working  principles  for  dif-
ferent  diseases  and  thus  cannot  be  directly  com-
pared,  Table  1(b)  shows  that  our  proposed  system 
has  better  device  performance,  which  might  be 
useful  for  more  precise  experiments.  The  minimum 
pulse  width  (time  resolution)  is  1μs,  the  maximum 
repetition  rate  was  500  kHz,  and  stimulation  voltage 

ranges  from  −3.3  to  ＋3.3  V.  The  output  voltage 

the  Soletra  Model  7426.  Although 

there 

the 

necessary  for  cortical  stimulation  for  stroke  recovery 
is  much  lower  than  3.3  V  (Moon  et  al,  2007). 
Cortical  stimulation  in  animals,  which  will  likely  be 
the  first  application  of  the  developed  system,  re-
quires  low  voltages.  Our  device  meets  the  require-
ments  for  a  prototype  and  animal  experiments. 
    The  chronic  data  management  capability  of  the 
remote  stimulation  system  will  help  doctors  un-
derstand  what  conditions  improve  recovery  for  a 

Wireless  Neuro-Stimulator 171

Table  1.  Key  features  of  the  developed  prototype  device.  (a) 
Current  consumption  under  different  pulse  conditions, 
(b) 
treating  movement 
Comparison  with  commercial  DBS 
disorder

for 

(a)

(b)

Duty  ratio

1/10
1/40

Symbol

Soletra  Model
  7426  (Medtronic)
Our  system

Polarity

Monopolar  (anodal) Even  bipolar  (anodal)

47  mA
45  mA

50  mA
46  mA

Max.
rate

Min.

pulse  width

Amplitude  of
stimulation

185  Hz

60μs

0∼10.5  V

500  kHz

1μs

0∼3.3  V

to 

the  electrical  stimulation, 

given  patient.  Although  a  more  quantitative  eva-
luation  of  recovery  requires  a  systematic 
tool, 
doctors  can  get  basic  information  about  the  pa-
tient’s  language  and  motor  abilities  through  voice 
communication  over  the  phone  and  through  ques-
tion-based  scoring  methods.  Actually,  we  are  de-
veloping  interactive  digital  devices  in  tangible  forms 
like  PEG  board  for  on-line  evaluation  of  stroke 
symptoms  and  recovery  progress  based  on  clinically 
verified  scoring  and  scaling  methods  (Masur,  2004). 
    In  addition  to  clinical  use  in  humans,  this  data 
mining  tool  is  useful  in  fundamental  research  using 
animal  models  to  investigate  the  principles  of  stroke 
recovery  accelerated  by  cortical  stimulation.  More-
over,  since  every  individual  will  have  different  re-
sponses 
this  data 
collection  approach  allows  for  personalized  therapy.
    As  a  conclusion,  we  have  developed  a  novel 
electrical  neuro-stimulator  for  stroke  recovery  on  the 
basis  of  preliminary  experimental 
results.  The 
ZigBee-based  RF  communication,  stimulation  func-
tion  and  internet  hookup  were  successfully  inte-
grated  in  the  proposed  neuro-modulation  system. 
The  precise  wireless  configuration  showed  promise 
for  applications  such  as  remote  rehabilitation. 
    With  the  help  of  wireless  communication,  the 
developed  system  will  facilitate  the  study  of  how 
electrical  stimulations  affect  neural  tissues.  Cur-
rently,  the  most  effective  pulse  shape  parameters 
for  improving  stroke  recovery  are  being  investigated 
through  animal  experiments  in  collaboration  with 
experts 
in  neurosurgery  and  neuro-rehabilitation. 
The  site  of  stimulation  is  also  an  important  issue  for 

172 Gookhwa  Kim,  et  al.

better  efficacy  of  electric  cortical  stimulation.  Com-
patibility  with  magnetic  resonance  (MR)  techniques 
is  another  important  requirement  for  the  implantable 
neuro-stimulator  because  we  need  to  use  neuro- 
imaging  systems  such  as  functional  MR  imaging 
(fMRI)  to  study  the  effect  more  precisely.
    We  are  also  examining  additional  components 
including  audiovisual  support  for  better  treatment  or 
a  user-friendly  interface  especially  for  patients  with 
severely  impaired  motor  function.  The  on-line  tools 
for  more  quantitative  evaluation  of  patient  recovery 
is  being  integrated  into  the  proposed  system  for 
future  use,  which  will  be  a  bi-directional  interactive 
platform 
tele-rehabilitation 
techniques. 
    The  system  developed  here  can  also  be  used  as 
a  common  platform  for  a  wide  range  of  brain 
diseases  and  clinical  care  for  which  electric  sti-
mulation  is  used. 

for  a  wide  range  of 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

    This  work  was  supported  by  the  Grant  of  the 
Korean  Ministry  of  Education,  Science  and  Tech-
nology  (The  Regional  Core  Research  Program/ 
Center  for  Healthcare  Technology  Development).

REFERENCES

Agnew  WF,  McCreery  DB,  Yuen  TG  and  Bullara  LA  (1990) 
Effects  of  prolonged  electrical  stimulation  of  the  central  ner-
vous  system.  In:  Neural  prostheses  fundamental  studies 
(Agnew  WF  and  McCreey  DB,  eds),  pp  226.  Prentice 
Hall,  Englewood  Cliffs  NJ.

Beck  H,  Goussakov  IV,  Ailing  L,  Helmstaedter  C  and  Elger 
the  Human  Dentate 

CE  (2000)  Synaptic  Plasticity 
Gyrus.  J  Neurosci  20:7080-7086.

Bonita  R  and  Beaglehole  R  (1988)  Recovery  of  motor  function 

in 

after  stroke.  Stroke  19:1497-1500.

Brown  JA,  Lutsep  H,  Cramer  SC  and  Weinand  M  (2003) 
Motor  cortex  stimulation  for  enhancement  of  recovery  after 
stroke:  case  report.  Neurol  Res  25:815-818.

Brown  JA,  Lutsep  HL,  Weinand  M  and  Cramer  SC  (2006) 
Motor  cortex  stimulation  for  the  enhancement  of  recovery 
from  stroke:  a  prospective,  multicenter  safety  study.  Neu-
rosurgery  58:464-473.

Calautti  C  and  Baron  JC  (2003)  Functional  Neuroimaging 
Studies  of  Motor  Recovery  After  Stroke  in  Adults.  Stroke 
34:1553-1566.

Canavero  S,  Bonicalzi  V,  Intonti  S,  Crasto  S  and  Castellano 
G  (2006)  Effects  of  bilateral  extradural  cortical  stimulation 
for  plegic  stroke  rehabilitation.  Neuromodulation  9:28-33.

Duncan  P,  Goldstein  L,  Matchar  D,  Divine  G  and  Feussner  J 

(1992)  Measurement  of  motor  recovery  after  stroke.  Out-
come  assessment  and  sample  size  requirement.  Stroke 
23:1084-1089.

Duncan  P,  Lai  S  and  Keighley  J  (2000)  Defining  post-stroke 
recovery:  implications  for  design  and  interpretation  of  drug 
trials.  Neuropharmacology  39:835-841.

Hendricks  HT,  Limbeck  VJ,  Geurts  AC  and  Zwarts  MJ  (2002) 
Motor  recovery  after  stroke:  a  systematic  review  of  the 
literature.  Arch  Phys  Med  Rehabil  83:1629-1637.

Huang  M,  Harvey  RL,  Stoykov  ME,  Ruland  S,  Weinand  M, 
Lowry  D  and  Levy  R  (2008)  Cortical  Stimulation  for  Upper 
Limb  Recovery  Following  Ischemic  Stroke:  A  Small  Phase 
II  Pilot  Study  of  a  Fully  Implanted  Stimulator.  Top  Stroke 
Rehabil  15:160-172.

Jung  SH  and  Jeon  HI  (2004)  IEEE  802.15.4  and  ZigBee 
Protocol:  Active  RFID  technology  for  Ubiquitous  sensor 
networking.  Journal  of  the  Korean  Institute  of  Communica-
tion  Sciences  21:67-88.

Khedr  EM,  Ahmed  MA,  Fathy  N  and  Rothwell  C  (2005) 
Therapeutic  trial  of  repetitive  transcranial  magnetic  stimu-
lation  after  acute  ischemic  stroke.  Neurology  65:466-468.
Kim  CS,  James  HC  and  Jeffery  JS  (2006a)  Bilateral  movem-
ent  training  and  stroke  rehabilitation:  a  systematic  review 
and  meta-analysis.  J  Neurol  Sci  244:89-95.

Kim  HI,  Shin  YI,  Moon  SK,  Chung  GH,  Lee  MC  and  Kim  HG 
(2008)  Unipolar  and  continuous  cortical  stimulation  to  en-
hance  motor  and  language  deficit  in  patients  with  chronic 
stroke:  report  of  2  cases.  Surg  Neurol  69:77-80.

Kim  KU,  Kim  HM,  Woo  SY  and  Chung  BK  (2006b)  The  effect 
of  the  Aqua-rehabilitaion  program  on  the  Stroke  patient’s 
muscle  strength  and  ADL  performance.  J  APA  14:99-115.
Kim  YH,  You  SH,  Ko  MH,  Park  JW,  Lee  KH,  Jang  SH,  Yoo 
WK  and  Hallett  M  (2006c)  Repetitive  transcranial  magnetic 
stimulation-induced  corticomotor  excitability  and  associated 
motor  skill  acquisition  in  chronic  stroke.  Stroke  37:1471- 
1476.

(2008)  Cortical  stimulation 

Levy  R,  Ruland  S,  Weinand  M,  Lowry  D,  Dafer  R  and  Bakay 
R 
rehabilitation  of 
patients  with  hemiparetic  stroke:  a  multicenter  feasibility 
study  of  safety  and  efficacy.  J  Neurosurg  108:707-714.

Luders  HO  (2004)  Deep  brain  stimulation  and  epilepsy.  The 

the 

for 

Cleveland  Clinic  Foundation,  Cleveland,  OH

Masur  H  (2004)  Scales  and  scores 

in  neurology.  Georg 

Thieme  Verlag,  German

Moon  SK,  Yang  CY,  No  SE,  Kim  EY,  Lee  S,  Park  SA,  Oh 
GJ,  Kim  HI,  Song  JH,  Lee  MC  and  Shin  YI  (2007) 
Promotion  of  motor  recovery  by  anodal  continuous  and 
low  amplitude  cortical  stimulation  in  rat  stroke  model.  Lab 
Anim  Res  23:25-30.

Neville  HJ  and  Bavelier  D  (2000)  Specificity  and  plasticity  in 
neurocognitive  development  in  humans.  In:  The  new  cog-
nitive  neurosciences.  2nd  ed.  pp  83-99.  The  MIT  Press, 
Cambridge  MA.

Theodore  WH  and  Fisher  RS  (2004)  Brain  stimulation  for 

epilepsy.  The  Lancet  Neurology  3:111-118.

Uy  J,  Ridding  MC,  Hillier  S,  Thompson  PD  and  Miles  TS 
(2003)  Does  induction  of  plastic  change  in  motor  cortex 
improve  leg  function  after  stroke?  Neurology  61:982-984.
Weaver  FM,  Stern  MB  and  Follett  K  (2006)  Deep  brain 
stimulation  in  Pakinson's  disease.  The  Lancet  Neurology 
5:900-901.

