Experimental  Neurobiology
Vol.  19,  pages  155∼164,  December  2010

Selective  Susceptibility  of  Human  Dopaminergic 
Neural  Stem  Cells  to  Dopamine-Induced  Apoptosis

Sung-Man  Jeon1,  Sang-Myung  Cheon2*,  Hye-Rahn  Bae3, 

Jae  Woo  Kim2  and  Seung  U  Kim4

1Department  of  Neurology,  Bongseng  Memorial  Hospital,  Busan  601-723, 

2Department  of  Neurology,  Dong-A  University  School  of  Medicine, 

Busan  602-715,  3Department  of  Physiology,  Dong-A  University  School  of 

Medicine,  Busan  602-714,  4Institute  for  Regenerative  Medicine, 

Gachon  University  Gil  Hospital,  Inchon  450-460,  Korea

ABSTRACT

Dysfunctions  of  ubiquitin-proteasome  system  and  toxicity  of  dopamine  have  been 
known  as  the  key  mechanisms  in  the  pathogenesis  of  Parkinson’s  disease  (PD)  and 
proteasome  inhibitors  are  widely  used  in  experimental  models  of  PD  to  reproduce  cell 
death  of  dopaminergic  neurons.  In  the  present  study,  immortalized  human  neural  stem 
cells  (HB1.F3,  F3)  and  those  transfected  with  human  aromatic  acid  decarboxylase 
gene  (F3.AADC),  were  used  to  investigate  the  mechanism  of  selective  dopaminergic 
neuronal  cell  death  mediated  by  dopamine  or  proteasome  inhibitors.  Flow  cytometric 
analysis  revealed  that  F3.AADC  was  more  susceptible  to  dopamine  than  parental  F3 
cell  which  does  not  carry  dopaminergic  phenotype.  The  dopamine-induced  apoptosis 
was  mediated  by  activation  of  caspases  3  and  9  and  cleavage  of  PARP.  Proteasome 
inhibitors  also  induced  apoptosis  in  dose-dependent  manner  but  there  was  no  dif-
ference  between  cell  types.  Prolonged  exposure  to  subtoxic  dose  of  proteasome  in-
hibitors  further  enhanced  dopamine-induced  apoptosis  in  the  F3.AADC,  and  increased 
presence  of  alpha-synuclein  and  ubiquitin-positive  inclusions  was  noted  in  the  cyto-
plasm  of  apoptotic  cells  by  immunocytochemistry.  These  findings  indicate  that  dopa-
minergic  cells  are  selectively  susceptible  to  dopamine  toxicity  and  prolonged  suppres-
sion  of  proteasome  system  further  enhances  selective  sensitivity  to  dopamine  toxicity. 
Chronic  subtoxic  proteasomal  dysfunction  of  dopaminergic  cells  might  contribute  to 
selective  cell  death  of  dopaminergic  neurons  during  the  pathogenesis  of  Parkinson's 
disease.

Key  words:  Parkinson’s  disease,  proteasome,  dopamine,  apoptosis,  human  neural  stem 

cells

*To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed.
TEL:  82-51-240-5266,  FAX:  82-51-244-8338
e-mail:  smcheon@dau.ac.kr
Received  September  16,  2010
Accepted  for  publication  November  5,  2010

    Parkinson’s  disease  (PD)  is  one  of  the  most 
common  neurodegenerative  disorders,  which  is  cha-
racterized  by  motor  symptoms,  such  as  brady-
kinesia,  rigidity,  tremor,  and  gait  disturbance.  PD 

INTRODUCTION

156 Sung-Man  Jeon,  et  al.

pathology  is  characterized  by  selective  dopaminer-
gic  neuronal  death  and  cytoplasmic  Lewy  bodies  in 
substantia  nigra  of  midbrain  (Forno,  1996).  The 
cause  of  PD  is  yet  to  be  clarified  but  diverse 
genetic  and  environmental  mechanisms  are  inferred 
(Weidong  et  al.,  2009). 
    Dopamine,  a  key  neurotransmitter  in  PD,  and 
L-DOPA,  a  precursor  of  dopamine  cause  cell  death 
in  cultured  neural  cells  by  oxidative  and  non-
oxidative  mechanisms  (Ahmadi  et  al.,  2008).  In 
addition,  dopamine  turnover  is  increased  in  me-
sencephalic  dopaminergic  neurons  in  PD  patients 
and  reactive  oxygen  species  are  found  to  increase 
following 
treatment  with  L-DOPA  (Foley  at  al., 
2000).  However,  there  is  no  convincing  evidence  of 
neurotoxic  events  caused  by  dopamine  or  L-DOPA 
in  vivo  conditions. 
    The  ubiquitin-proteasome  system  is  known  to  be 
implicated  in  pathogenesis  of  PD.  Lewy  body,  a 
pathological  hallmark  of  Parkinson's  disease,  con-
tains  a  heterogeneous  mixture  of  proteins  and 
lipids,  including  alpha-synuclein,  ubiquitin,  synphi-
lin-1,  neurofilaments,  and  oxidized  proteins  (Olanow 
and  McNaught,  2006).  Familial  PD  cases  are 
caused  by  abnormalities  in  genes  encoding  the 
proteins  alpha-synuclein,  parkin,  ubiquitin  carboxy- 
terminal  hydrolase-L1  and  DJ-1,  which  can  cause 
dysfunctions  of  proteasome  system  (Hatano  et  al., 
2009).  Proteasome  inhibitors  are  also  reported  to 
induce  neuronal  cells  hypersensitive  to  protein  al-
teration  or  oxidative  stress  (Mytilineou  et  al.,  2004; 
Rideout  et  al.,  2004;  Lev  et  al.,  2006).  Others  in 
contrast,  reported  that  proteasome  inhibitors,  such 
as  lactacystin  and  MG-132,  caused  the  appearance 
of  α-synuclein  and  ubiquitin  inclusions,  but  pre-
vented  dopaminergic  degeneration  in  a  6-hydroxy-
dopamine-induced  PD  animal  model  (Inden  et  al., 
2005).  To  date, 
the  exact  role  of  proteasome 
inhibition  on  dopaminergic  neurodegeneration  and 
subsequent  development  of  Parkinson's  disease  is 
still  not  well  understood. 
    Human  neural  stem  cells  (NSCs)  could  serve  as 
a  good  in  vitro  model  system  representing  in  vivo 
conditions.  In  the  present  study,  immortalized  hu-
man  neural  stem  cells  (HB1.F3,  F3)  and  those  cells 
transduced  with  human  aromatic  acid  decarboxylase 
gene  (F3.AADC),  were  used 
the 
mechanism  of  selective  dopaminergic  neuronal  cell 

investigate 

to 

death  mediated  by  dopamine  or  proteasome  in-
hibitors.

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS

Cell  culture

    This  study  used  human  neural  stem  cells  derived 
from  human  embryonic  telencephalon  (15  week  of 
gestational  age),  which  were  immortalized  by  using 
a  retroviral  vector  encoding  v-myc  oncogene  (Chu 
et  al.,  2003).  One  of  the  NSC  clones,  HB1.F3  (F3), 
expresses  phenotypes  specific  for  neural  stem  cells 
including  ABCG2,  nestin  and  mushashi-1  (Flax  et 
al.,  1998).  Additionally,  F3  expresses  Na＋  current 
when  transduced  with  NeuroD  gene  and  differen-
tiated  into  neurons  (Cho  et  al.,  2002).  F3.AADC 
was  also  used  which  was  prepared  with  human 
aromatic  acid  decarboxylase  gene 
transfection. 
Cells  were  cultured 
the  Dulbecco’s  Modified 
Eagle  Medium  (DMEM,  Gibco-BRL,  Gathersberg, 
MD)  with  10%  fetal  bovine  serum.  L-DOPA  (5μM) 
were  added  to  culture  media  of  F3.AADC.  Patterns 
of  growth  and  morphology  were  not  significantly 
different  from  those  of  non-transfected  or  supple-
mented  conditions. 

in 

Measurement  of  dopamine

filter.  Cells  were  raked  out 

    The  level  of  dopamine  was  measured  in  cells  and 
cultured  media.  Medium  was  collected  after  2  days 
of  culture,  reacted  with  alumina  (180  mg/ml,  Sigma) 
in  4oC  for  24  hours,  cleared  with  sample  buffer  (0.1 
M  perchloric  acid,  0.1  mM  EDTA),  and  then  filtered 
with  0.22μm 
from 
culture  dish  and  crushed  with  sample  buffer.  The 
supernatant  was  collected  after  centrifuge  and  fil-
tration.  Purified  cells  and  media  were  transferred 
through  Reverse-Phase  HPLC  (Waters,  Milford,  MA) 
system  in  0.5  ml/min  mobile  phase  (0.07  M  sodium 
phosphate  monobasic  pH  3.4,  1  mM  sodium  octa-
nesulfonic  acid,  0.1  mM  EDTA,  8%  acetonitrile).  We 
used  HR-80  RP-C18  (Esa,  Chelmsford,  MA)  column 
and  analyzed  with  Coulchem  II  electrochemical  de-
tector  (Esa,  Chelmsford,  MA)  in  400  mV. 

Measurement  of  cytotoxicity

    Cytotoxicity  was  evaluated  by  3,4,5-dimethyl  thi-
azole-3,  5-diphenyl  tetrazolium  bromide  (MTT)  assay 
test  according  to  standard  procedures.  The  ability  of 

viable  cells  to  reduce  MTT  was  determined.  MTT 
stock  solution  (5  mg/ml)  was  prepared  in  PBS,  pH 
7.4,  filtered  through  0.22  M  filter  to  remove  for-

mazan  crystals  and  stored  at  −20oC  in  the  dark. 

Cells  were  plated  in  a  density  of  5,000  cells/well  on 
pre-coated  96-well  plates  and  incubated  for  in-
dicated  times.  Subsequently,  10-fold  diluted  MTT 
with  culture  medium  was  added  to  each  well  and 
incubated  for  4  hours.  Plates  were  centrifuged  at 
275×g  for  5  min  and  the  supernatant  was  as-
pirated.  The 
formazan  crystals  were  completely 
dissolved  in  dimethyl  sulfoxide  by  vigorously  shak-
ing  on  microplate  shaker.  OD  was  read  on  micro-
plate  ELISA  reader  (El  312e,  Bio-Tek)  at  wave-
length  of  550  nm  and  630  nm.  Survival  of  each 
experimental  group  was  compared  with 
that  of 
control  cells. 

Quantitative  assessment  of  apoptosis

    The  quantification  of  apoptotic  cells  was  screened 
by  flow  cytometry  technique  using  propidium  iodide 
(PI),  identifying  cells  in  late  apoptosis  of  which  high 
permeability  allows  PI  to  stain  intracellular  DNA 
(Tang  et  al.,  2005).  Cells  were  plated  in  a  6-well 
plate  and  incubated  for  different  time  points  with 
L-DOPA  and  dopamine,  alone  or  in  the  presence  of 
proteasome  inhibitors.  Cells  were  trypsinized  and 
washed  with  PBS  containing  1%  bovine  serum 
albumin.  Cells  were  fixed  with  70%  ethanol  con-
taining  0.5%  Tween  20  for  30  minutes  at  4°C  and 
stained  with  PBS  containing  0.5  mg/ml  of  PI  and 
1μg/ml  of  RNase  A.  Fluorescence  was  measured 
using  a  FACScan  cytometry  system  (Beckman 
Coulter  Epics  XL,  Palo  Alto,  CA).
    The  further  quantification  of  apoptotic  cells  was 
conducted  by  dual-color  flow  cytometry  technique 
using  the  annexin  V  conjugated  with  Alexa  488  and 
PI.  Annexin  V  detects  phosphatidylserine  in  the 
outer  membrane  leaflet,  a  marker  for  early  ap-
optosis,  whereas  PI  identifies  cells  in  late  apoptosis 
(Behbahani  et  al.,  2005).  Cells  were  harvested, 
washed  in  PBS,  resuspended  in  100μl  of  Annexin 
binding  buffer  (10  mM  HEPES  pH  7.4,  140  mM 
NaCl,  2.5  mM  CaCl2)  and 
treated  with  Alexa 
488-conjugated  annexin  V  (5μl)  and  PI  (5μg/ml). 
Cells  were  then  incubated  in  room  temperature  for 
15  minutes  and  analyzed  using  a  FACScan  cyto-
metry  system.

Additive  Effect  of  Proteasome  Inhibition  to  Dopamine 157

Measurement  of  mitochondrial  membrane  po-
tential  (MMP)

    Changes  in  MMP  after  treatments  with  L-DOPA 
and  dopamine,  alone  or  in  the  presence  of  pro-
teasome  inhibitors,  were  determined  by  staining 
cells  with  JC-1,  a  mitochondrial  potential  indicator 
dye.  JC-1  was  added  directly  to  the  cell  culture 
medium  (2μM)  and  incubated  for  30  minutes  at 
37oC.  After  washing  with  culture  medium,  cells  were 
trypsinized  and  resuspended  with  PBS.  Shift  from 
red  fluorescent  J-aggregates  into  green  JC-1  mo-
nomers  was  immediately  measured  by  flow  cyto-
metry.

Western  blot  analysis 

    For  antibody  cleavage  blots,  2×106  cells  treated 
for  the  indicated  time  points  with  L-DOPA  and 
dopamine,  alone  or  in  the  presence  of  proteasome 
inhibitors,  were  washed  twice  with  ice-cold  PBS, 
resuspended  in  500μl  of  ice-cold  modified  RIPA 
buffer  (1%  NP-40,  1%  sodium  deoxycholate,  0.1% 
SDS,  NaCl  150  mm,  25  mM  Tris-HEPES  pH  7.6). 
Cells  were  scraped  with  a  rubber  policeman,  and 
transferred  into  Eppendorf  tubes.  Cell  suspension 
was  rocked  on  a  rocker  at  4oC  for  15  minutes  to 
lyse  cells.  The  lysates  were  centrifuged  at  14,000  g 
for  15  min  at  4oC.  After  protein  quantification  by  the 
method  of  Bradford,  ∼20μg  of  proteins  per  well 
was  loaded  onto  8∼15%  SDS-polyacrylamide  gel 
electrophoresis.  The  gels  were  transferred  to  a 
polyvinylidene  difluoride  membrane  (Amersham  Bio-
sciences,  UK)  and  reacted  with  anti-PARP  (On-
cogene  Science,  Cambridge,  MA),  anti-caspase  3, 
and  anti-caspase  7  antibodies  (Santa  Cruz  Bio-
technology  Inc,  CA).  Immunological  complexes  were 
revealed  with  the  appropriate  secondary  peroxi-
dase-coupled  antibodies  (Cell  Signaling  Technology 
Inc,  Danvers,  MA),  enhanced  chemiluminescence 
detection  system  (Amersham  Biosciences,  UK)  and 
detected  by  LAS-3000  (Fujifilm,  Tokyo,  Japan). 

Immunocytochemistry

    Cells  were  cultured  on  plastic  chamber  slides 
(Nunc,  Naperville,  IL),  treated  with  L-DOPA  and 
dopamine,  alone  or  in  the  presence  of  proteasome 
inhibitors,  and  fixed  with  4%  paraformaldehyde  at 
room  temperature  for  15  minutes.  After  washing, 
cells  were  permeabilized  with  phosphate-buffered 

158 Sung-Man  Jeon,  et  al.

saline  (137  mM  NaCl,  2.7  mM  KCl,  10  mM 
Na2HPO4,  2  mM  KH2PO4  pH  7.4)  containing  0.25% 
Triton  X-100  and  blocked  in  1%  bovine  serum 
albumin.  Primary  antibodies  against  α-synuclein 
(1：2,500,  Sigma,  St.  Louis,  MO)  and  ubiquitin  (1：
500,  Chemicon,  Temecula,  CA)  were 
incubated 
overnight  at  4oC,  followed  by  secondary  antibodies 
(1：200, 
conjugated  with  FITC  or  Texas  Red 
Molecular  Probe,  Eugene,  OR)  for  40  minutes  at 
room  temperature.  Hoechst  stain  was  used  to  ob-
serve  apoptosis.  The  slide  was  mounted  with  Vec-
tashield  mounting  media  containing  4,6-diamino-2- 
phenylindole  (Vetcor  Lab,  Burlingame,  CA),  and 
observed  under  the  confocal  microscope  (LSM510, 
Carl  Zeiss  GmbH.,  Jena,  Germany).

Statistical  analysis

    Data  analysis  was  performed  with  SPSS  18.0 
software  (SPSS  Inc.,  Chicago,  IL).  The  significance 
of  intergroup  differences  was  evaluated  by  one-way 

analyses  of  variance  (ANOVA)  and  that  of  single 
comparisons  was  by  the  Student's  t-test.  Differ-
ences  were  considered  significant  at  p＜0.05.

RESULTS

Dopamine  production

    The  basal  levels  of  dopamine  in  cells  and  culture 
media  were  undetectable  in  human  neural  stem 
cells.  Addition  of  L-DOPA  to  F3.AADC  significantly 
increased  the  level  of  dopamine  in  culture  media, 
while  did  not  induce  any  noticeable  change  in  cell 
morphology  or  growth  pattern  as  compared  to  those 
of  parental  F3  cells.  The  concentration  of  dopamine 
in  culture  media  was  0.9  ng/106  cells  in  F3  and 
14.6  ng/106  cells  in  F3.AADC.  Therefore,  F3.AADC 
can  be  regarded  as  dopamine-secreting  dopami-
nergic  cells  whereas  their  prototype  cells,  F3,  as 
non-secreting  control  cells.

Fig.  1.  Dopamine-  and  L-DOPA-induced  cell  death.  Neural  stem  cells  were  incubated  with  various  concentrations  of  dopamine  (A)  and 
L-DOPA  (B),  and  the  total  cell  death  after  24  hours  was  measured  using  MTT  assay.  Apoptosis  was  quantified  by  PI  fluorescence  using 
flow  cytometry.  #p＜0.05,  vs.  control  condition,  *p＜0.05,  between  cell  lines.

Additive  Effect  of  Proteasome  Inhibition  to  Dopamine 159

Cell  death  by  L-DOPA  and  dopamine

    Both  L-DOPA  and  dopamine  induced  cell  death 
in  human  neural  stem  cells  was  measured  by  either 
MTT  or  flow  cytometry  using  PI  assay.  Results  of 
cell  death  assessed  by  PI  assay  correlated  well 
with  those  using  MTT  assay,  indicating  that  most  of 
cell  death  induced  by  L-DOPA  or  dopamine  was 
apoptosis  (Fig.  1).  Dopamine-induced  cell  death  was 
dose-dependent  and  more  prominent  in  F3.AADC 
than  F3  cells  (Fig.  1A).  At  500μM  of  concentration, 
dopamine  induced  42%  of  apoptotic  cell  death  after 
24  hours  in  F3.AADC  cells  compared  to  25%  in  F3 
cells  (Fig.  1A).  However,  F3.AADC  cells  were  more 
resistant  to  L-DOPA-induced  cell  death  than  to 
dopamine-induced  one  and  these  differences  were 
reached  statistical  significance  (Fig.  1B). 

Mode  of  L-DOPA  and  dopamine-induced  ap-
optosis

    To  elucidate  the  pathway  of  L-DOPA  or  dopa-
mine-induced  apoptotic  cell  death  in  dopaminergic 

fragmentation 

cells  typical  apoptotic  markers  was  examined.  An-
nexin-V  assay  showed  that  both  L-DOPA  or  do-
pamine-induced  apoptosis  follows  typical  apoptotic 
steps  involving  early  apoptosis  with  translocation  of 
annexin  V-positive  phosphatidylserine  to  cell  surface 
and  late  apoptosis  of  annexin  V-positive  and  PI- 
positive  fraction  (L4  and  L2  fraction,  respectively  in 
Fig.  2A).  Hoechst  stain  showed  increased  nuclear 
condensation  and 
in  dopaminergic 
cells  by  both  L-DOPA  and  dopamine  (Fig.  2B). 
Measurement  of  mitochondrial  membrane  potential 
using  JC-1  showed  increased  shift  of  red  to  green 
fluorescence  after  8  hours  treatments  with  L-DOPA 
or  dopamine  in  dopaminergic  cells  (shifts  from  C2 
fraction  to  C4  fraction  in  Fig.  3A),  compared  to 
the  typical  orange-red  fluorescence  of  JC-1  ag-
gregates  in  F3  (C2  fraction  in  Fig.  3A).  L-DOPA 
and  dopamine-induced  apoptosis  caused  activation 
of  PARP,  caspase  3  and  caspase  7,  common 
execution  systems  in  apoptosis  by  western  blot 
that 
analysis  (Fig.  3B).  These 

findings 

indicate 

Fig.  2.  Dopamine-  and  L-DOPA-in-
duced  apoptosis.  Neural  stem  cells 
were  incubated  with  dopamine  (500
μM)  or  L-DOPA  (100μM)  and  ap-
optotic  cell  death  after  24  hours  was 
quantified  by  Annexin  V  and  PI  flu-
orescence  using  flow  cytometry  (A) 
and  nuclear  Hoechst  stain  (B).  Num-
bers  inside  the  boxes  of  L4  and  L2 
represent  percentages  of  cell  popu-
lation  in  early  and  late  stage  of  ap-
optosis,  respectively.

160 Sung-Man  Jeon,  et  al.

L-DOPA  and  dopamine-induced  apoptosis  follows  a 
typical  mitochondrial  and  caspase-dependent  path-
way.

Apoptosis  by  proteasome  inhibitors

    Proteasome  inhibitors  induced  apoptosis  in  do-
paminergic  neurons  (Fig.  4).  PI  assay  showed  PSI 
was  more  potent  than  lactacystin  and  MG-132, 
inducing  over  40%  apoptosis  at  10  nM  in  all  the 
cell 
there  was  no  significant 
difference  in  sensitivity  between  F3  and  F3.AADC. 

types.  However, 

Effects  of  proteasome  inhibition  on  dopamine- 
induced  apoptosis

    To  examine  the  combined  effect  of  proteasome 
inhibition  and  dopamine-induced  apoptosis,  F3  and 
F3.AADC  cells  were  simultaneously  treated  with 
dopamine  and  PSI  or  lactacystin  for  a  short  term  at 
higher  concentrations  or  a 
long 
lower 
term  at 
concentrations.  Both  proteasome 
inhibitors  and 
dopamine  induced  apoptosis  when  treated  alone  for 
1  day,  as  shown  above  (Fig.  1B  and  4).  However, 

Fig.  3.  Mitochondrial,  PARP  and  cas-
pase-dependent  apoptosis 
induced 
by  dopamine  and  L-DOPA.  Neural 
stem  cells  were  incubated  with  dopa-
mine  (500μM)  or  L-DOPA  (100μM) 
and  mitochondrial  membrane  poten-
tial  was  measured  by  flow  cytometry 
using  JC-1  at  8  hours  after  treatment 
(A).  Activation  of  PARP,  caspase  3 
and  caspase  7  was  assessed  by 
western  blots  after  24  hours  of 
treatment  (B).

treated 

together 

rate  of  apoptosis  following  combined  treatments 
was  not  increased  additively  when  compared  to  that 
of  dopamine  or  proteasome-only  condition  (Fig.  5A). 
And  when 
for  1  day  at  high 
concentration,  a  difference  in  dopamine  sensitivity 
between  F3  and  F3.AADC  was  not  observed  any 
more.  However,  long-term  culture  with  combined 
low  concentration  of  proteasome 
dopamine  and 
inhibitors  (5  days)  significantly 
increased  dopa-
mine-induced  apoptosis,  especially 
in  F3.AADC 
cells,  making  dopaminergic  cells  more  sensitive  to 
dopamine  (Fig.  5B).

Inclusion  body  formation  in  the  process  of 
combined  dopamine  and  proteasome  inhibi-
tors-induced  apoptosis 

    Immunocytofluorescene  study  was  done  after 
long-term  culture  with  combined  dopamine  and  low 
concentration  of  proteasome  inhibitors  to  evaluate 
the  correlation  between  formation  of  Lewy  body-like 
cytoplasmic  inclusions  and  apoptosis  induced  by 
combined  dopamine  and  proteasome 
inhibition. 

Additive  Effect  of  Proteasome  Inhibition  to  Dopamine 161

Fig.  5.  Effects  of  proteasome  inhibition  on  dopamine-induced 
apoptosis.  Neural  stem  cells  were  incubated  with  dopamine  in 
the  absence  or  presence  of  indicated  concentrations  of  pro-
teasome  inhibitors,  PSI  and  lactacystin,  Apoptosis  was  quantified 
by  flow  cytometry  using  PI  at  24  hours  after  treatments  (A)  or  5 
days  after  treatments  (B).  *p＜0.05,  vs.  without  dopamine,  #p
＜0.05,  vs.  without  proteasome  inhibitors.

Fig.  4.  Apoptosis  induced  by  proteasome  inhibition.  Neural  stem 
cells  were  incubated  with  indicated  concentrations  of  proteasome 
inhibitor  PSI  (A),  lactacystin  (B)  and  MG-132  (C).  Apoptosis  was 
quantified  by 
flow  cytometry  using  PI  at  24  hours  after 
treatments.  There  was  no  difference  between  cell  lines.  #p＜0.05, 
vs.  control  condition.

Apoptotic  cells  induced  by  long-term  treatment  of 
dopamine  alone  showed  increased  Lewy  body-like 
cytoplasmic  inclusions  containing  both  α-synuclein 
and  ubiquitin  (Fig.  6).  However,  α-synuclein  and 
ubiquitin  were  not  completely  co-localized  in  the 
same  Lewy  body-like  inclusions,  so  there  were 
some  fractions  of  inclusions  stained  only  with  either 
α-synuclein  or  ubiquitin.  Addition  of  low  concen-
tration  of  proteasome  inhibitors  to  dopamine  further 
increased  α-synuclein  and  ubiquitin-positive  Lewy 
body  like  inclusions,  especially  in  the  F3.AADC. 

DISCUSSION

    Human  neural  stem  cells  (HB1.F3)  immortalized 
by  a  retroviral  vector  encoding  v-myc  were  em-
ployed  in  the  present  study.  Dopaminergic  trans-
formation  of  HB1.F3  was  carried  out  with  hu-

man  aromatic  acid  decarboxylase  gene  trans-
fection  (F3.AADC).  Addition  of  L-DOPA  into  culture 
media  significantly  increased  the  levels  of  dopamine 
in  cytoplasm  and  culture  media  of  F3.AADC,  com-
pared  to  those  of  F3  cells.  Therefore  F3.AADC  cells 
were  regarded  as  dopaminergic  cell  line  producing 
dopamine  endogenously,  and  compared  with  non- 
secreting  F3  cells  to  evaluate  the  difference  in 
dopamine  sensitivity.
    Dopamine  and  L-DOPA-induced  cell  death  was 
found  in  a  dose-dependent  manner  in  all  cell  lines, 
and  dopaminergic  cell  lines  were  more  susceptible 
to  dopamine,  but  not  to  L-DOPA.  F3  was  more 
susceptible  to  L-DOPA,  which  might  be  explained 
by  a  preconditioning  effect  that  dopaminergic  cells 
were  already  exposed  to  L-DOPA  as  an  additive  to 
culture  media  or  endogenous  products.  Precon-
ditioning  effect  of  reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS)  to 
protect  dopamine-induced  apoptosis  could  contri-
bute  the  susceptibility  of  F3  to  L-DOPA  (Tang  et 
al.,  2005). 
    Most  of  cell  death 
induced  by  L-DOPA  or 
dopamine  was  apoptosis  as  shown  by  nuclear 
staining  with  PI  and  flow  cytometric  analysis  using 

162 Sung-Man  Jeon,  et  al.

Fig.  6.  α-Synuclein  positive  inclu-
sion  body  formation  in  the  process 
of  apoptosis  induced  by  dopamine 
and  proteasome 
inhibitors.  Neural 
stem  cells  were  treated  with  dopa-
mine  (50μM)  in  the  presence  or 
absence  of  proteasome 
inhibitors, 
PSI  (1  nM)  and  lactacystin  (0.1μM) 
for  5  days.  Inclusion  body  forma-
tion  was  assessed  by  immunofluor-
escence  study  using  α-synuclein  (red) 
and  ubiquitin  (green).

annexin  V/PI.  Measurement  of  mitochondrial  mem-
brane  potential  showed  increase  of  JC-1  monomeric 
form  in  dopaminergic  cells  by  dopamine.  These 
results  are  consistent  with  previous  studies  (Lee  et 
al.,  2007;  Zafar  et  al.,  2007),  indicating  that  dis-
ruption  of  mitochondrial  functions  had  a  role  in 
dopamine-induced  apoptosis  of  dopaminergic  cells. 
Caspases  play  an  important  role  in  the  apoptotic 
process  both  in  death  receptor  pathway  and  the 
mitochondrial  pathway  (Grütter,  2000).  Western  blot 
analysis  of 
this  experiment  revealed  dopamine- 
induced  activation  of  caspase  3  and  7,  and  PARP 
in  the  course  of  apoptosis  in  dopaminergic  cells. 
    Proteasomes  are  the  primary  enzymes  involved 
in  the  degradation  of  proteins  within  cells.  Dys-
function  of  ubiquitin-proteasome  system  has  taken  a 
great  attention  in  the  pathogenesis  of  Parkinson's 
disease  (Olanow  and  McNaught,  2006). 
the 
the  effect  of  dopamine  and 
report  comparing 
proteasome 
inhibitor,  dopamine-induced  neuronal 
death  was  blocked  by  anti-oxidants  but  the  effect  of 
proteasome  inhibitor  was  not  influenced,  suggesting 
that  dopamine 
injury  but 
proteasome  inhibitor  could  contribute  to  cell  death 
by  non-oxidative  mechanism  (Zafar  et  al.,  2007). 
Several  proteasomal  inhibitors  have  been  used  as 
key  molecules  for  in  vivo  and/or  in  vitro  models  of 
Parkinson's  disease.  It  has  been  demonstrated  that 
MG132 
inhibition  with  ac-
cumulation  of  oxidized  proteins  and  subsequent  cell 
death  in  PC12  cells  and  N27  cells  (Sun  et  al., 

induced  oxidative  cell 

induced  proteasomal 

In 

the 

recent 

inhibitors 

this  study,  proteasomal 

2006).  Lactacystin  has  been  documented  to  have 
the  capability  to  cause  impairment  of  ubiquitin- 
proteasome  system  and  sufficient  to  produce  cell 
death 
in  cultured  dopaminergic  neuronal  cells 
(Reaney  et  al.,  2006).  PSI  has  drawn  a  great 
attention  because  of 
report,  which 
asserted  development  of  progressive  animal  model 
of  PD  by  systemic  exposure  of  PSI  (McNaught  et 
al.,  2004).  Nonetheless, 
there  has  been  con-
siderable  debate  due  to  the  failure  of  replication  of 
this  animal  model  (Kordower  et  al.,  2006;  Mathur  et 
al.,  2007). 
induced 
    In 
there  was  no 
dose-dependent  apoptosis,  and 
significant  difference  between  F3  and  dopaminergic 
further 
cell 
increased  dopamine-induced  apoptosis 
time- 
dependent  manner.  Exposure 
to  relatively  high 
concentration  of  proteasomal  inhibitors  for  short 
duration 
in 
dopaminergic  cells  but  did  not  potentiate  the  effect 
of  dopamine-induced  apoptosis.  Chronic  exposure 
(5  days) 
low  concentration  of  proteasomal 
inhibitors  significantly  increased  dopamine-induced 
apoptosis,  especially  in  dopaminergic  cells,  resulting 
in  more  selective  dopamine  susceptibility.  Immu-
nostaining  with  α-synuclein  and  ubiquitin  showed 
formation  of  α-synuclein  and  ubiquitin-positive 
cytoplasmic 
the  process  of 
dopamine-induced  apoptosis  and  combination  with 
chronic  exposure  to  proteasomal  inhibitors  further 

(F3.AADC).  Proteasomal 

increase  apoptosis 

inclusion  bodies 

(24  hours)  did 

inhibition 

to 

in 

in 

increase  of  cytoplasmic 

increased  inclusions,  especially  in  the  dopaminergic 
cell  lines.  Recent  report  showed  time-dependent 
increase  of  cell  death  by  prolonged  exposure  to 
proteasome  inhibitors  with  corresponding  increase 
of  ROS  (Papa  et  al.,  2007).  Furthermore,  they 
suggested  ROS-dependent  collapse  of  the  mito-
chondrial  membrane  potential  and  the  nuclear  re-
localization  of  apoptosis-inducing  factor  were  de-
cisive  events  in  neuronal  cell  death,  independently 
on  caspase  mechanism.  Their  results  indicate  that 
chronic  exposure  to  subtoxic  dose  of  proteasome 
inhibitors 
induces  neuronal  apoptosis  by  ROS, 
which  is  contradictory  to  those  of  Zafar  et  al. 
(2007).  As  previously  cited,  they  found  that  subtoxic 
dose  of  proteasome 
inhibitors  even  protect  6- 
hydroxy-dopamine-induced  dopaminergic  neural  loss 
despite 
inclusions  sug-
gesting  a  protective  role  of  α-synuclein-positive 
inclusions  (Inden  et  al.,  2005).  In  the  present  study, 
which  was  consistent  with  those  of  Papa  et  al. 
(2007),  time-dependent  increase  of  cell  death  and 
potentiation  of  dopamine-induced  apoptosis  by 
proteasome  inhibitors  were  observed.  And  there 
were  increased  cytoplasmic  inclusions  in  chronically 
proteasome 
inhibitor-exposed  dopaminergic  cells. 
These  findings  could  be  another  in  vitro  evidence  to 
support  PD  animal  model  by  chronic  PSI  exposure. 
However,  whether  the  mechanism  of  cell  death  by 
prolonged  exposure 
is 
different  from  that  by  acute  exposure  should  be 
further  elucidated. 
    In  conclusion,  dopaminergic  cells  (F3.AADC)  were 
more  susceptible  to  dopamine  compared  to  pro-
totype  F3  neural  stem  cells.  Dopamine-induced 
apoptosis  was  through  activation  of  caspases  and 
disruption  of  mitochondrial  membrane  potential. 
Chronic  exposure 
in-
hibitors  further  increased  dopamine-induced  apop-
tosis  and  Lewy  body-like  cytoplasmic 
inclusions 
selectively  in  dopaminergic  cells.  These  findings 
support  that  dopamine  and  proteasomal  dysfunction 
play 
to  apoptotic  cell  death  of 
dopaminergic  neurons.  These  results  suggest  that 
chronic  proteasomal  dysfunction  superimposed  on 
dopamine  might  account  for  selective  dopaminergic 
neuronal  cell  death 
the  pathogenesis  of 
Parkinson's  disease.

low  dose  proteasomal 

important  roles 

to  proteasome 

inhibitors 

to 

in 

Additive  Effect  of  Proteasome  Inhibition  to  Dopamine 163

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

    This  study  was  supported  by  Dong-A  University 
Research  Fund.

REFERENCES

Ahmadi  FA,  Grammatopoulos  TN,  Poczobutt  AM,  Jones  SM, 
Snell  LD,  Das  M  and  Zawada  WM  (2008)  Dopamine 
selectively  sensitizes  dopaminergic  neurons  to  rotenone- 
induced  apoptosis.  Neurochem  Res  33:886-901.

Behbahani  H,  Rickle  A,  Concha  H,  Ankarcrona  M,  Winblad  B 
and  Cowburn  RF  (2005)  Flow  cytometry  as  a  method  for 
studying  effects  of  stressors  on  primary  rat  neurons.  J 
Neurosci  Res  82:432-441.

Cho  T,  Bae  JH,  Choi  HB,  Kim  SS,  McLarnon  JG,  Suh-Kim  H, 
Kim  SU  and  Min  CK  (2002)  Human  neural  stem  cells: 
electrophysiological  properties  of  voltage-gated  ion  chan-
nels.  Memb  Biophysics  Biochem  13:1447-1452.

Chu  K,  Kim  M,  Jeong  SW,  Kim  SU  and  Yoon  BW  (2003) 
Human  neural  stem  cells  can  migrate,  differentiate,  and 
integrate  after  intravenous  transplantation  in  adult  rats  with 
transient  forebrain  ischemia.  Neurosci  Lett  343:129-133.

Flax  JD,  Aurora  S,  Yang  C,  Simonin  C,  Wills  AM,  Billinghurst 
LL,  Jendoubi  M,  Sidman  RL,  Wolfe  JH,  Kim  SU  and 
Snyder  EY  (1998)  Engraftable  human  neural  stem  cells 
respond 
to  developmental  cues,  replace  neurons,  and 
express  foreign  genes.  Nat  Biotechnol  16:1033-1039.

Foley  P  and  Riederer  P  (2000)  Influence  of  neurotoxins  and 
oxidative  stress  on  the  onset  and  progression  of  Par-
kinson's  disease.  J  Neurol  247:1182-1194.

Forno  LS  (1996)  Neuropathology  of  Parkinson's  disease.  J 

Neuropathol  Exp  Neurol  55:259-272. 

Grütter  MG  (2000)  Caspases:  key  players  in  programmed  cell 

death.  Curr  Opin  Struct  Biol  10:649-655.

Hatano  T,  Kubo  S,  Sato  S  and  Hattori  N  (2009)  Pathogenesis 
of  familial  Parkinson's  disease:  new  insights  based  on 
monogenic  forms  of  Parkinson's  disease.  J  Neurochem 
111:1075-1093.

Inden  M,  Kondo  J,  Kitamura  Y,  Takata  K,  Nishimura  K, 
Taniguchi  T,  Sawada  H  and  Shimohama  S  (2005)  Pro-
teasome  inhibitors  protect  against  degeneration  of  nigral 
dopaminergic  neurons  in  hemiparkinsonian  rats.  J  Phar-
macol  Sci  97:203-211.

Kordower  JH,  Kanaan  NM,  Chu  Y,  Suresh  Babu  R,  Stansell 
J  3rd,  Terpstra  BT,  Sortwell  CE,  Steece-Collier  K  and 
Collier  TJ  (2006)  Failure  of  proteasome 
inhibitor  ad-
ministration  to  provide  a  model  of  Parkinson's  disease  in 
rats  and  monkeys.  Ann  Neurol  60:264-268.

Lee  MK,  Kang  SJ,  Poncz  M,  Song  KJ  and  Park  KS  (2007) 
Resveratrol  protects  SH-SY5Y  neuroblastoma  cells  from 
apoptosis  induced  by  dopamine.  Exp  Mol  Med  30:376- 
384.

Lev  N,  Melamed  E  and  Offen  D  (2006)  Proteasomal  inhibition 
hypersensitizes  differentiated  neuroblastoma  cells  to  oxi-
dative  damage.  Neurosci  Lett  399:27-32.

Mathur  BN,  Neely  MD,  Dyllick-Brenzinger  M,  Tandon  A  and 
Deutch  AY  (2007)  Systemic  administration  of  a  pro-
teasome  inhibitor  does  not  cause  nigrostriatal  dopamine 

164 Sung-Man  Jeon,  et  al.

degeneration.  Brain  Res  1168:83-89.

McNaught  KS,  Perl  DP,  Brownell  AL  and  Olanow  CW  (2004) 
inhibitors  causes  a 
Systemic  exposure 
progressive  model  of  Parkinson's  disease.  Ann  Neurol 
56:149-162.

to  proteasome 

Mytilineou  C,  McNaught  KS,  Shashidharan  P,  Yabut  J, 
Baptiste  RJ,  Parnandi  A  and  Olanow  CW  (2004)  Inhibition 
of  proteasome  activity  sensitizes  dopamine  neurons 
to 
protein  alterations  and  oxidative  stress.  J  Neural  Transm 
111:1237-1251.

Olanow  CW  and  McNaught  KS  (2006)  Ubiquitin-proteasome 
system  and  Parkinson's  disease.  Mov  Disord  21:1806- 
1823.

Papa  L,  Gomes  E  and  Rockwell  P  (2007)  Reactive  oxygen 
species  induced  by  proteasome  inhibition  in  neuronal  cells 
mediate  mitochondrial  dysfunction  and  a  caspase-inde-
pendent  cell  death.  Apoptosis  12:1389-1405.

Reaney  SH,  Johnston  LC,  Langston  WJ  and  Di  Monte  DA 
(2006)  Comparison  of  the  neurotoxic  effects  of  protea-
somal  inhibitors  in  primary  mesencephalic  cultures.  Exp 
Neurol  202:434-440.

Rideout  HJ,  Dietrich  P,  Wang  Q,  Dauer  WT  and  Stefanis  L 
(2004)  Alpha-synuclein  is  required  for  the  fibrillar  nature  of 
ubiquitinated  inclusions  induced  by  proteasomal  inhibition 
in  primary  neurons.  J  Biol  Chem  279:46915-46920.

Sun  F,  Anantharam  V,  Zhang  D,  Latchoumycandane  C,  Kan-
(2006)  Proteasome 
thasamy  A  and  Kanthasamy  AG 
inhibitor  MG-132 
in 
cell  culture  and  animal  models.  Neurotoxicology  27:807- 
815.

induces  dopaminergic  degeneration 

Tang  XQ,  Feng  JQ,  Chen  J,  Chen  PX,  Zhi  JL,  Cui  Y,  Guo 
RX  and  Yu  HM 
(2005)  Protection  of  oxidative  pre-
conditioning  against  apoptosis  induced  by  H2O2  in  PC12 
cells:  mechanisms  via  MMP,  ROS,  and  Bcl-2.  Brain  Res 
1057:57-64.

Weidong  Le,  Shen  Chen  and  Jankovic  J  (2009)  Etiopatho-
genesis  of  Parkinson  disease:  a  new  beginning?  Neuro-
scientist  15:28-35.

Zafar  KS, 

Inayat-Hussain  SH  and  Ross  D 

(2007)  A 
comparative  study  of  proteasomal  inhibition  and  apoptosis 
induced  in  N27  mesencephalic  cells  by  dopamine  and 
MG132.  J  Neurochem  102:913-921.

