Experimental  Neurobiology
Vol.  19,  pages  75∼82,  September  2010

A  Winged-Helix  Transcription  Factor  Foxg1 

Induces  Expression  of  Mss4  Gene 

in  Rat  Hippocampal  Progenitor  Cells

Ju-Suk  Nam,  Haijie  Yang,  Nam-Ho  Kim,  Yuanjie  Sun, 

Byung-Soo  Choi  and  Sung-Oh  Huh*

Department  of  Pharmacology,  Institute  of  Natural  Medicine, 

College  of  Medicine,  Hallym  University,  Chunchon  200-702,  Korea

ABSTRACT

Foxg1  (previously  named  BF1)  is  a  winged-helix  transcription  factor  with  restricted 
expression  pattern  in  the  telencephalic  neuroepithelium  of  the  neural  tube  and  in  the 
anterior  half  of  the  developing  optic  vesicle.  Previous  studies  have  shown  that  the 
targeted  disruption  of  the  Foxg1  gene  leads  to  hypoplasia  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres 
with  severe  defect  in  the  structures  of  the  ventral  telencephalon.  To  further  investigate 
the  molecular  mechanisms  by  which  Foxg1  plays  essential  roles  during  brain  de-
velopment,  we  have  adopted  a  strategy  to  isolate  genes  whose  expression  changes 
immediately  after  introduction  of  Foxg1  in  cultured  neural  precursor  cell  line,  HiB5. 
Here,  we  report  that  seventeen  genes  were  isolated  by  ordered  differential  displays 
that  are  up-regulated  by  over-expression  of  Foxg1,  in  cultured  neuronal  precursor  cells. 
By  nucleotide  sequence  comparison  to  known  genes  in  the  GeneBank  database,  we 
find  that  nine  of  these  clones  represent  novel  genes  whose  DNA  sequences  have  not 
been  reported.  The  results  suggest  that  these  genes  are  closely  related  to  develop-
mental  regulation  of  Foxg1.

Key  words:  Foxg1,  telencephalon  development,  Mss4,  ordered-differential  display

INTRODUCTION

    The  telencephalon  is  the  most  complex  and  di-
vergent  structure  of  the  vertebrate  central  nervous 
system.  A  crucial  regulator  of  telencephalic  de-
velopment  is  Foxg1  (previously  named  BF1),  for 
which  mutations  were  very  recently  identified  as  the 
cause  of  a  congenital  form  of  the  severe  human 
neurodegenerative  disease  Rett  syndrome  (Ariani  et 

*To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed.
TEL:  82-33-248-2615,  FAX:  82-33-248-2612
e-mail:  s0huh@hallym.ac.kr
Received  September  21,  2010
Accepted  for  publication  September  25,  2010

al.,  2008).  This  Forkhead  transcriptional  repressor, 
which  encodes  a  winged  helix  transcription  factor 
expressed  in  telencephalon,  is  thought  to  participate 
in  diverse  developmental  processes  such  as  pro-
liferation,  differentiation,  patterning  and  neurogene-
sis  (Seoane  et  al.,  2004;  Regad  et  al.,  2007; 
Danesin  et  al.,  2009).  Foxg1  expression  in  the 
developing  brain  is  restricted  to  the  telencephalic 
neuroepithelium  and  the  nasal  half  of  the  retina  and 
optic  stalk  (Tao  and  Lai,  1992).  It  was  previously 
reported  that  mice  lacking  Foxg1  die  at  birth  with 
hypoplasia  of  the  telencephalon,  therefore,  Foxg1 
controls  the  morphogenesis  of  the  telencephalon  by 
regulating  the  rate  of  neuroepithelial  cell  prolifera-

76 Ju-Suk  Nam,  et  al.

tion  and  the  timing  of  neuronal  differentiation  (Xuan 

et  al.,  1995).  In  Foxg1(−/−)  mutant,  defects  in  the 

patterning  of  the  dorsal-ventral  axis  of  the  optic 
vesicle  are  correlated  with  a  localized  loss  of  shh 
expression  in  the  ventral  telencephalon  and  ab-
normal  expression  of  Pax6  and  Pax2  (Huh  et  al., 
1999).  In  controlling  the  pattern  of  neurogenesis  in 
Xenopus  ectoderm,  XFoxg1  regulates  the  expres-
sion  of  XSox3,  X-ngnr-1,  XMyt-1  and  X-Delta-1 
(Bourguignon  et  al.,  1998).  These  findings  raised 
the  possibility  that  lots  of  genes  controlling  de-
velopment  are  regulated  by  Foxg1. 
    The  growth  and  specification  of  forebrain  during 
development  require  the  regulation  of  Foxg1,  but 
the  distinct  molecular  mechanism  about  develop-
mental  regulation  of  Foxg1  has  not  yet  been 
elucidated,  and  few  genes  involved  in  the  function 
of  Foxg1  have  been  identified.  To  investigate  the 
molecular  mechanisms  of  Foxg1  in  vitro  system,  a 
stable  cell  line  that  has  developmental  potency  is 
necessary.  We  used  neuronal  precursor  cell  line  of 
hippocampus,  HiB5  (Renfranz  et  al.,  1991).  In  this 
neuronal  precursor  cell  line,  Foxg1  may  function  as 
developmental  control  molecule  like  in  vivo.
    The  aim  of  this  study  is  to  evaluate  the  al-
terations  in  gene  expression  in  neuronal  precursor 
cell  line  of  hippocampus  after  over-expression  of 
Foxg1.  It  is  believed  that  the  function  of  Foxg1  is  to 
control  downstream-genes  as  transcription  factor, 
and  many  genes  have  been  demonstrated  to  con-
tribute  to  the  development  of  the  forebrain.  How-
ever,  little  is  known  about  the  complete  expression 
profile  of  genes  that  are  regulated  by  Foxg1  during 
the  forebrain  development.  mRNA  differential  dis-
play  is  an  effective  method  for  isolating  genes  that 
are  expressed  differentially  among  different  con-
ditions  (Liang  and  Pardee,  1992).  The  differential 
display 
to  compare  ex-
pression  of  mRNAs  between  GFP  and  GFP-Foxg1 
transfected  neuronal  precursor  cell  line.  Although 
some  of 
to  differential 
display  which  have  been  proposed  could  be  used 
for  several  systematic  investigation,  these  methods 
are  rather  complicated  or  may  not  have  enough 
sensitivity.  So,  we  tried  ordered  differential  display 
(ODD),  which  does  not  involve  arbitrary  priming  for 
pattern  generation  and  provides  a  possibility  for  a 
through  step-by-step  comparison  of  all  mRNAs,  was 

the  approaches  related 

technique  was  applied 

developed  to  search  differentially  expressed  genes 
(Matz  et  al.,  1997;  Matz  and  Lukyanov,  1998).
    We 
isolated  seventeen  differentially  expressed 
genes,  nine  that  were  novel  and  eight  that  were 
already  known.  These  data  provide  basic  informa-
tion  necessary  to  understand  the  gene  expression 
profiles  regulated  by  Foxg1.  Further  characterization 
of  these  genes  will  help  to  clarify  the  molecular 
mechanisms  of  Foxg1  during 
forebrain  de-
velopment.

the 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS

Cell  culture

    The  HiB5  neuronal  precursor  cell  line  was  cul-
tured  by  previously  described  methods  (Renfranz  et 
al.,  1991).  Cells  were  maintained  in  Dulbecco’s 
modified  Eagle’s  medium  (Gibco)  with  10%  fetal 
bovine  serum  (Gibco)  supplemented  with  0.11  g/l 
sodium  pyruvate,  3.7  g/l  NaHCO3,  0.29  g/l  glu-
tamine,  0.6  g/l  penicillin,  and  0.1  g/l  streptomycin. 
Medium  was  changed  every  three  days  and  cells 
were  incubated  at  33oC  in  5%  CO2.  HiB5  cells 
proliferate  at  33oC,  the  permissive  temperature  of 
the  oncogenic  tsA58  allele  of  the  SV40  large  T 
antigen. 

Transfection

    HiB5  cell  line  was  cultured  in  100  mm  dishes  for 
RNA  isolation  and  plated  onto  glass  coverslips  in 
24-well  plates  for  immunocytochemistry  at  75∼80% 
confluence.  The  cells  were  transiently  transfected 
using  the  calcium-phosphate  co-precipitation  method 
(Pear  et  al.,  1993).  Two  μg/ml  of  the  vector 
encoding  2.5  kb  of  the  mouse  Foxg1  cDNA,  which 
was  subcloned 
the  pEGFP  C2  (clontech) 
expression  vector,  was  used  for  transfection.  After 
transfection,  cells  were  incubated  in  serum-free  me-
dium  including  transfection  solution  for  12  hr.  For 
transient  gene  expression  assay,  cells  were  in-
cubated  in  complete  medium  after  removing  cal-
cium-phosphate  containing  medium  for  24  hr.

into 

Immunocytochemistry

    R18F1  and  HiB5  cells  were  plated  onto  glass 
coverslips  at  a  density  of  75∼80%  confluence  in 
24-well  plates.  The  transfected  cells  were  fixed  in 
4%  paraformaldehyde  and  permeabilized  with  0.1% 

TritonX-100.  Coverslips  were  incubated  with  the 
primary  antibody  (anti-Foxg1,  1：1,500)  for  3  hr, 
and  then  incubated  for  1  hr  with  a  goat  anti-rabbit 
rhodamine-conjugated  antibody  (Leinco,  1：300). 
The  stained  coverslips  were  observed  under  fluo-
rescence  microscope  (Olympus  PROVIS  AX-70, 
X200).

RT-PCR

    Total  RNA  was  isolated  from  cultured  HiB5  cell 
line  using  TRIzol  (GibcoBRL),  and  cDNA  was  made 
using  1μg  of  RNA  and  AMV  reverse-transcriptase 
(Promega).  Primer  sequences 
for  Foxg1  were 
forward  (5'-GGGCAACAACCACTCCTTCTCCAC-3') 
and  reverse  (5'-GACCCCTGATTTTGATGTGTGAAA- 
3').  The  expected  size  of  the  Foxg1  product  was 
396  bp.  PCR  cycling  conditions  were  94oC  for  30  s, 
65oC  for  30  s,  and  72oC  for  90  s,  for  a  total  of  30 
cycles.  The  PCR  products  were  electrophoresis  on 
the  1.5%  agarose  gel  and  stained  with  ethidium 
bromide.

Ordered  differential  display

for 

    Foxg1-overexpressing  HiB5  cell  line  was  used  as 
sources  of  RNA  for  ODD.  The  techniques  used  for 
ODD  have  been  described  (Matz  et  al.,  1997).  In 
brief,  total  RNA  used  for  differential  display  was 
further  purified  to  remove  DNA  contamination  using 
the  MessageClean  Kit  (GenHunter  Corp)  and  a 
commercially  available  kit  (Boehringer  Mannheim) 
was  used 
the  synthesis  of  double-stranded 
cDNA  from  1μg  of  total  RNA,  except  the  T-primer 
for  first  strand  synthesis  provided  with  the  kit  that 
should  be  substituted  for  non-extended  ODD  T- 
primer.  cDNA  species  were  discriminated  by  the 
length  of  fragment  between  polyA  attachment  site 
and  the  first  occurrence  of  site  for  restrictase,  RsaI, 
and  then  ligated  to  5'-ends  of  full  length  cDNA 
digests  with  ODD  adaptor.  After  the  generation  of 
amplified  cDNA,  the  subsets  of  cDNA  were  pro-
duced  by  PCR  with  both  a  T-primer  and  an 
adaptor-specific  primer  extended  by  two  arbitrary 
bases  at  their  3'-ends.  The  population  of  cDNA  was 
subdivided  into  192  subsets  (as  there  exist  16 
possible  variants  of  adaptor-specific  primer  exten-
sion  and  12  of  T-primer),  which  were  displayed  on 
an  ordinary  6%  sequencing  gel.  The  gel  was 
transferred  to  3  M  filter  paper  and  dried.  By  terminal 

Regulation  of  Mss4  by  Foxg1 77

labeling  of  extended  adaptor-specific  primer  with  γ- 
33P[dATP],  the  displayed  bands  were  detected  on 
the  exposed  X-ray  films.

Reverse  northern  blotting

    The  PCR  products  were  excised  from  the  dried 
sequencing  gel  and  eluted  by  boiling  in  20μl  of 
H2O  for  10  min.  The  eluted  cDNA  fragments  were 
subjected  to  PCR  reamplification  using  the  appro-
priate  extended  T-primers  and  adaptor-specific  pri-
mers.  The  reamplified  fragments  of  cDNA  were 
fractionated  on  2%  agarose  gels  and  extracted. 
One  μl  of  the  reamplified  cDNA  fragments  directly 
applied  by  diffusion  as  targets  on  a  nitrocellulose 
membrane  and  cross-linked  by  UV-illuminator.  Two 
copies  of  the  membrane  were  prepared  and  hy-
bridized  overnight  with  [α-32P]dCTP-labeled  cDNA 
probes  reverse-transcribed  from  the  original  RNA 
preparation  of  either  the  GFP  or  the  GFP-Foxg1 
transfected  cells.  After  hybridization,  the  membranes 

were  exposed  to  X-ray  films  at  −80oC.  If  differ-

ential  expression  was  confirmed  by  reverse  northern 
blot  analysis,  the  band  was  cloned  and  sequenced 
as  described  below.

Cloning  and  sequencing

    The  differentially  expressed  cDNA  fragments  con-
firmed  by  reverse  northern  blotting  were  cloned  into 
plasmid  vector  pCRII  using  the  TOPO  TA  cloning 
system  (Invitrogen).  The  resulting  plasmids  were 
confirmed  by  restriction  enzyme  digestion  and  per-
formed  automatic  sequencing  (KAIST  BioMedical 
Research  Center).  Partial  length  sequences  were 
compared  to  all  previously  reported  gene  sequen-
ces  in  GeneBank.

In  situ  hybridization

    Mouse  brains  (P0)  were  fixed  at  4oC  in  4%  pa-
raformaldehyde  for  4  hr,  immersed  in  20%  sucrose 
overnight  and  embedded 
in  OCT  (Tissue-Tek). 
Sections  were  cut  at  10μm  on  a  cryostat.  Non-
radioactive  in  situ  hybridization  was  performed  as 
described  by  Gradwohl  (Gradwohl  et  al.,  1996). 
Antisense  RNA  probe  from  partial  fragment  of  Mss4 
were  prepared  by 
the 
linearized  DNA  templete  in  the  presence  of  di-
goxigenin-11-UTP  (Boehringer  Mannheim).  The  sub-
strate 
the  chromogenic  reaction  of  alkaline 

transcription  of 

in  vitro 

for 

pools  of  3'  cDNA  fragment  from  polyA-trac  to  the 
first  occurrence  of  RsaI  recognition  site,  and  3' 
cDNA  fragments  were  amplified  (Fig.  2A).  Adap-
ter-ligated  3'-end  cDNA  fragments  were  subjected 
to  ODD.  For  each  sample,  192  different  combi-
nations  of  primer  sets  made  of  12  extended  T- 
primers  and  16  adaptor-specific  primers  were  used 
for  PCR  amplification  to  generate  differential  dis-
plays.  PCR  products  were  separated  by  PAGE  and 
visualized  on  the  exposed  X-ray  films.  The  vast 
majority  of  the  PCR  products  were  common  in  all  of 
the  samples  (Fig.  2B).  A  total  of  98  differentially 
displayed  bands  designated  as  1  to  100  were 
excised  and  recovered  from  the  dried  gels,  and 
re-amplified  using  the  corresponding  primer  sets.  All 

78 Ju-Suk  Nam,  et  al.

phosphatase  was  BM  Purple  (Boehringer  Mann-
heim).  Stained  sections  were  mounted  and  pho-
tographed  with  Olympus  PROVIS  AX-70.

RESULTS

Over-expression  of  Foxg1  in  neuronal  precur-
sor  cell  line

    It  is  known  that  the  Foxg1  is  highly  expressed  in 
the  developing  mammalian  forebrain.  Homozygous 
null  Foxg1  mutants  die  at  birth,  and  have  a  dra-
matic  reduction  in  the  size  of  the  cerebral  hemis-
pheres  and  multiple  developmental  anomalies  of 
the  eyes  (Tao  and  Lai,  1992;  Xuan  et  al.,  1995; 
Huh  et  al.,  1999).  To  study  the  developmental 
mechanism  of  Foxg1  in  the  hippocampus  through 
the  regulation  of  the  downstream  genes,  we  used 
neuronal  precursor  cell  line  which  was  originated  in 
the  hippocampus.  As  the  first  step  to  examine  the 
molecular  mechanisms  of  Foxg1,  HiB5  cell  line  was 
transfected  with  Foxg1  subcloned  into  the  pEGFP 
C2.  Total  RNAs  from  the  transfected  cells  were 
reverse-transcribed 
the  cDNAs 
were  used  in  PCR  reaction.  Foxg1  was  weakly 
expressed  in  the  normal  state  but  increased  in  the 
transfected  cells  (Fig.  1A).  According  to  the  results 
of 
immunocytochemistry  using  specific  antibody, 
Foxg1-expressing  cells  were 
the 
GFP-expressing  cells  under  the  fluorescence  micro-
scopy.  Especially,  Foxg1  expressed  in  the  trans-
fected  cells  was  localized  in  the  nucleus  (Fig.  1B). 
These  results  indicate  that  mRNA  and  protein  level 
of  Foxg1  were  simultaneously  increased  in  the 
Foxg1-transfected  cells.

into  cDNAs  and 

identical  with 

Differential  display  of  mRNAs  isolated  from 
the  Foxg1-overexpressing  cells

    We  compared  the  profiles  of  gene  expression 
between  the  GFP-  and  GFP-Foxg1-transfected  cell 
line  by  ordered  differential  display,  using  192  sets 
of  primer  pairs  as  described  previously  (Matz  et  al., 
1997).  ODD  often  shows 
false  positive  bands 
because  of  differences  in  the  efficiency  of  reverse 
transcription  or  PCR  among  each  sample.  To 
overcome  this  problem,  we  duplicated  each  sample 
and  remove  contaminating  DNA  in  total  RNA  using 
DNase  I.  Double-stranded  cDNAs  synthesized  from 
isolated  RNAs  were  used  to  prepare  representative 

Fig.  1.  Detection  of  Foxg1  over-expressed  in  level  of  both  mRNA 
and  protein.  The  expression  level  of  Foxg1  was  increased  in 
HiB5  cell  line  transfected  with  constructs  encoding  GFP  or  Foxg1 
tagged  with  GFP  by  calcium-phosphate  method.  Twenty-four 
hours  after  transfection,  cells  were  fixed  or  harvested  and  their 
total  RNA  was  isolated.  RT-PCR  result  indicated  that  mRNA  level 
of  Foxg1  was  increased  in  HiB5  and  R18F1  cells  transfected  with 
Foxg1  (A).  mRNA  from  C6  cell  line  was  used  for  positive  control 
of  Foxg1  and  β-actin  was  used  for  internal  control.  Increased 
protein  and  cellular  localization  of  Foxg1  were  detected  in  HiB5 
cell  line  transfected  with  Foxg1  by  immunocytochemistry  with 
anti-Foxg1  antibody  (B).  GFP  was  visualized  as  green  fluo-
rescence  and  Foxg1  was  visualized  as  red  fluorescence.

Regulation  of  Mss4  by  Foxg1 79

Fig.  3.  Reverse-northern  blot  analysis  of  17  confirmed  cDNA 
fragments  differentially  expressed  in  Foxg1-transfected  cells.  Out 
of  100  Fragments,  17  were  confirmed  for  their  differential  ex-
pression  patterns.  Note  that  the  RNA  for  the  cDNA  probe  was 
derived  from  another  cell  culture  preparation  than  the  one  used 
for  the  original  ODD.  Arrows  indicate  the  differentially  expressed 
dots.  Below  the  blots  are  the  controls  DNA,  cyclophiline  (CPN), 
demonstrating  that  equivalent  amounts  of  total  RNA  were  hy-
bridized  on  each  blots.

GFP-Foxg1-transfected  cell  line  was  radioactively 
labeled  and  used  as  probes  for  reverse-northern 
blot  analysis  of  all  100  reamplified  cDNA  fragments. 
Seventeen  percent  (17  out  of  100)  of  these  re-
amplified  cDNA  fragments  were  certified  to  the 
original  observed  displayed  patterns  (Fig.  3).  For 
internal  control,  cyclophilin  was  used.  Reverse-nor-
thern  blot  analysis  confirmed  that  these  clones 
corresponded  to  mRNA  that  was  differentially  ex-
pressed  in  response  to  Foxg1.

Identification  of  the  cloned  cDNA  fragments

for 

fragments  were 
    Differentially  expressed  cDNA 
subcloned  into  pCRII  cloning  vector  and  sequenced 
automatically  using  M13  primer.  The  unique  se-
quence  of  the  differentially  expressed  cDNA  frag-
ments  were  compared  to  GeneBank  entries  using 
BLASTn  (Altschul  et  al.,  1997).  All  17  confirmed 
cDNA  fragments  were  successfully  cloned  into  TA 
cloning  vectors 
further  analysis.  The  above 
cloned  cDNA  fragments  were  subjected  to  DNA 
sequencing.  All  sequences  of  17  cDNA  fragments 
were  flanked  by  sequences  derived  from  the  ex-
tended  T-primers  and  adaptor-specific  primers  used 
in  PCR  amplification.  The  features  of  each  clone 
are  summarized  in  Table  1.  Homology  searches 
against  GeneBank  database  revealed 
that  nine 
fragments  are  not  homologous  to  any  known  genes 
and  the  other  eight  fragments  contain  partial  cDNA 
sequences  for  known  genes  (Table  1).

Fig.  2.  Example  of  the  ordered  differential  display.  Double-strand-
ed  cDNA  was  synthesized  with  non-extended  ODD  T-primer  (5'- 
GCGAGTCGACCG(T)13)  using  double-stranded  cDNA  synthesis 
kit  (Boehringer  Mannheim)  and  the  cDNA  fragment  pools,  ligated 
with  pseudo-double-stranded  adaptor:  long  oligo  (5'-GCGTGA-
AGACGACAGAAAGGGCGTGGTGCGGAGGGC  GGT)  and  short 
one  (5'-AC-CGCCCTCCGC),  were  amplified  with  adaptor-specific 
primer  (5'-TGTAGCGTGAA  GACGACAGAA)  and  non-extended 
ODD  T-primer  (A).  Several  primer  combinations  were  used  to 
amplify  the  cDNA  fragments  as  described  in  materials  and  me-
thods,  and  33P-labeled  PCR  products  were  separated  by  PAGE 
(B).  Each  sample  was  prepared  as  duplication.  Arrowheads  in-
dicate  differential  expressed  bands.

of  cDNAs  were  re-amplified  with  sizes  between  100
∼500  bp.

Reverse  northern  blot  analysis  of  the  differ-
ential  expressed  cDNA  fragments

    Those  cDNA  fragments  were  recovered  from  the 
gel  and  reamplified  by  PCR  with  the  same  primer 
sets.  To  confirm  the  expression  patterns  observed 
in  the  sequencing  gels,  RNAs  from  the  GFP-  and 

80 Ju-Suk  Nam,  et  al.

Table  1.  Identification  of  Foxg1-responsive  genes  (up-regulated)  by  ordered  differential  display

Clone

Homology  with  known  genes  or  EST  clones

Function  (putative)

  1
11
16
18
22-L
22-S

24
26
27

37
50
51
84
86
90
92
98

Rat              AI502605        388  bp      mRNA      EST
Rat              AI710681        362  bp      mRNA      EST
Rat              AW253495      334  bp      mRNA      EST
Human      gadd45
Rat            AA900991        516  bp      mRNA      EST
Rat            mss4

Rat            CEP52
Rat            Galectin  8  (RL-30) 
Rat            (XL  alpha  s)

Mouse      M-beta-2
Not  found  in  any  other  database
Mouse      W44112            335  bp      mRNA      EST
Rat            NADH:ubiquinone  oxidoreductase  subunit
Mouse      MITF-2B
Rat            AI711590          397  bp      mRNA      EST
Rat            AI556121          358  bp      mRNA      EST
Rat            AI145929          414  bp      mRNA      EST

Unknown
Unknown
Unknown
DNA  damage-repair
Unknown
Guanine  nucleotide-releasing  protein,  regulation  of  synaptic 
  secreation 
Ubiquitin/60S  ribosomal  subunit  protein
S-type  lectin,  sugar  binding  and  hemaggulutination  activity
Guanine  nucleotide-binding  protein,  secretory  vesicle 
  formation
Beta-tubulin  gene,  cytoskeleton  formation
Unknown
Unknown
Electron  transfer
bHLH  family,  inhibition  of  MyoD  activity
Unknown
Unknown
Unknown

presumptive  hippocampal  region  (arrows  in  Fig.  4), 
suggesting 
that  Mss4  expression  might  be  de-
pendent  on  the  normal  expression  of  Foxg1  during 
development  of  hippocampus. 

DISCUSSION

    Identification  of  genes  whose  expression  is  al-
tered  in  Foxg1-overexpressing  cells  would  be  ins-
trumental  in  elucidating  the  molecular  mechanism  of 
developmental  regulation  by  Foxg1.  Here,  using  an 
ordered-differential  differential  display  screening,  we 
isolated  seventeen  distinct  genes  that  are  differ-
entially  expressed  after  screening  of  100  differential 
bands  from  the  differential  sequencing  gels.  Of 
these,  eight  genes  represent  known  genes  or  ho-
mologues  of  genes  characterized  previously,  and 
the  other  nine  genes  represent  genes  that  are  not 
related  to  any  sequences  in  the  databases.  All 
seventeen  genes  have  not  been 
to  be 
associated  with  the  Foxg1  gene  prior  to  our  study. 
In  our  experimental  condition,  over-expression  of 
Foxg1  in  hippocampal  progenitor  cells  did  not  affect 
marked  changes  in  cell  morphology.  However,  the 
gain-of-Foxg1  functions  in  these  cells  were  found  to 
be  modifying  the  level  of  expression  of  genes  that 
are  involved  in  cell  proliferation,  differentiation  or 
survival.  Foxg1  increased  the  expression  of  Mss4, 

found 

Fig.  4.  Expression  of  Mss4  in  the  heterozygote  and  homozy-

gote  Foxg1  mutant  mouse  brain.  Sections  from  Foxg1(＋/−) 
heterozygote  (A)  and  Foxg1(−/−)  mutant  (B)  at  P0  were  probed 

by  in  situ  hybridization  for  Mss4  expression.  cDNA  fragment  of 
Mss4  cloned  in  pCRII  was  used  for  dig-labeled  probe  by  in  vitro 
transcription.  (A)  A  coronal  section  of  the  telencephalon  from  the 

Foxg1(＋/−)  heterozygote  mice.  (B)  A  coronal  section  of  the 
telencephalon  from  the  Foxg1(−/−)  mutant  mice.  Thl:  thalamus, 

Ctx:  cortex.

Down-regulation  of  Mss4  mRNA  expression  in 

the  hippocampus  of  the  Foxg1(−/−)  mutant 

mice

    Using  non-radioactive  in-situ  hybridization,  Mss4 
mRNA  level  was  examined  in  the  heterozygote  and 
homozygote  Foxg1  mutant  mouse  brain.  In  the 

Foxg1(＋/−)  mouse  hippocampus,  the  specific  Mss4 
in  the  Foxg1(−/−)  mutant  hippocampus,  the  spe-

signal  was  detected  (arrows  in  Fig.  4A).  However, 

cific  Mss4  massage  was  not  detected 

in 

the 

XL  alpha-s,  NADH:ubiquinone  oxidoreductase  sub-
unit,  Gadd45,  CEP52,  M-beta-2,  Galectin  8,  and 
several  unknown  genes.  Our  observations  indicate 
that  Foxg1  modifies  the  expression  of  several  ge-
nes  in  neuronal  precursor  cell  line.  The  information 
on  such  genes  may  facilitate  our  understanding  of 
the  spectrum  of  the  functional  genetic  changes  in 
central  nervous  system  development.
    Mss4  binds  to,  and  stimulates  GDP-GTP  ex-
change  on,  a  subset  of  the  Rab  GTPase  that 
belongs  to  the  Ras  superfamily  (Burton  et  al., 
1994).  The  involvement  of  Rab  proteins  in  the 
regulation  of  intracellular  membrane  traffic  and  se-
cretion  of  hormone  and  neurotransmitters  has  been 
previously  demonstrated  using  both  genetic  and 
biochemical  approaches.  ‘Extra  large’  G  protein  (XL 
alpha  s),  which  consists  of  a  new  51K  XL-portion 
linked  to  the  alpha  s  subunit  of  heterotrimeric  G 
proteins  truncated  at  the  amino  terminus,  is  spe-
cifically  associated  with  the  trans-Golgi  network  and 
occurs  selectively  in  cells  containing  both  the  re-
gulated  and  constitutive  pathway  of  protein  se-
cretion  (Kehlenbach  et  al.,  1994).  Hence,  Mss4  and 
XL  alpha  s  may  mediate  the  effects  of  Foxg1  on 
the  function  related  to  synaptic  secretion  and  se-
cretory  vesicle  formation.
    NADH:ubiquinone  oxidoreductase  (complex  I),  the 
first  and  largest  enzyme  of  the  mitochondrial  re-
spiratory  chain,  transfers  electrons  from  NADH  to 
ubiquinone-10  (UQ-10)  (Kitahara  et  al.,  1996).  This 
finding  suggest  that  up-regulation  of  the  NADH: 
ubiquinone  oxidoreductase  subunit  after  Foxg1-over-
expression  plays  an  important  role  in  the  effective 
electron  transfer  from  NADH  to  UQ-10  in  neuronal 
precursor  cell  line.
    Gadd45,  which  encodes  a  protein  associated  with 
PCNA  to  stimulate  DNA  repair  machinery  (Kastan 
et  al.,  1992),  is  a  DNA  damage-inducible  gene 
involved  in  DNA  excision  repair  that  is  induced  by  a 
variety  of  DNA-damaging  stimuli  in  mammalian  cells 
(Fornace  et  al.,  1988).  Only  gadd45,  of  the  five 
gadd  genes,  is  induced  in  the  central  nervous 
system  by  DNA-damages  (Zhu  et  al.,  1997).  At  the 
permissive  temperature,  TUNEL-stained  cells  were 
detected  in  the  small  number  of  HiB5  cells  (data 
not  shown).  Thus,  the  induction  of  gadd45  may 
suggests  that  the  Foxg1-overexpressing  cells  better 
respond  to  repair  DNA  damage  and  that  Foxg1  has 

Regulation  of  Mss4  by  Foxg1 81

survival  effect  through  the  involvement  of  DNA 
repair  systems.
    The  functions  of  other  up-regulated  genes  in 
response  to  Foxg1  are  not  elucidated  in  detail  and 
thus  the  biological  relevance  of  the  expression  of 
these  genes  in  relation  to  the  expression  of  Foxg1 
has  not  been  assessed  yet.  However,  because 
these  genes  might  play 
important  roles  as  a 
downstream  mediator  of  the  effects  of  Foxg1,  a 
detailed  cellular  signaling  cascades  exerted  by 
Foxg1  are  worth  to  investigate  in  future  studies.  In 
addition,  since  Foxg1  is  a  transcription  factor  with 
cognate  DNA  binding  sites,  examination  of 
the 
promoter  region  of  these  Foxg1-regulated  genes 
would  enlighten  novel  downstream  target  genes  of 
Foxg1  during  brain  development.  Furthermore,  func-
tional  analysis  of  the  gene  products  would  provide 
clues  in  understanding  the  molecular  mechanisms 
during 
telencephalic  morphogenesis  exerted  by 
Foxg1.  Finally,  examination  of  the  spatio-temporal 
expression  pattern  of  these  Foxg1-regulated  genes 
by  in  situ  hybridization  would  further  enlighten  the 
complicated  gene-gene  interactions  during  develop-
ment  of  telencephalon.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

    We  thank  Professor  Yunhee  Kim-Kwon  for  pro-
viding  us  with  HiB5  cell  line.  This  work  was  sup-
ported  by  Priority  Research  Centers  Program  th-
rough  the  National  Research  Foundation  of  Korea 
(NRF)  funded  by  the  Ministry  of  Education,  Science 
and  Technology  (2009-0094073).

REFERENCES

Altschul  SF,  Madden  TL,  Schaffer  AA,  Zhang  J,  Zhang  Z, 
Miller  W  and  Lipman  DJ  (1997)  Gapped  BLAST  and 
PSI-BLAST:  a  new  generation  of  protein  database  search 
programs.  Nucleic  Acids  Res  25:3389-3402.

Ariani  F,  Hayek  G,  Rondinella  D,  Artuso  R,  Mencarelli  MA, 
Spanhol-Rosseto  A,  Pollazzon  M,  Buoni  S,  Spiga  O,  Ri-
cciardi  S,  Meloni  I,  Longo  I,  Mari  F,  Broccoli  V,  Zappella 
M  and  Renieri  A  (2008)  FOXG1  is  responsible  for  the 
congenital  variant  of  Rett  syndrome.  Am  J  Hum  Genet 
83:89-93.

Bourguignon  C,  Li  J  and  Papalopulu  N  (1998)  XBF-1,  a 
winged  helix  transcription  factor  with  dual  activity,  has  a 
role  in  positioning  neurogenesis  in  Xenopus  competent 
ectoderm.  Development  125:4889-4900.

Burton  JL,  Burns  ME,  Gatti  E,  Augustine  GJ  and  De  Camilli 

82 Ju-Suk  Nam,  et  al.

P  (1994)  Specific  interactions  of  Mss4  with  members  of 
the  Rab  GTPase  subfamily.  EMBO  J  13:5547-5558.

Danesin  C,  Peres  JN,  Johansson  M,  Snowden  V,  Cording  A, 
Papalopulu  N  and  Houart  C  (2009)  Integration  of  tel-
encephalic  Wnt  and  hedgehog  signaling  center  activities 
by  Foxg1.  Dev  Cell  16:576-587.

Fornace  AJ  Jr,  Alamo  I  Jr  and  Hollander  MC  (1988)  DNA 
damage-inducible  transcripts  in  mammalian  cells.  Pro  Natl 
Acad  Sci  USA  85:8800-8804.

Gradwohl  G,  Fode  C  and  Guillemot  F  (1996)  Restricted 
expression  of  a  novel  murine  atonal-related  bHLH  protein 
in  undifferentiated  neural  precursors.  Dev  Biol  180:227- 
241.

Huh  S,  Hatini  V,  Marcus  RC,  Li  SC  and  Lai  E  (1999) 
Dorsal-ventral  patterning  defects  in  the  eye  of  BF-1-de-
ficient  mice  associated  with  a  restricted  loss  of  shh  ex-
pression.  Dev  Biol  211:53-63.

Kastan  MB,  Zhan  Q,  el-Deiry  WS,  Carrier  F,  Jacks  T,  Walsh 
WV,  Plunkett  BS,  Vogelstein  B  and  Fornace  AJ  Jr.  (1992) 
A  mammalian  cell  cycle  checkpoint  pathway  utilizing  p53 
and  GADD45 
in  ataxia-telangiectasia.  Cell 
71:587-597.

is  defective 

Kehlenbach  RH,  Matthey  J  and  Huttner  WB  (1994)  XL  alpha 

s  is  a  new  type  of  G  protein.  Nature  372:804-809.

Kitahara  T,  Takeda  N,  Kubo  T  and  Kiyama  H  (1996)  Mole-
cular  cloning  of  the  rat  NADH:ubiquinone  oxidoreductase 
subunit  and  its  up-regulation  in  the  facial  muscle  after 
denervation:  detected  by  means  of  differential  display.  Neu-
rol  Res  18:329-336.

Liang  P  and  Pardee  AB  (1992)  Differential  display  of  eu-
karyotic  messenger  RNA  by  means  of  the  polymerase 
chain  reaction.  Science  257:967-971.

Matz  M,  Usman  N,  Shagin  D,  Bogdanova  E  and  Lukyanov  S 

(1997)  Ordered  differential  display:  a  simple  method  for 
systematic  comparison  of  gene  expression  profiles.  Nu-
cleic  Acids  Res  25:2541-2542.

Matz  MV  and  Lukyanov  SA  (1998)  Different  strategies  of 
differential  display:  areas  of  application.  Nucleic  Acids  Res 
26:5537-5543.

Pear  WS,  Nolan  GP,  Scott  ML  and  Baltimore  D  (1993) 
Production  of  high-titer  helper-free  retroviruses  by  transient 
transfection.  Pro  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  90:8392-8396.

Regad  T,  Roth  M,  Bredenkamp  N,  Illing  N  and  Papalopulu  N 
(2007)  The  neural  progenitor-specifying  activity  of  FoxG1 
is  antagonistically  regulated  by  CKI  and  FGF.  Nat  Cell 
Biol  9:531-540.

Renfranz  PJ,  Cunningham  MG  and  McKay  RD  (1991)  Re-
gion-specific  differentiation  of  the  hippocampal  stem  cell 
line  HiB5  upon  implantation  into  the  developing  mamma-
lian  brain.  Cell  66:713-729.

Seoane  J,  Le  HV,  Shen  L,  Anderson  SA  and  Massague  J 
(2004)  Integration  of  Smad  and  forkhead  pathways  in  the 
control  of  neuroepithelial  and  glioblastoma  cell  prolifera-
tion.  Cell  117:211-223.

Tao  W  and  Lai  E  (1992)  Telencephalon-restricted  expression 
of  BF-1,  a  new  member  of  the  HNF-3/fork  head  gene 
family,  in  the  developing  rat  brain.  Neuron  8:957-966.

Xuan  S,  Baptista  CA,  Balas  G,  Tao  W,  Soares  VC  and  Lai 
E  (1995)  Winged  helix  transcription  factor  BF-1  is  es-
sential  for  the  development  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres. 
Neuron  14:1141-1152.

Zhu  RL,  Graham  SH,  Jin  J,  Stetler  RA,  Simon  RP  and  Chen 
J  (1997)  Kainate 
induces  the  expression  of  the  DNA 
damage-inducible  gene,  GADD45,  in  the  rat  brain.  Neuro-
science  81:707-720.

