Experimental  Neurobiology
Vol.  19,  pages  106∼113,  September  2010

Organotypic  Spinal  Cord  Slice  Culture  to  Study 
Neural  Stem/Progenitor  Cell  Microenvironment 

in  the  Injured  Spinal  Cord

Hyuk  Min  Kim1†

,  Hong  Jun  Lee2†

,  Man  Young  Lee1, 

Seung  U.  Kim2,3  and  Byung  Gon  Kim1*

1Brain  Disease  Research  Center,  Institute  for  Medical  Sciences,  and 

Department  of  Neurology,  Ajou  University  School  of  Medicine,  Suwon 

442-721,  Korea,  2Medical  Research  Institute,  Chungang  University  School  of 
Medicine,  Seoul  156-756,  Korea,  3Department  of  Neurology,  University  of 

British  Columbia,  Vancouver,  BC  V6T  2B5,  Canada

ABSTRACT

The  molecular  microenvironment  of  the  injured  spinal  cord  does  not  support  survival 
and  differentiation  of  either  grafted  or  endogenous  NSCs,  restricting  the  effectiveness 
of  the  NSC-based  cell  replacement  strategy.  Studying  the  biology  of  NSCs  in  in  vivo 
usually  requires  a  considerable  amount  of  time  and  cost,  and  the  complexity  of  the  in 
vivo  system  makes  it  difficult  to  identify  individual  environmental  factors.  The  present 
study  sought  to  establish  the  organotypic  spinal  cord  slice  culture  that  closely  mimics 
the  in  vivo  environment.  The  cultured  spinal  cord  slices  preserved  the  cytoarchitecture 
consisting  of  neurons  in  the  gray  matter  and  interspersed  glial  cells.  The  majority  of 
focally  applied  exogenous  NSCs  survived  up  to  4  weeks.  Pre-exposure  of  the  cultured 
slices  to  a  hypoxic  chamber  markedly  reduced  the  survival  of  seeded  NSCs  on  the 
slices.  Differentiation  into  mature  neurons  was  severely  limited  in  this  co-culture 
system.  Endogenous  neural  progenitor  cells  were  marked  by  BrdU  incorporation,  and 
applying  an  inflammatory  cytokine  IL-1β significantly  increased  the  extent  of  endo-
genous  neural  progenitors  with  the  oligodendrocytic  lineage.  The  present  study  shows 
that  the  organotypic  spinal  cord  slice  culture  can  be  properly  utilized  to  study  molecular 
factors  from  the  post-injury  microenvironment  affecting  NSCs  in  the  injured  spinal  cord.

Key  words:  spinal  cord  injury,  organotypic  slice  culture,  neural  stem  cells,  hypoxia, 

inflammatory  cytokine

*To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed. 
†The  first  two  authors  equally  contributed  to  this  work
TEL:  82-31-219-4495,  FAX:  82-31-219-4530
e-mail:  kimbg@ajou.ac.kr
Received  August  17,  2010
Accepted  for  publication  September  28,  2010

INTRODUCTION

    Traumatic  injuries  to  the  spinal  cord  frequently 
leave  permanent  neurological  disabilities  to  the  vic-
tims  and  impose  enormous  economic  burdens  on 
the  families  and  society,  yet  there  is  no  single 
effective  therapeutic  option  to  improve  functional 
recovery.  Recent  studies  have  shown  promises  that 

cellular  replacement  either  by 
transplantation  of 
neural  stem  or  progenitor  cells  (NSC)  or  mo-
bilization  of  endogenous  NSCs  could  be  an  ef-
fective  therapeutic  option  (Rossignol  et  al.,  2007; 
Meletis  et  al.,  2008;  Cao  et  al.,  2010;  Tetzlaff  et  al., 
2010).  However,  inhospitable  microenvironment  of 
injured  spinal  cord  has  been  shown  to  limit  survival 
and  differentiation  of  either  grafted  or  endogenous 
NSCs  (Monje  et  al.,  2002;  Snyder  and  Park,  2002; 
Ishii  et  al.,  2006;  Kim  et  al.,  2007).  For  example, 
survival  of  NSC  continually  dropped  after  trans-
plantation  (Okada  et  al.,  2005;  Lee  et  al.,  2009). 
Moreover,  differentiation  of  NSCs  into  neuronal  or 
oligodendroglial  lineages  in  the  injured  spinal  cord 
is  significantly  hampered  (Cao  et  al.,  2001;  Cao  et 
al.,  2002).  Therefore,  modification  of  the  inhospi-
table  microenvironment  would  greatly  improve  the 
efficacy  of  NSC  transplantation  approach  for  spinal 
cord  injury.
    Since  the  complexity  of  cellular  and  molecular 
composition  can  hardly  be  modeled  in  dissociated 
cell  culture  system,  studying  potential  factors  that 
regulate  the  microenvironment  would  necessitate  in 
vivo  animal  experiments.  However,  screening  po-
tential  candidate  factors  in  in  vivo  system  would 
require  a  considerable  amount  of  time  and  cost 
(Pena,  2010).  An  in  vitro  system  that  allows  facile 
manipulation  of 
the  microenvironment  and  yet 
closely  mimics  in  vivo  complex  tissue  microenviron-
ment,  therefore,  would  be  desirable  for  this  pur-
pose.  The  organotypic  slice  culture  allows  long-term 
maintenance  of  tissue  architecture  in  dish  and  has 
been  an  important  tool  in  neurobiology  research 
(Gahwiler  et  al.,  1997;  Noraberg  et  al.,  2005).  The 
current  study  sought  to  establish  and  characterize 
the  organotypic  spinal  cord  slice  culture  in  which 
exogenous  NSCs  are  seeded  or  endogenous  neural 
progenitor  cells  are  marked.  In  this  culture  system, 
we  performed  exemplary  experiments 
to  study 
possible  effects  of  environmental  manipulation  on 
biological  behavior  of  either  exogenous  NSCs  or 
endogenous  neural  progenitor  cells  in  a  complex 
tissue  environment  similar  to  that  of  in  vivo  system.

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS

Culture  of  human  neural  stem  cells

    As  an  exogenous  source  of  NSCs,  we  used 

NSC  Microenvironment  in  Spinal  Slice 107

this  NSC 

line  has  been  reported 

immortalized  human  neural  stem  cell  (NSC)  line, 
which  has  been  widely  employed  in  various  animal 
models  of  CNS  diseases  (Jeong  et  al.,  2003;  Meng 
et  al.,  2003;  Yasuhara  et  al.,  2006;  Lee  et  al., 
2007;  Hwang  et  al.,  2009).  Preparation  and  culture 
of 
in  detail 
elsewhere  (Lee  et  al.,  2009).  Briefly,  the  human 
NSC  line  was  generated  by  transducing  dissociated 
cells  of  fetal  human  telencephalon  tissues  (at  14 
weeks  gestation)  by  replication  incompetent  retro-
viral  vector  containing  v-myc  (Flax  et  al.,  1998;  Kim, 
2004).  The  permission  to  use  the  fetal  tissues  was 
granted  by  the  Clinical  Research  Screening  Com-
mittee  involving  Human  Subjects  of  the  University 
of  British  Columbia,  and  the  fetal  tissues  were 
obtained  from  the  Anatomical  Pathology  Department 
of  Vancouver  General  Hospital.  Cryopreserved  NSCs 
were  thawed  and  cultured  in  Dulbecco’s  modified 
Eagle  medium  (DMEM;  HyClone,  Logan,  UT,  USA) 
with  high  glucose  supplemented  with  5%  fetal  bo-
vine  serum  (FBS)  and  20  mg/ml  gentamicin  (Sigma, 
St  Louis,  MO,  USA)  for  at  least  three  days  before 
cell  seeding.  We  also  generated  a  NSC  line  over-
expressing  green  fluorescent  protein  (GFP)  by  trans-
ducing  the  human  NSC  line  by  retrovirus  encoding 
GFP. 

Organotypic  spinal  cord  slice  culture  and  cell 
seeding  procedure

transversely  sliced 

    Organotypic  spinal  cord  slice  cultures  were  pre-
pared  according  to  the  standard  interface  method 
(Stoppini  et  al.,  1991).  After  decapitation,  the  brain 
was  removed,  and  the  entire  spinal  cord  block  was 
dissected  from  P5-7  Sprague  Dawley  rats  through 
an  opening  in  the  ventral  side  of  the  spine.  Axial 
slices  of  the  cervical  and  lumbar  cord  were  dis-
sected  and 
into  a  350  um 
thickness  on  a  McILWAIN  tissue  chopper  (The 
Mickle  Laboratory  Engineering  Co.,  Guildford,  UK) 
in  sterile  Gey’s  balanced  salt  solution  (Sigma- 
Aldrich).  The  slices  were  then  carefully  separated 
with  two  pairs  of  fine  forceps  and  transferred  to 
sterile,  30  mm  diameter  Millipore  Milicell-CM  (0.4 
μm;  Millipore,  Bedford,  MA)  culture  plate  insert, 
using  a  glass  Pasteur  pipette.  Five  or  six  randomly 
selected  slices  that  looked  apparently  intact  and 
undamaged  were  transferred  and  placed  on  each 
insert.  The  inserts  were  placed  in  35  mm  diameter 

108 Hyuk  Min  Kim,  et  al.

culture  wells  (six  well  culture  trays;  BD  Falcon, 
Franklin  Lakes,  NJ).  Cultures  were  maintained  in  1 
ml  of  the  serum-based  medium  containing  50% 
Basal  Medial  Eagle  (Sigma-Aldrich),  25%  Hank’s 
Balanced  Salt  Solution  (GIBCO),  2.2  g  glucose,  1 
mM  GlutaMAX-I  supplement  (Invitrogen,  Carlsbad, 
CA),  and  20%  FBS.  Culture  plates  were  incubated 
at  37oC  in  a  5%  CO2-95%  O2  humidified  incubator. 
Culture  medium  was  changed  4  hours  after  har-
vesting  and  then  twice  per  week.  The  level  of  the 
medium  was  adjusted  to  slightly  below  the  surface 
of  the  slices  in  order  to  provide  a  sufficient  supply 
of 
the  culture  medium  and  mixed  gases.  Cell 
seeding  was  performed  7  days  after  initial  slice 
preparation.  The  human  NSCs  were  trypsinized  just 
before  seeding,  and  a  total  of  1,000  cell/1μl  cells 
for  each  slice  were  seeded  using  a  glass  mic-
ropipette.  Special  care  was  taken  to  avoid  touching 
slices  with  micropipette.  One  day  after  seeding,  the 
culture  medium  was  changed.  To  induce  differen-
tiation  of  NSCs  grown  on  top  of  slices,  the  FBS 
concentration  was 
identify 
seeded  NSCs,  cells  were  prelabeled  with  BrdU  or 
DiI.  For  BrdU  prelabeling,  cells  were  treated  with  2
μM  BrdU  dissolved  in  culture  media  for  24  hours 
prior  to  harvesting  for  transplantation.  The  human 
NSCs  were  labeled  VybrantTMDiI  (Molecular  Probe) 
according  to  the  manufacturer’s  instruction.  To  mark 
endogenous  proliferating  neural  progenitor  cells, 
BrdU  at  a  concentration  of  1.0μM  was  added  to 
the  culture  media  one  day  before  fixation  (24  hours 
incubation).  IL-1β (R&D  systems,  Minneapolis,  MN) 
was  added  to  the  media  at  a  concentration  of  20 
ng/ml  for  three  days  before  fixation. 

to  5%.  To 

lowered 

Exposure  of  cultured  slices  to  a  hypoxic 
chamber

    To  mimic  secondary  injury  process  after  spinal 
cord  injury,  cultured  spinal  cord  slices  were  ex-
posed  to  a  hypoxic  chamber  (Forma  Scientific, 
Marietta,  OH).  Glucose-free  medium  DMEM  was 
saturated  with  nitrogen  gas  mixture  (95%  N2,  and 
5%  CO2)  for  40  min  to  obtain  an  O2  gas  pressure 
close  to  zero,  as  measured  by  a  dip-type  O2 
microelectrode.  After  saturation,  the  inserts  with 
spinal  cord  slices  were  placed  in  1  ml  of  saturated 
glucose-free  medium  DMEM  and  then  maintained  at 
37oC  in  a  N2  saturated  environment.  Therefore,  the 

cultured  slices  were  challenged  by  aglycemic  hy-
poxic  stress.  After  40  minutes  in  the  chamber,  the 
inserts  were  moved  to  the  fresh  culture  medium 
and  atmosphere  with  5%  CO2-95%  O2.  One  day 
after,  NSCs  were  seeded  as  described  above.

Slice  processing  and  immunohistochemistry

    Slices  were  washed  in  PBS  and  fixed  in  4% 
paraformaldehyde  for  5  min.  Slice  was  excised  from 
the  culture  insert  together  with  the  attached  mem-
brane,  and  each  slice  is  transferred  to  a  24  well 
plate.  The  slices  were  permeabilized  and  blocked 
by  0.5%  triton  with  10%  goat  serum  for  2  hours. 
Then,  slices  were  incubated  overnight  with  primary 
antibodies  at  4oC  or  2  hours  at  room  temperature. 
We  used  polyclonal  NG2  antibody  (1：1,000;  Mi-
llipore,  Bedford,  MA)  as  a  marker  for  oligoden-
drocyte  progenitors,  polyclonal  GFAP  antibody  (1：
500;  Dako,  Carpinteria,  CA)  for  astrocytes,  Tuj1 
(1：500;  Millipore,  Bedford,  MA)  for  immature  neu-
rons,  CD11b  (1：300:  Abcam,  Cambridge,  UK)  for 
resident  microglia,  and  BrdU  (1：500;  Serotec,  Ox-
ford,  UK)  for  a  marker  of  proliferating  NSCs.  For 
BrdU  staining,  DNA  denaturation  was  achieved  by 
treatment  with  2  M  HCl  at  room  temperature  for  60 
min  followed  by  incubation  for  30  min  with  0.1  M 
Borate  solution  (Sigma-Aldrich).  After  thorough  rins-
ing,  slices  were  incubated  by  rat  IgG  secondary 
antibody 
tagged  with  Alexa  Fluor  594  or  488 
(Molecular  Probes,  Eugene,  OR)  for  1  hour  at  room 
temperature  to  visualize  antigen-antibody  complex.

RESULTS

    We  first  characterized  the  histological  architecture 
of  cultured  spinal  cord  slices.  When  the  cultured 
slice  was  view  with  the  transmitted  light,  the  gray 
matter  was  apparently  distinguished  from  the  sur-
rounding  white  matter 
(Fig.  1A).  Neurofilament 
staining  revealed  clear  margin  of  the  dorsal  horn 
where  profuse  axons  and  scattered  neuronal  cell 
bodies  were  observed  (Fig.  1B).  In  contrast,  axonal 
fibers  in  the  white  matter  were  sparsely  observed, 
suggesting  that  axons  in  the  white  matter  tract 
underwent  some  degree  of  degeneration  after  dis-
connected  from  the  cell  bodies.  In  the  ventral  horn, 
large  neurons  suggestive  of  spinal  motor  neurons 
were  observed  (Fig.  1C,  D).  They  grew  long  neu-

NSC  Microenvironment  in  Spinal  Slice 109

Fig.  1.  Characterization  of  cultured  spinal  cord  slices.  (A)  A  dor-
sal  part  of  spinal  cord  slice  under  the  transmitted  light  showed  a 
clear  distinction  between  the  white  (W)  and  gray  (G)  matter.  A 
dotted  line  indicates  the  outer  margin  of  the  slice.  (B)  Immuno-
fluorescent  staining  with  neurofilament  (NF)  antibody  showed  pro-
fuse  axonal  branching  and  scattered  neurons  in  the  dorsal  horn. 
(C)  A  transmitted  image  of  the  ventral  part  of  the  slice.  A  dotted 
line  indicates  the  outer  margin  of  the  slice.  (D)  Neurofilament 
immunostaining  of  the  region  boxed  in  (C)  showed  large  multi-
polar  neuron  in  the  ventral  region.  Inset,  a  magnified  image  of  a 
neuron.  (E,  F)  Glial  cells  in  the  spinal  cord  slice  culture  (E) 
GFAP  positive  astrocytes,  (F)  NG2  positive  oligodendrocyte  pro-
genitors.  All  scale  bars  represent  200μm.

Fig.  2.  Survival  of  neural  stem  cells  co-cultured  on  spinal  cord 
slices.  (A∼D)  Human  neural  stem  cells  (NSCs)  were  seeded 
onto  the  surface  of  the  spinal  cord  slices  and  co-cultured  up  to  4 
weeks.  The  NSCs  were  prelabeled  by  eGFP  (A,  B),  DiI  (C)  or 
BrdU  (D).  In  a  transmitted  image  (B),  NSCs  were  found  to  grow 
on  top  of  the  slice.  The  slices  were  fixed  at  4  weeks  after 
seeding,  and  the  surviving  NSCs  were  readily  observed.  (E,  F) 
Mimicking  post-injury  environment  by  exposure  to  hypoxic  cham-
ber.  The  survival  of  NSCs  seeded  on  the  slice  preexposed  to  a 
hypoxic  chamber  for  40  minutes  was  markedly  reduced  com-
pared  to  that  on  the  control  (CTL)  slice.  All  scale  bars  represent 
50μm.

rites  within  the  slice  indicating  that  the  neurons 
were  healthy  and  made  connections  with  different 
neurons  in  the  slice.  We  also  characterized  glial 
cells  in  the  spinal  cord  slices.  GFAP  staining  show-
ed  a  large  number  of  astrocytes  located  in  both  the 
white  and  gray  matter  (Fig.  1E).  Numerous  oligo-
dendrocyte  progenitors  expressing  NG2  proteogly-
can  (Dawson  et  al.,  2000)  were  also  observed. 
However,  CD11b  (OX42)  staining  did  not  show 
apparent  microglial  cells 
the  slice  (data  not 
shown),  suggesting  that  no  macrophages  migrate  to 
the  spinal  cord  to  become  resident  microglial  cells 
before  postnatal  day  5.  Together,  these  results 

in 

showed  that  the  spinal  cord  slices  maintain  cha-
racteristics  of  the  cellular  and  tissue  architecture  of 
the  in  vivo  spinal  cord  tissue.
    To  mimic  NSC  grafting  into  the  spinal  cord,  we 
seeded  NSCs  on  top  of  cultured  spinal  cord  slices 
using  the  Hamilton  syringe  at  between  7  to  10  days 
after  initial  culture.  The  seeded  hNSCs  on  spinal 
cord  slice  culture  were  prelabeled  by  DiI  or  BrdU. 
In  some  experiments,  we  used  GFP  expressing 
hNSCs  to  identify  the  seeded  cells.  Many  of  the 
cells  survived  the  seeding  procedure  and  were 
identified  up  to  4  weeks  after  seeding  (Fig.  2A∼D), 
the 
time  point  we  measured.  They  were 

last 

110 Hyuk  Min  Kim,  et  al.

Fig.  3.  Differentiation  of  co-cultured  neural  stem  cells  on  cultured  slices.  (A∼C)  Prelabeled  neural  stem  cells  with  DiI  (A)  or  BrdU  were 
immunostained  with  phenotype  specific  markers  such  as  Tuj-1  (A),  GFAP  (B),  and  NG2  (C).  There  were  no  NSCs  expressing  Tuj-1,  but 
some  of  them  differentiated  into  GFAP  positive  astrocytes  and  NG2＋  oligodendrocyte  lineage  cells.  Arrows  indicate  cells  with 
colocalization.  All  scale  bars  represent  50μm. 

transplantation  strategy.  To  mimic 

dispersed  throughout  the  surface  of  the  spinal  cord 
slice,  but  many  of  them  were  found  at  or  near  the 
parts  of  the  slice  where  they  were  dislodged  from 
the  Hamilton  syringe  (Fig.  2B).  Dispersing  cells  did 
not  show  any  preference  to  either  the  white  or  gray 
matter.  These  findings  indicated  that  NSCs  can  be 
cultured  on  top  of  cultured  spinal  cord  slices,  pro-
viding  an  opportunity  to  examine  biological  behavior 
of  NSCs  in  an  environment  which  closely  mimics  in 
vivo  spinal  cord  tissue,  yet  is  still  amenable  to 
experimental  manipulation.  Transplantation  of  NSCs 
into  injured  spinal  cord  is  usually  complicated  by  a 
poor  survival  of  grafted  cells  (Okada  et  al.,  2005; 
Lee  et  al.,  2009).  Therefore,  increasing  survival  of 
grafted  NSCs  could  lead  to  an  improved  efficiency 
of  NSC 
the 
post-injury  microenvironment,  cultured  spinal  cord 
slices  were  exposed 
to  hypoxic  and  aglycemic 
chamber  for  40  minutes.  Then  NSCs  were  seeded 
onto  the  slice,  and  the  survival  of  NSCs  was 
compared 
to  NSCs  seeded  onto  control  slices 
without  exposure  to  the  hypoxic  chamber.  We  found 
that  pre-exposure  of  slices  to  hypoxic  and  agly-
cemic  chamber  markedly  reduced  the  survival  of 
NSCs  compared  to  those  grown  on  control  slices 
(Fig.  2E,  F). 
    The  spinal  cord  has  been  regarded  as  non- 
neurogenic.  When  NSCs  collected  from  spinal  cord 
were  transplanted  into  spinal  cord,  they  could  not 
differentiate  into  neurons,  whereas  the  same  NSCs 
differentiated  neurons  when  they  were  transplanted 
into  the  brain  (Shihabuddin  et  al.,  2000).  We  ex-
amined  differentiation  of  NSCs  co-cultured  on  spinal 

cord  slices.  NSCs  did  not  express  neuronal  marker 
Tuj-1  (Fig.  3A).  Addition  of  retinoic  acid  into  the 
culture  medium  did  not  increase  Tuj-1  expression 
(data  not  shown).  Some  NSCs  (20%  of  BrdU＋ 
cells)  were  colocalized  with  GFAP, 
indicating 
differentiation  into  astrocytic  lineage  (Fig.  3B).  In 
addition,  they  were  able  to  differentiate  into  NG2 
positive  oligodendrocytic 
lineage  cells  (26%  of 
BrdU＋  cells;  Fig.  3C).  Therefore,  the  microen-
vironment  created  by  cultured  spinal  cord  tissue 
does  not  seem  to  be  conducive  to  neuronal  dif-
ferentiation  of  NSCs,  lending  a  support  to 
the 
notion  that  spinal  cord  is  non-neurogenic.
    Endogenous  glial  progenitor  cells  are  present  in 
adult  spinal  cord  and  increase  their  number  in 
response  to  spinal  cord  injury  (Horner  et  al.,  2000; 
McTigue  et  al.,  2001).  It  is  possible  that  they  can 
differentiate  into  mature  oligodendrocytes  that  may 
participate 
in  spontaneous  remyelination  process 
(Yang  et  al.,  2006),  although  the  extent  of  re-
myelination  is  often  limited.  To  recapitulate  the  glial 
progenitor  cells 
in  a  complex  environment,  we 
marked  proliferating  neural  progenitor  cells  by  BrdU 
incorporation  (Fig.  4A).  As  expected  from  the  in 
vivo  observation  (Horner  et  al.,  2000),  BrdU  positive 
progenitor  cells  were  never  colocalized  with  neu-
ronal  markers  (Data  not  shown). 
they 
showed  expression  of  glial  marker  such  as  GFAP 
(Fig.  4B)  and  NG2  (Fig.  4C),  suggesting  that  the 
proliferating  neural  progenitors  are  already  com-
mitted  to  glial  rather  than  neural  lineage.  To  ex-
amine  whether  the  molecular  microenvironment  in 
the  injured  spinal  cord  could  affect  the  lineage 

Instead, 

NSC  Microenvironment  in  Spinal  Slice 111

DISCUSSION

fact 

that 

    We  found  that  in  organotypic  spinal  cord  slices, 
regional  specificity  such  as  gray  and  white  matter  is 
conserved  and  cellular  diversity  and/or  complexity  is 
maintained  encompassing  neurons  and  glial  cells. 
The 
the  cultured  slices  retain  major 
characteristics  of  in  vivo  spinal  cord  tissue  implies 
that  seeded  NSCs  on  spinal  cord  slices  are 
exposed  to  the  microenvironment  very  similar  to  the 
in  vivo  spinal  cord  tissue.  It  has  to  be  mentioned, 
however,  that  the  cultured  spinal  cord  slices  cannot 
represent  all  the  in  vivo  properties.  For  example, 
there  were  no  microglial  cells  in  the  slices  that  play 
various  functions  of  paramount  importance  in  in-
flammatory  conditions  (Ankeny  and  Popovich,  2009). 
In  addition,  the  majority  of  long  white  matter  tracts 
surrounding  gray  matter  seemed  to  be  degenerated, 
indicating  that  contribution  of  myelin  cannot  be 
mimicked  in  cultured  spinal  cord  slices.  We  con-
sidered,  however,  that  the  advantage  of  in  vitro 
system  for  being  easily  amenable  to  experimental 
manipulation  may  offset  a  large  part  of  the  dif-
ferences  between  the  in  vivo  tissue  and  the  or-
ganotypic  spinal  cord  slice.  Taken  together,  our 
findings  suggested 
that  organotypic  slices  can 
mimic  the  complex  spinal  cord  tissue  environment, 
and  it  would  be  feasible  to  study  environmental 
factors  affecting  NSC  using  in  the  injured  spinal 
cord.     
    It  has  been  increasingly  clear  that  adult  CNS, 
especially  diseased  CNS,  is  not  always  favorable  to 
the  integration  NSCs  with  host  tissue  (Bjorklund 
and  Lindvall,  2000;  Snyder  and  Park,  2002;  Okano 
et  al.,  2003).  Injured  CNS  microenvironment  con-
siderably  limits  the  survival  of  grafted  cells  (Emgard 
et  al.,  2003;  Bakshi  et  al.,  2005;  Lee  et  al.,  2009), 
which  may  pose  a  significant  hurdle  to  be  over-
come  before  NSC  transplantation  strategy  is  applied 
to  human  patients.  Traumatic  spinal  cord  injuries 
are  usually  complicated  by  a  breakdown  of  blood 
supply  leading  to  tissue  ischemia  and  hypoxia  (Chu 
et  al.,  2002).  As  an  example  of  altering 
the 
microenvironment  in  a  manner  similar  to  the  spinal 
cord  injury,  the  cultured  spinal  cord  slices  were 
pre-exposed 
(aglycemic  as  well) 
chamber  before  the  NSCs  were  seeded  on  the 
them.  Although  hypoxic  injury  is  not  supposed  to 

to  a  hypoxic 

Fig.  4.  Influence  of  inflammatory  cytokine  on  neural  progenitor 
cells  in  cultured  spinal  cord.  (A)  BrdU  staining  of  proliferating 
neural  progenitor  cells  in  a  cultured  spinal  cord  slice.  A  dotted 
line  indicates  the  margin  of  the  central  canal.  (B)  Visualization  of 
neural  progenitor  cells  differentiated  into  astrocytes.  BrdU  staining 
is  shown  in  red  and  GFAP  in  green.  (C,  D)  Influence  of  in-
flammatory  cytokine  IL-1β on  differentiation  of  neural  progenitor 
cells  into  the  oligodendrocytic  lineage.  IL-1β (D)  or  PBS  (C)  as 
a  control  (CTL)  was  added  to  the  culture  media  for  three  day. 
BrdU  staining  is  shown  in  red  and  NG2  proteoglycan,  a  marker 
of  oligodendrocyte  progenitor,  in  green.  All  scale  bars  represent 
50μm.  (E,  F)  Quantification  of  BrdU+  cell  number  (E)  or  BrdU＋
/NG2＋ cell  number  (F).  Asterisk  indicates  a  statistical  difference 
at  *p＜0.05  by  student  T-test.

determination  of  glial  progenitor  cells,  we  chose 
IL-1β which  is  a  well  characterized  proinflammatory 
cytokine  and  know  to  be  unregulated  after  spinal 
cord  injury  (Rice  et  al.,  2007).  The  number  of  total 
proliferating  cells  was  not  affected  by  IL-1β (Fig. 
IL-1β  increased  the 
4E).  However,  addition  of 
number  of  NG2＋ oligodendrocyte  lineage  cells  by 
more  than  three  folds  (p＜0.05,  n=3  slices  per 
condition)  (Fig.  4C,  D,  F).

112 Hyuk  Min  Kim,  et  al.

replicate  all  the  changes  related  to  traumatic  in-
juries,  we  found  that  exposure  to  hypoxic  chamber 
for  40  minutes  did  make  a  difference  in  the  survival 
of  seeded  NSCs  on  the  slices.  It  is  assumed  that 
hypoxic  conditions  altered  the  environment  of  spinal 
cord  slices  to  become  more  inhospitable  for  NSCs 
to  survive.  Therefore,  the  hypoxic  condition  used  in 
this  experiment  can  be  used  to  screen  potential 
factors  or  small  molecules  that  regulate  the  survival 
of  grafted  NSCs  in  the  injured  spinal  cord. 
    After  spinal  cord  injury,  demyelination  of  spared 
white  matter  significantly  hampers  spontaneous 
function  recovery  (Kim  et  al.,  2007).  Therefore, 
preventing  demyelination  or  promoting  remyelination 
is  one  of  the  key  strategies  to  improve  function 
outcomes  after  spinal  cord  injury  (McDonald  and 
Belegu,  2006).  Modifying  the  microenvironment  of 
the  injured  spinal  cord  may  improve  the  extent  of 
oligodendrogenesis  and  ultimately  promote  remye-
lination.  We  tested  whether  inflammatory  molecules 
can  affect  the  fate  of  glial  progenitors,  especially 
oligodendrocytic  lineage,  in  the  cultured  spinal  cord 
slice.  The  cultured  spinal  cord  slices  closely  re-
capitulated  in  vivo  glial  progenitors  since  the  pro-
liferating  cells  showed  only  glial  rather  than  neu-
ronal  lineage.  Therefore,  this  culture  system  allowed 
a  convenient,  yet  highly  relevant  assay  system  to 
identify  a  potential  environmental  factor.  It  can  be 
envisioned  that  the  organotypic  spinal  cord  culture 
system  is  used  as  a  platform  of  an  assay  screening 
a  potential  candidate  from  small  molecule  library  to 
modify  inhibitory  microenvironment  for  endogenous 
neural  progenitors  (Wang  et  al.,  2006). 
    To  summarize,  the  current  study  established  the 
utility  of  the  organotypic  spinal  cord  slices  to  study 
neural  stem/progenitor  cell  microenvironment  in  the 
injured  spinal  cord.  Co-culture  of  exogenous  NSCs 
was  feasible  mimicking  post-graft  environment.  Ex-
posure  of  the  cultured  slices  to  hypoxic  chamber 
mimicked  the  post-injury  environment  in  that  the 
survival  of  seeded  NSCs  was  reduced.  Cultured 
spinal  cord  slices  retained  the  non-neurogenic  cha-
racteristics  of  in  vivo  spinal  cord  tissue  since  they 
did  not  support  neuronal  differentiation  of  either 
exogenous  NSCs  or  endogenous  neural  proge-
nitors.  The  cultured  spinal  cord  slices  also  provided 
an  opportunity  to  examine  the  influence  of  inflam-
matory  environment  mimicking  post-injury  condition 

that 

on  endogenous  neural  progenitors.  Collectively,  we 
conclude 
the  organotypic  spinal  cord  slice 
culture  can  be  properly  utilized  to  study  molecular 
factors  from  the  post-injury  microenvironment  af-
fecting  NSCs  in  the  injured  spinal  cord.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

    This  work  was  supported  by  the  National  Re-
search  Foundation  of  Korea,  funded  by  the  Mi-
nistry  of  Education,  Science  and  Technology  (2009- 
0081467,  R01-2007-000-20617-0).

REFERENCES

Ankeny  DP  and  Popovich  PG  (2009)  Mechanisms  and  im-
plications  of  adaptive  immune  responses  after  traumatic 
spinal  cord  injury.  Neuroscience  158:1112-1121.

Bakshi  A,  Keck  CA,  Koshkin  VS,  LeBold  DG,  Siman  R, 
Snyder  EY  and  McIntosh  TK  (2005)  Caspase-mediated 
cell  death  predominates  following  engraftment  of  neural 
progenitor  cells  into  traumatically  injured  rat  brain.  Brain 
Research  1065:8-19.

Bjorklund  A  and  Lindvall  O  (2000)  Cell  replacement  therapies 
for  central  nervous  system  disorders.  Nat  Neurosci  3: 
537-544.

Cao  Q,  He  Q,  Wang  Y,  Cheng  X,  Howard  RM,  Zhang  Y, 
DeVries  WH,  Shields  CB,  Magnuson  DS,  Xu  XM,  Kim  DH 
and  Whittemore  SR  (2010)  Transplantation  of  ciliary  neu-
rotrophic  factor-expressing  adult  oligodendrocyte  precursor 
cells  promotes  remyelination  and  functional  recovery  after 
spinal  cord  injury.  J  Neurosci  30:2989-3001.

Cao  QL,  Howard  RM,  Dennison  JB  and  Whittemore  SR 
(2002)  Differentiation  of  engrafted  neuronal-restricted  pre-
cursor  cells  is  inhibited  in  the  traumatically  injured  spinal 
cord.  Exp  Neurol  177:349-359.

Cao  QL,  Zhang  YP,  Howard  RM,  Walters  WM,  Tsoulfas  P 
and  Whittemore  SR  (2001)  Pluripotent  stem  cells  en-
grafted  into  the  normal  or  lesioned  adult  rat  spinal  cord 
are  restricted  to  a  glial  lineage.  Exp  Neurol  167:48-58.

Chu  D,  Qiu  J,  Grafe  M,  Fabian  R,  Kent  TA,  Rassin  D,  Nesic 
O,  Werrbach-Perez  K  and  Perez-Polo  R  (2002)  Delayed 
cell  death  signaling  in  traumatized  central  nervous  system: 
hypoxia.  Neurochem  Res  27:97-106.

Dawson  MR,  Levine  JM  and  Reynolds  R  (2000)  NG2-ex-
pressing  cells  in  the  central  nervous  system:  are  they 
oligodendroglial  progenitors?  J  Neurosci  Res  61:471-479.
Emgard  M,  Hallin  U,  Karlsson  J,  Bahr  BA,  Brundin  P  and 
Blomgren  K  (2003)  Both  apoptosis  and  necrosis  occur 
early  after  intracerebral  grafting  of  ventral  mesencephalic 
tissue:  a  role  for  protease  activation.  J  Neurochem  86: 
1223-1232.

Flax  JD,  Aurora  S,  Yang  C,  Simonin  C,  Wills  AM,  Billinghurst 
LL,  Jendoubi  M,  Sidman  RL,  Wolfe  JH,  Kim  SU  and 
Snyder  EY  (1998)  Engraftable  human  neural  stem  cells 
respond  to  developmental  cues,  replace  neurons,  and  ex-
press  foreign  genes.  Nat  Biotechnol  16:1033-1039.

Gahwiler  BH,  Capogna  M,  Debanne  D,  McKinney  RA  and 
Thompson  SM  (1997)  Organotypic  slice  cultures:  a  tech-
nique  has  come  of  age.  Trends  Neurosci  20:471-477.

Horner  PJ,  Power  AE,  Kempermann  G,  Kuhn  HG,  Palmer  TD, 
Winkler  J,  Thal  LJ  and  Gage  FH  (2000)  Proliferation  and 
differentiation  of  progenitor  cells  throughout  the  intact  adult 
rat  spinal  cord.  J  Neurosci  20:2218-2228.

Hwang  DH,  Kim  BG,  Kim  EJ,  Lee  SI,  Joo  IS,  Suh-Kim  H, 
Sohn  S  and  Kim  SU  (2009)  Transplantation  of  human 
neural  stem  cells  transduced  with  Olig2  transcription  factor 
improves  locomotor  recovery  and  enhances  myelination  in 
the  white  matter  of  rat  spinal  cord  following  contusive 
injury.  BMC  Neurosci  10:117.

Ishii  K,  Nakamura  M,  Dai  H,  Finn  TP,  Okano  H,  Toyama  Y 
and  Bregman  BS  (2006)  Neutralization  of  ciliary  neuro-
trophic 
trans-
planted  neural  stem  cells  and  promotes  regeneration  of 
corticospinal  tract  fibers  in  spinal  cord  injury.  J  Neurosci 
Res  84:1669-1681.

factor  reduces  astrocyte  production 

from 

Jeong  SW,  Chu  K,  Jung  KH,  Kim  SU,  Kim  M  and  Roh  JK 
(2003)  Human  Neural  Stem  Cell  Transplantation  Promotes 
Functional  Recovery  in  Rats  With  Experimental  Intracere-
bral  Hemorrhage.  Stroke  34:2258-2263.

Kim  BG,  Hwang  DH,  Lee  SI,  Kim  EJ  and  Kim  SU  (2007) 
Stem  cell-based  cell  therapy  for  spinal  cord  injury.  Cell 
Transplant  16:357-366.

Kim  SU  (2004)  Human  neural  stem  cells  genetically  modified 
for  brain  repair  in  neurological  disorders.  Neuropathology 
24:159-171.

Lee  HJ,  Kim  KS,  Kim  EJ,  Choi  HB,  Lee  KH,  Park  IH,  Ko  Y, 
Jeong  SW  and  Kim  SU  (2007)  Brain  transplantation  of 
immortalized  human  neural  stem  cells  promotes  functional 
recovery  in  mouse  intracerebral  hemorrhage  stroke  model. 
Stem  Cells  25:1204-1212.

Lee  SI,  Kim  BG,  Hwang  DH,  Kim  HM  and  Kim  SU  (2009) 
Overexpression  of  Bcl-XL 
in  human  neural  stem  cells 
promotes  graft  survival  and  functional  recovery  following 
transplantation  in  spinal  cord  injury.  J  Neurosci  Res  87: 
3186-3197.

McDonald  JW  and  Belegu  V  (2006)  Demyelination  and  re-
myelination  after  spinal  cord  injury.  J  Neurotrauma  23: 
345-359.

McTigue  DM,  Wei  P  and  Stokes  BT  (2001)  Proliferation  of 
NG2-positive  cells  and  altered  oligodendrocyte  numbers  in 
the  contused  rat  spinal  cord.  J  Neurosci  21:3392-3400.

Meletis  K,  Barnabe-Heider  F,  Carlen  M,  Evergren  E,  Tomilin 
N,  Shupliakov  O  and  Frisen  J  (2008)  Spinal  cord  injury 
reveals  multilineage  differentiation  of  ependymal  cells. 
PLoS  Biol  6:e182.

Meng  XL,  Shen  JS,  Ohashi  T,  Maeda  H,  Kim  SU  and  Eto  Y 
(2003)  Brain  transplantation  of  genetically  engineered  hu-
man  neural  stem  cells  globally  corrects  brain  lesions  in 
the  mucopolysaccharidosis  type  VII  mouse.  J  Neurosci 
Res  74:266-277.

Monje  ML,  Mizumatsu  S,  Fike  JR  and  Palmer  TD  (2002) 

NSC  Microenvironment  in  Spinal  Slice 113

Irradiation  induces  neural  precursor-cell  dysfunction.  Nat 
Med  8:955-962.

Noraberg  J,  Poulsen  FR,  Blaabjerg  M,  Kristensen  BW,  Bonde 
C,  Montero  M,  Meyer  M,  Gramsbergen  JB  and  Zimmer  J 
(2005)  Organotypic  hippocampal  slice  cultures  for  studies 
of  brain  damage,  neuroprotection  and  neurorepair.  Curr 
Drug  Targets  CNS  Neurol  Disord  4:435-452.

Okada  S,  Ishii  K,  Yamane  J,  Iwanami  A,  Ikegami  T,  Katoh  H, 
Iwamoto  Y,  Nakamura  M,  Miyoshi  H,  Okano  HJ,  Contag 
CH,  Toyama  Y  and  Okano  H  (2005)  In  vivo  imaging  of 
engrafted  neural  stem  cells:  its  application  in  evaluating 
the  optimal  timing  of  transplantation  for  spinal  cord  injury. 
FASEB  19:1839-1841.

Okano  H,  Ogawa  Y,  Nakamura  M,  Kaneko  S,  Iwanami  A  and 
Toyama  Y  (2003)  Transplantation  of  neural  stem  cells  into 
the  spinal  cord  after  injury.  Semin  Cell  Dev  Biol  14: 
191-198.

Pena  F  (2010)  Organotypic  cultures  as  tool  to  test  long-term 
effects  of  chemicals  on  the  nervous  system.  Curr  Med 
Chem  17:987-1001.

Rice  T,  Larsen  J,  Rivest  S  and  Yong  VW  (2007)  Cha-
racterization  of  the  early  neuroinflammation  after  spinal 
cord  injury  in  mice.  J  Neuropathol  Exp  Neurol  66:184-195.
Rossignol  S,  Schwab  M,  Schwartz  M  and  Fehlings  MG  (2007) 
Spinal  cord  injury:  time  to  move?  J  Neurosci  27:11782- 
11792.

Shihabuddin  LS,  Horner  PJ,  Ray  J  and  Gage  FH  (2000)  Adult 
Spinal  Cord  Stem  Cells  Generate  Neurons  after  Trans-
plantation  in  the  Adult  Dentate  Gyrus.  J  Neurosci  20: 
8727-8735.

Snyder  EY  and  Park  KI  (2002)  Limitations  in  brain  repair.  Nat 

Med  8:928-930.

Stoppini  L,  Buchs  PA  and  Muller  D  (1991)  A  simple  method 
tissue.  J  Neurosci 

for  organotypic  cultures  of  nervous 
Methods  37:173-182.

Tetzlaff  W,  Okon  EB,  Karimi-Abdolrezaee  S,  Hill  CE,  Sparling 
JS,  Plemel  JR,  Plunet  WT,  Tsai  EC,  Baptiste  D,  Smithson 
LJ,  Kawaja  MD,  Fehlings  MG  and  Kwon  BK  (2010)  A 
Systematic  Review  of  Cellular  Transplantation  Therapies 
for  Spinal  Cord  Injury.  J  Neurotrauma  27:1-72.

Wang  JK,  Portbury  S,  Thomas  MB,  Barney  S,  Ricca  DJ, 
Morris  DL,  Warner  DS  and  Lo  DC 
(2006)  Cardiac 
glycosides  provide  neuroprotection  against  ischemic  stroke: 
discovery  by  a  brain  slice-based  compound  screening 
platform.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A  103:10461-10466.

Yang  H,  Lu  P,  McKay  HM,  Bernot  T,  Keirstead  H,  Steward 
O,  Gage  FH,  Edgerton  VR  and  Tuszynski  MH  (2006) 
Endogenous  neurogenesis  replaces  oligodendrocytes  and 
astrocytes  after  primate  spinal  cord  injury.  J  Neurosci  26: 
2157-2166.

Yasuhara  T,  Matsukawa  N,  Hara  K,  Yu  G,  Xu  L,  Maki  M, 
Kim  S  and  Borlongan  C  (2006)  Transplantation  of  Human 
Neural  Stem  Cells  Exerts  Neuroprotection  in  a  Rat  Model 
of  Parkinson's  Disease.  J  Neurosci  26:12497-12511.

