Experimental  Neurobiology
Vol.  19,  pages  15∼22,  June  2010

Disambiguation  of  Similar  Object-Place  Paired 

Associations  and  the  Roles  of  the  Brain 
Structures  in  the  Medial  Temporal  Lobe

Jayoung  Byun  and  Inah  Lee*

Department  of  Brain  and  Cognitive  Sciences,  Seoul  National  University, 

Seoul  151-742,  Korea

ABSTRACT

Amnesic  patients  who  have  damage  in  the  hippocampus  and  in  associated  areas  in 
the  medial  temporal  lobe  suffer  from  remembering  specific  events  that  may  or  may  not 
share  similar  objects  and  locations.  Computational  models,  behavioral  studies,  and 
physiological  findings  all  suggest  that  neural  circuits  in  the  hippocampus  are  suitable 
for  representing  seemingly  similar  events  as  distinctively  different  individual  event 
memories.  This  article  offers  a  selective  review  on  this  particular  function  of  the  hip-
pocampus  and  its  associates  areas  such  as  the  perirhinal  cortex,  mostly  centering 
upon  lesion  studies  and  physiological  studies  using  animals.  We  also  present  recent 
experimental  results  showing  that  the  dentate  gyrus  subfield  of  the  hippocampus  and 
perirhinal  cortex  are  particularly  important  for  discriminating  similar  paired  associates 
between  same  objects  and  different  locations,  or  vice  versa.

Key  words:  hippocampus,  perirhinal  cortex,  event  memory,  pattern  separation

INTRODUCTION

    Many  studies  using  animals  and  humans  suggest 
that  the  hippocampus  is  critical  for  remembering 
events  (Hasselmo,  2005;  Chadwick  et  al.,  2010;  Chad-
wick,  2010).  Throughout  this  article,  we  define  an 
“event”  as  a  particular  combination  of  individual 
items  in  a  specific  location  in  space  and  possible 
actions  of  an  animal  towards  the  items.  Patients 
with  hippocampal  damage  typically  exhibit  deficits 
in  remembering  discrete  events  composed  of  dif-
ferent  places  and  associated  items.  Remembering  a 
particular  event  often  requires  associating  different 

*To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed.
TEL:  82-2-880-8013,  FAX:  82-2-883-8013
e-mail:  inahlee@snu.ac.kr
Received  June  15,  2010
Accepted  for  publication  June  20,  2010

locations  and  objects,  and  several  theoretical  mo-
dels  suggest  that  such  object-place  association  is 
likely  to  be  represented  in  the  hippocampus.  Fur-
thermore,  maintaining  distinct  event  memories  also 
requires  disambiguating  similar  events  because 
different  events  may  share  common  elements  such 
as  overlapping  objects  and/or  same/similar  places. 
Literature  suggests  that  the  hippocampus  is  es-
sential  in  disambiguating  similar  places  (Gaffan, 
1994;  Eacott  et  al.,  2004;  Kesner  et  al.,  2008)  and 
this  implies  that  it  may  be  also  critical  for  the 
orthogonalization  of  neural  representations  for  si-
milar  paired-associates  between  objects  and  places.
    Brief  overview  of  anatomical  connections  within 
the  hippocampus  as  well  as  between  the  hippo-
campus  and  its  associated  regions  will  be  provided 
here  to  help  readers.  The  hippocampus  receives 
most  of  its  inputs  from  the  entorhinal  cortex  (Bur-

16 Jayoung  Byun,  et  al.

well  et  al.,  1995).  The  entorhinal  cortex  is  divided 
into  the  lateral  entorhinal  cortex  (LEC)  and  the 
medial  entorhinal  cortex  (MEC).  The  MEC  receives 
most  of  its  inputs  from  the  POR  and  the  inputs  to 
the  LEC  mostly  stem  from  the  perirhinal  cortex 
(PER)  (Burwell  et  al.,  1995).  Anatomical  literature 
indicates  that  the  PER  receives  information  that  is 
qualitatively  different  from  the  information  fed  to  the 
postrhinal  cortex  (POR).  The  POR  receives 
its 
inputs 
from  visual  association  and  visuospatial 
cortex  and  this  input  has  visuo-spatial  characte-
ristics  in  terms  of  quality  of  information  and  the 
postrhinal  cortical  cells  have  spatial  selectivity  (Bur-
well  and  Hafeman,  2003).  On  the  other  hand,  the 
PER  neurons  receive  inputs  from  the  ventral  visual 
sensory  areas  and  it  is  known  to  respond  to  visual, 
somatosensory,  auditory  or  a  combination  of  sen-
sory  stimuli  (Chadwick  et  al.,  2010).  Especially  in 
physiological  studies  in  the  rat,  the  PER  has  been 
identified  to  exhibit  response-selectivity  to  odor  and 
visual  stimuli  (Young,  1995;  Zhu  et  al.,  1995;  Young 
et  al.,  1997).  Gaffan  and  colleagues  provided  evi-
dence  that  PER  lesion  in  monkeys  produce  im-
pairment  in  discriminating  large  numbers  of  visual 
stimuli.  Based  on  this  finding,  the  authors  argued 
that 
functions, 
including  object  identification  (Eacott  et  al.,  1994) 
and  Burwell  also  found  that  cells  in  the  PER  fire  in 
correlation  with  object  identity  (Burwell  et  al.,  1998). 
What  makes  the  hippocampus  an  ideal  structure  of 
making  arbitrary  associations  among 
items  and 
places  is  the  CA3’s  autoassociative  network  com-
posed  of  recurrent  collaterals  (Marr,  1971;  Mc-
Naughton  and  Morris,  1987;  Ishizuka  et  al.,  1990; 
Treves  and  Rolls,  1994;  Amaral  and  Witter,  1995; 
Hasselmo  et  al.,  1995;  Rolls  et  al.,  1998;  Kesner  et 
al.,  2001).  The  recurrent  collateral  fibers  of  CA3 
pyramidal  neurons  connect  CA3  neurons  exten-
sively  with  each  other  and 
information  re-
presented  in  a  subset  of  CA3  neurons  can  make 
arbitrary  and  rapid  associations  with  other  infor-
mation  represented  in  other  neurons  (Marr,  1971; 
Hopfield,  1982;  McNaughton  and  Morris,  1987;  Mi-
zumori  et  al.,  1989;  Hasselmo  et  al.,  1995;  Rolls  et 
al.,  1998;  Kesner  et  al.,  2001).  There  are  some 
studies  that  have  examined  the  associative  function 
of  the  hippocampus  (especially  CA3)  using  single- 
unit  recording  or  lesion  techniques  in  mnemonic 

the  PER  participates 

in  sensory 

the 

settings  and  we  will  provide  selective  review  on 
some  of  the  studies  in  the  following  sections.

SINGLE-UNIT  RECORDING  STUDIES

there  were 

the  hypothesis 

    Rolls  (1989)  conducted  an  electrophysiological 
study  with  monkeys  on  this  issue.  In  that  study, 
monkeys  performed  an  object-place  association  task 
in  which  they  were  required  to  judge  whether  a 
particular  visual  stimulus  was  presented  in  a  certain 
location  in  which  the  stimulus  had  previously  been 
presented.  As  the  monkeys  performed  this  task  with 
various  stimuli,  some  neurons  in  the  hippocampus 
fired  only  when  a  certain  stimulus  was  seen  in  a 
particular  location,  but  not  in  other  positions  (Rolls, 
1989).  The  results  support 
that 
some  hippocampal  neurons  respond  to  objects  and 
their  associated  locations  in  a  combinatorial  fashion. 
    Komorowski  recorded  hippocampal  neurons  while 
rats  performed  odor-context  associations  (Rolls, 
1989;  Komorowski  et  al.,  2009).  In  that  study,  main 
components  of  an  event  were  a  cup  filled  with  sand 
(scented  with  a  particular  odor)  and  its  location  in  a 
certain  compartment  of  a  chamber.  There  were  two 
cups  with  different  odors  and 
two 
compartments  (or  contexts)  with  the  walls  of  each 
compartment  associated  with  either  black  or  white 
color.  The  task  was  a  biconditional  task  because 
one  of  the  odors  rewarded  in  a  certain  context  was 
not  rewarded  in  the  other  context,  and  vice  versa 
for  the  other  odor.  This  study  addresses  this  issue 
to  some  degree  by  showing  changes  in  the  re-
sponsiveness  of  hippocampal  neurons  as  learning 
proceeded  for  the  item  in  context.  According  to  their 
result,  cells  that  fired  in  association  with  item- 
position  variables  gradually  appeared  during  training 
while  place  cells  in  the  hippocampus  remain  con-
sistent  in  their  firing  rate  throughout  the  training. 
Furthermore,  the  activation  of  these  item-position 
selective  cells  can  predict  performance  accuracy. 
However,  this  task  may  not  be  testing  the  role  of 
context  because  it  was  not  necessary  for  the  rats  to 
pay  attention  to  the  contextual  information  since  the 
rat  left  a  given  compartment  voluntarily  to  enter  the 
opposite  compartment.  In  a  sense,  spatial  infor-
mation  could  be  obtained  during  the  alternation 
between  compartments  without  the  contextual  in-
formation  (i.e.,  wall  color  of  each  compartment). 

in  object 

the  PER  are  considered 

    Information  about  the  external  world  enters  the 
hippocampus  by  various  routes  and  the  entorhinal 
cortex  and 
important 
upstream  structures  of  the  hippocampus  in  this 
regard.  Knowing  physiological  characteristics  of 
neurons  in  these  upstream  structures  is  thus  very 
important  in  understanding  the  hippocampal  me-
chanisms  for  event  information  processing.  Suzuki 
tested  firing  properties  of  cells  in  the  PER  and 
recognition  memory 
entorhinal  cortex 
(Suzuki  et  al.,  1997).  Monkeys  performed 
two 
different  behavioral  tasks.  One  was  a  delayed- 
matching-to-sample  task  (DMS),  which  tested  whe-
ther  monkeys  could  remember  previously  seen 
objects  by  choosing  it  later  when  several  objects 
were  shown  sequentially.  Another  task  was  a  de-
layed-matching-to-place  task  (DMP)  in  which  mon-
keys  must  choose  a  visual  cue  on  the  screen  only 
when  it  appeared  in  a  location  that  was  previously 
associated  with  the  cue.  In  the  DMS  task,  en-
torhinal  cortical  cells  showed  different  responses  to 
the  test  stimuli  depending  on  whether  they  match 
sample  stimuli,  which  means  that  the  entorhinal 
cortex  is  involved  in  processing  object  recognition 
memory. 
In  addition,  entorhinal  cortical  neurons 
also  showed  stimulus-specific  activity  during  delay, 
which  was  also  shown  in  the  PER  where  a  large 
proportion  of  cells  showed  object-specific  respon-
ses.  In  the  DMP  task,  entorhinal  cortical  cells 
showed  different 
the 
location  of  a  cue  on  the  screen  (Rolls,  1989).  Thus, 
this  study  supports  the  hypothesis  that  the  en-
torhinal  cortex  processes  sensory  information  as-
sociated  with  objects  and  their  spatial  locations, 
both  of  which  may  be  used  in  the  hippocampus  to 
form  event  memory. 
    The  Suzuki  group  also  recorded  neuronal  activity 
in  the  hippocampus  and  the  PER.  Monkeys  were 
required  to  remember  multiple  locations  each  of 
which  was  associated  with  a  particular  scene  and 
PER  cells  showed  firing  correlates  with  learned 
spatial-scene  association.  This  study  supports  that 
the  PER  is  not  only  involved  in  object  information 
processing  but  also  in  spatial-context  association  to 
some  degree.
    On  the  other  hand,  spatially  selective  neuronal 
firing  was  observed  in  the  POR  as  compared  to  the 
spatial  firing  of  hippocampal  neurons  (Burwell  and 

responses  depending  on 

Object-Place  Event  and  the  Hippocampus 17

Hafeman,  2003).  Although  the  firing  properties  of 
the  MEC  and  PER  cells  have  been  examined  with 
electrophysiology,  the  firing  characteristics  of  the 
cells  in  the  POR  have  never  been  investigated 
before  the  Burwell  group  recorded  neuronal  re-
sponses  in  the  POR.  In  a  four-arm  radial  maze, 
rats  were 
three  conditions:  baseline, 
double-cue  rotation  (proximal  ＋90  degree;  distal 

−90  degree),  the  second  baseline.  Although  POR 

tested 

in 

in 

the  environment  and  were 

cells  showed  spatially  correlated  neuronal  firing, 
firing  patterns  were  different  from  those  of  hip-
pocampal  place  cells.  The  POR  neuronal  firing 
fields  were  correlated  more  with  the  changes  in  the 
visual  cues 
less 
correlated  with  stable  space  in  the  environment. 
This  may  mean  that  the  POR  is  an  earlier  step  of 
processing  visuo-spatial  information  which  suppo-
sedly  helps  the  hippocampal  neurons  to  create 
stable  place  fields.  Therefore,  this  study  supports 
the  hypothesis  that  the  POR  contributes  to  forming 
event  memory  in  the  hippocampus  by  providing 
spatial  information.

LESION  STUDIES

lesion  studies  also 

    Some 
investigated  object- 
place  associative  memory.  For  example,  Gaffan 
hypothesized 
that  macaque  monkeys  associate 
spatial  representation  with  object  representation  and 
called  it  “object-place  configural  memory”  on  the 
basis  of  three  experiments  (Gaffan,  1994).  In  the 
first  experiment,  monkeys  were  required  to  learn 
the  followings:  If  objects  A  and  B  covered  two  food 
wells  in  a  Wisconsin  General  Test  apparatus,  then 
food  reward  was  found  in  left  food  well  regardless 
of  the  position  of  A  or  B,  whereas  objects  C  and  D 
signaled  that  food  reward  was  in  right  food  well 
(Gaffan,  1994).  Therefore,  the  spatial  memory  of 
finding  reward  on  the  left  food  well  was  associated 
with  objects  A  and  B.  Conversely,  in  spatio-visual 
conditional 
to 
associate  objects  shown  in  the  test  with  locations. 
For  example,  if  objects  E  and  F  were  both  on  the 
left  (in  a  tray  with  two  food  wells  on  both  sides), 
then  only  E  was  rewarded,  while  if  they  were  both 
on  the  right,  only  F  was  rewarded  (Gaffan  and 
Harrison,  1989).  Object-place  memory  was  also 
tested  in  a  recognition  memory  test  in  which  some 

learning  monkeys  were 

required 

18 Jayoung  Byun,  et  al.

to 

the 

fornix 

in  specific 

indicate  whether 

particular  objects  appeared 
locations 
(Gaffan  et  al.,  1985).  Here,  a  monkey  saw  a 
particular  object  in  a  particular  place  and  was  later 
able 
test  object  was 
presented  in  the  same  place.  In  all  three  ex-
periments,  monkeys  with 
transactions  or 
hippocampal  aspiration  lesions  showed  deficits  in 
associating  objects  and  places  together. 
    Gilbert  and  Kesner  (2002)  also  examined  object- 
in-place  memory  by  using  a  biconditional  paired- 
associate  memory  task.  In  their  Go/No-Go  task, 
choosing  a  particular  object  A  in  location  1,  but  not 
in  location  2,  was  rewarded  whereas  choosing  an 
object  B  in  location  2,  but  not  in  location  1,  was 
rewarded.  Rats  with  hippocampal  lesions  showed 
severe  deficits  in  acquisition  and  retention  of  this 
task.  Especially  CA3,  a  subfield  of 
the  hippo-
campus,  appears  to  be  important  in  the  acquisition 
of  this  task  because  of  its  associative  function 
(Marr,  1971;  McNaughton  and  Morris,  1987;  Gilbert 
and  Kesner,  2003;  Rolls  and  Kesner,  2006).   
    Eacott  and  Norman  (2004)  suggested  a  model  of 
episodic-like  memory  for  rats.  In  their  task,  rats 
were  tested  for  their  integrated  memory  for  object, 
place,  and  context.  The  animals  were  presented 
with  two  familiar  objects  and  only  one  of  them  was 
not 
location  and  context  (both 
location  and  context  were  familiar  to  them)(Eacott 
et  al.,  2004).  Rats  preferred  a  novel  configuration 
than  familiar  one,  which  means  they  were  able  to 
integrate  object,  place,  and  their  associated  context. 
Perirhinal  cortical  lesions  did  not  impair  object-place 
memory  (Ennaceur  et  al.,  1996)  and  caused  re-
latively  mild,  delay-dependant  impairments  of  ob-
ject-context  memory  (Eacott  et  al.,  2004).  On  the 
for 
other  hand,  POR 
object-context  associations  more  severely 
than 
fornix  lesions  (Eacott  et  al.,  2004).  Therefore,  fornix 
lesions  produced 
the 
configuration  of  object,  place,  and  context  rather 
than  by  disrupting  one  of  these  elements. 
    The  lesion  studies  mentioned  above,  however, 
may  never  reveal  the  mechanisms  of  object-place 
paired  association 
lobe 
because  those  studies  never  test  how  the  normal 
brain  works.  Therefore,  electrophysiological  studies 
are  needed.  Recent  electrophysiological  studies 
(Lee  et  al.,  2004;  Leutgeb  et  al.,  2004;  2005)  have 

impairment  by  disrupting 

impaired  memory 

its  previous 

the  medial 

temporal 

lesions 

in 

in 

reported  that  hippocampal  subfields  (DG,  CA3,  and 
CA1)  are  important  when  ambiguity  in  the  en-
vironment  needs  to  be  processed.  However,  these 
studies  were  carried  out  using  non-  mnemonic 
behavioral  paradigms  such  as  foraging  for  food 
pellets  as  the  environment  underwent  changes  for 
inducing  contextual  ambiguity  to  the  animals.  In 
other  words,  the  animals  were  not  required  to  use 
the  changed,  ambiguous  contexts  to  solve  a  certain 
memory  problem  in  those  studies.

DISAMBIGUATION  OF  COGNITIVE 
REPRESENTATIONS  FOR  EVENTS 

IN  THE  HIPPOCAMPUS

to 

locations, 

the  animal  needed 

    To  investigate  how  the  hippocampal  subfields 
process  ambiguous  event  information  to  store  them 
as  discrete  representations,  we  have  used  an  ob-
ject-place  paired-associate  task.  Before  conducting 
electrophysiological  investigations,  we  performed  se-
veral  lesion/inactivation  studies  to  learn  the  func-
tions  of  the  hippocampus  and  its  associated  re-
gions.
    In  our  study,  an  object  pair  was  presented  in  two 
different  places  of  a  radial-arm  maze  and  each 
object  within  the  pair  was  associated  with  reward 
only  in  a  particular  arm  of  the  maze.  Therefore,  as 
the  same  pair  of  objects  was  presented  in  two 
different 
form 
discrete  object-place  paired  associates  and  their 
reward  values.  Since  some  of  these  conditions 
share  the  same  elements  (such  as  same  objects 
and  maze  arms)  but  each  condition  could  be 
remembered  as  a  distinct  event,  this  task  requires 
the  rats  to  disambiguate  similar  event  represen-
tations.  In  the  hippocampus,  the  dentate  gyrus  (DG) 
is  known  for  its  role  in  pattern  separation  of  similar 
places  (Leutgeb  et  al.,  2007)  and  CA3  is  widely 
known  for  its  role  in  auto-association  among  items 
(Rolls  and  Kesner,  2006),  which  enables  various 
kinds  of  information  to  become  bound  together. 
These  two  subfields  are  supposedly  very  important 
in  our  task  since  both  arbitrary  associations  bet-
ween  object  and  places,  and  the  orthogonalization 
of  similar  spatial  locations  (different  arms  of  the 
maze)  needed  to  occur  at  the  same  time. 
    In  our  previous  study  (Lee,  2008;  Lee  and 
Solivan,  2008),  we  showed  that  the  hippocampal 

recovery 

lesioned  rats  as  well  as  the  rats  with  lesions  in  the 
DG  were  impaired  not  only  in  the  retention  of 
object-in-place  memory  but  also  in  the  acquisition  of 
the  memory  as  compared  to  the  control  lesioned 
group.  These  results  confirm  that  the  hippocampus 
(especially  the  DG)  is  necessary  for  detecting  dif-
ferences  between  similar  events  in  which  object 
and  place  need  to  be  associated  as  discrete  event 
representations.  However,  rats  with  lesions  in  the 
PER  showed 
re-
membering  previously  learned  paired  associates, 
whereas  the  lesioned  rats  showed  total  deficits  for 
learning  new  paired  associates.  When  the  task 
required  rats  to  just  discriminate  different  objects 
within  the  same  arm,  the  impairment  disappeared  in 
all  three  lesions  (i.e.,  hippocampal,  DG,  and  pe-
rirhinal  cortical  lesion)  groups,  which  means  that 
none  of  these  areas  may  be  necessary  for  just 
simple  object  discrimination.  We  describe  results 
from  these  and  other  studies  from  our  laboratory  in 
more  detail  below.

in  performance 

for 

HIPPOCAMPAL  CONTRIBUTION 

TO  THE  DISAMBIGUATION 

OF  SPATIAL  CONTEXT

    In  one  of  our  studies  (Kim  and  Lee,  2010),  rats 
with  dorsal  hippocampal  lesions  or  pharmacological 
inactivations  were  severely  impaired  in  disambi-
guating  similar  spatial  contexts.  In  this  task,  rats 
were  trained  to  associate  two  different  configu-
rations  of  distal  cue-sets  (i.e.,  spatial  context)  with 
different  food-well  locations.  We  found  that  hippo-
campal  lesioned  rats  were  unable  to  retrieve  the 
context-place  paired  associations 
learned  before 
surgery.  We  also  found  that  rats  with  muscimol 
inactivation  in  the  dorsal  hippocampus  were  unable 
to  discriminate  ambiguous  contexts  composed  of 
modified  spatial  contexts  (by  varying  the  angular 
distance  between  distal  cue  sets).  These  results 
suggest  that  the  hippocampus  is  necessary  for 
spatial  discrimination  using  distal  cue-configuration, 
especially  when  the  distal  cue-configurations  are 
similar  to  each  other. 

Object-Place  Event  and  the  Hippocampus 19

HIPPOCAMPUS  AND  DG  ARE 

NECESSARY  FOR  DISCRIMINATING 
SIMILAR  OBJECT-PLACE  PAIRED 

ASSOCIATIVE  EVENTS

the  objects 

    To  test  the  role  of  the  hippocampus  in  dis-
ambiguating  similar  object-place  associations,  Lee 
and  Solivan  (2008)  used  a  radial-arm  maze  sur-
rounded  by  black  curtains  and  there  were  visual 
cues  that  provided  rats  with  spatial  or  contextual 
information  on  the  curtains.  When  a  trial  began,  the 
rat  was  placed  in  the  start  box  on  the  center 
platform.  One  of  two  arms  (arm  3  or  arm  5)  was 
opened  by  an  experimenter  and  the  animal  entered 
the  opened  arm.  At  the  end  of  the  arm,  there  was 
a  so-called  ‘event  platform’  and  the  rat  saw  two 
objects  in  the  event  platform.  Each  object  was 
positioned  on  top  of  a  food  well  in  which  a  small 
cereal  reward  was  hidden.  The  rat  needed 
to 
to  obtain  reward. 
displace  one  of 
Choosing  a  certain  object  was  rewarded  in  arm  3 
and  choosing  another  object  was  rewarded  in  arm 
5.  Thirty-two 
trials  were  given  per  day  during 
training  and  when  the  rat  reached  performance 
criterion  (75%  correct  performance  in  both  arms  for 
two  consecutive  days)  they  received  lesions  in  the 
hippocampus.  After  a  week  of  recovery  period,  rats 
were  tested  again  in  the  same  task.  Hippocampal 
lesioned  animals  were  severely  impaired  in  the  task 
(Lee  and  Solivan,  2008),  suggesting 
the 
hippocampus  is  crucial  in  processing  object-place 
associations  especially  when  there  is  ambiguity  due 
to  overlapping  components  between  events.
    Rats  with  lesions  in  the  dorsal  DG  also  de-
monstrated  deficits  in  the  same  task  described 
above  (Lee  &  Solivan,  in  press).  However,  if  the 
ambiguity  was  removed  by  using  non-overlapping 
objects  between  different  arms  in  the  maze  (Ex-
periment  2)  or  by  presenting  objects  in  the  arms 
more  separated  from  each  other  (Experiment  3), 
the  DG 
lesioned  rats  performed  normally  (Ex-
periment  2)  or  relearned  the  task  (Experiment  3). 
These  results  suggest  that  the  DG  is  necessary  for 
amplifying  small  differences  among  similar  object- 
place  paired  associates 
to  produce  more  dis-
tinctively  different  neural  representations.  The  DG 
appears  to  be  more  important  when  the  same 
objects  were  presented  at  closer  locations,  which 

that 

20 Jayoung  Byun,  et  al.

is 

important 

is  necessary 

means  DG 
for  spatial  pattern  se-
paration  (Leutgeb  et  al.,  2007).  However,  the  DG 
lesion  animals  never  showed  the  level  of  per-
formance  demonstrated  by  the  control  group  and 
this  suggests  a  possibility  that  the  DG  might  be 
also  important  for  disambiguating  nonspatial  com-
ponents  such  as  same  objects  associated  with 
different  spatial  locations.  Furthermore,  when  there 
was  no  object  similarity  in  experiment  2,  DG  lesion 
rats  were  unimpaired.  In  addition,  the  perirhinal 
cortex  (PER) 
for  acquiring  novel 
object-place  paired  association  but  not  in  retrieving 
old  one.  When  the  rats  with  lesions  in  the  PER 
performed  the  same  task  learned  before  surgery, 
they  showed  impairment  during  the  early  days  of 
testing  period  (Jo  and  Lee,  2010).  However,  the 
performance  improved  in  later  part  of  testing  and 
this  suggests  that  the  PER  is  originally  involved  in 
retrieving  well-learned  object-place  paired  asso-
ciative  representations  but  is  not  necessary  be-
cause  it  appears  that  other  areas  may  take  over 
the  function.  We  then  became  interested  in  whether 
the  PER 
for  “forming”  new 
associations  between  object  and  place  information. 
To  test  this,  rats  were  tested  in  the  same  ob-
ject-place  paired-associate  task  except  that  novel 
objects  were  used  this  time.  The  PER  lesion  group 
was  unable  to  learn  the  newly  introduced  paired 
associations.  These  results  overall  indicate  that  the 
PER  is  necessary  for  novel  object-place  paired 
association  and  no  other  area  can  take  over  this 
unique  function  of  the  PER  in  this  domain.

important 

is  more 

DISCUSSION

    The  object-place  paired-associate  task  we  have 
used  to  assess  the  roles  of  the  hippocampus,  DG, 
and  PER  is  an  ideal  behavioral  paradigm  to  gain 
insights  into  the  functions  of  medial  temporal  lobe 
structures.  In  future  studies,  it  is  necessary  to  gain 
more  mechanistic  understandings  of  individual  cir-
cuits  in  the  hippocampus  and  its  associated  re-
gions.  Most  of  all,  it  is  yet  to  be  determined 
whether  the  mechanisms  underlying  the  impairment 
of  the  lesioned  animals  come  from  deficits  in  spatial 
information  processing,  nonspatial  information  (e.g., 
object)  processing,  and/or  the  conjunction  of  object 
and  space  information.  For  example,  when  the 

DG-lesioned  animals  exhibited  deficits  in  the  task 
(Lee  &  Solivan,  in  press),  it  could  be  purely  due  to 
impairment  in  spatial  pattern  separation  between 
different  locations  in  space.  Confirming  this  hy-
pothesis  would  require  showing  impaired  perfor-
mance  when  purely  spatial  discrimination  is  ne-
cessary,  but  normal  performance  when  such  spatial 
requirement  is  removed  in  the  task.  Our  previous 
study  (Lee  &  Solivan,  in  press)  did  not  test  animals 
in  a  purely  spatial  condition  and  future  studies  may 
address  the  issue  with  electrophysiological  tech-
niques.  For  a  purely  spatial  test,  no  object  should 
be  used  during  the  test  and  the  results  should  be 
compared  to  object-place  paired  associative  test.  It 
would  be  also  necessary  to  test  animals  in  a 
situation  where  many  different  or  similar  objects 
need  to  be  discriminated  in  the  absence  of  spatial 
information. 
    A  leading  hypothesis  suggests  that  there  are  two 
main  information-processing  streams  leading  to  the 
hippocampus  (Burwell  et  al.,  1998).  One  is  the  PER
→LEC→hippocampus  stream,  which  may  process 
nonspatial 
information  (individual  sensory  stimuli 
such  as  objects  and  odors),  and  the  other  is  the 
POR→MEC→hippocampus,  which  involves  spatial 
information  processing.  The  PER  may  be  necessary 
for  discriminating  similar  objects  and 
retrieving 
previously 
In  our  PER 
lesion  study,  rats  with  PER  lesions  were  able  to 
perform  previously  learned  task  as  time  passed,  but 
showed  deficits  in  acquiring  new  paired  associates 
between  objects  and  places.  It  may  be  that  the 
PER  contributes  to  forming  pattern-separated  re-
presentations  of  object-place  paired  associates  and 
once  such  representations  are  formed,  the  area  is 
no  longer  necessary  and  other  areas  such  as  the 
LEC  may  take  over  the  function  of  retrieving  old 
memory  representations.
    Some  of  the  results  of  our  lesion  studies  may  not 
be  consistent  with  classical  theories  that  assert  that 
the  hippocampus  is  the  place  where  spatial  and 
non-spatial  information  are  bound  together  for  the 
formation  of  an  event  memory.  According  to  pre-
valent  view,  two  types  of  information,  spatial  and 
non-spatial  information,  are  processed  in  separate 
pathways  and  these  inputs  are  combined  at  the 
hippocampus  level.  However,  our  lesion  studies 
suggest  some  interesting  points  that  may  not  be 

formed  object  memory. 

in 

information 

the  spatial 

perfectly  explained  by  the  previous  theories.  First  of 
all,  in  our  study,  DG-lesioned  rats  showed  some 
additional  effects  of  object-information  processing 
even  when  the  load  for  spatial  information  was 
reduced  significantly.  This  suggests  that  the  DG 
may  play  a  role  in  combining  the  object  information 
with 
the  object-place 
paired-associate  task.  There  has  been  no  evidence 
for  proving  or  disproving  that  the  DG  is  involved  in 
processing  object  and  place  information  together 
and  our  study  investigated  the  issue  for  the  first 
time.  Second,  rats  in  our  study  could  not  learn  new 
object-place  association  after  PER 
lesion  while 
showing  gradual  improvement  in  performance  for 
old  object-place  paired-associates  in  the  object- 
place  paired-associate  task.  The  perirhinal  cortical 
lesions  did  not  impair  the  performance  in  the  simple 
object  discrimination  task.  The  results  suggest  that 
the  perirhinal  cortex  is  not  only  sensitive  to  object 
information  but  also  processes  spatial  information 
particularly  if  the  spatial  information  is  critical  in 
assessing  the  identity  of  an  object.  Given  the  strong 
feedforward  inputs  from  the  POR  to  the  PER,  it 
may  be  that  at  the  PER  and  POR  level,  the  spatial 
and  nonspatial  information  may  be  combined  to 
some  degree  and  likewise  at  the  MEC  and  LEC 
level.  These  results  imply  that  the  hippocampus 
may  not  be 
first  place  where  spatial  and 
nonspatial  information  are  combined  together.  Ana-
tomical  studies  also  show  that  the  POR  projects  to 
the  LEA  and  the  PER  projects  to  the  MEA  (Van 
Strien  et  al.,  2009).  Furthermore,  extensive  con-
nectivity  between  PER  and  the  POR,  MEA  and 
LEA  were  also  found  (Van  Strien  et  al.,  2009).  In 
addition,  the  entorhinal  cortex  and  the  hippocampus 
are  also  anatomically  interconnected  (Lingenhohl, 
1991;  Witter,  1993).  Electrophysiological  studies  re-
cording  multiple  single  units  simultaneously  from 
different  regions  in  the  medial  temporal  lobe  should 
shed  a  light  on  these  issues  in  future  studies. 

the 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

    The  current  study  was  supported  by  the  WCU 
program  of  the  Ministry  of  Education,  Science  and 
Technology  in  Korea  through  KOSEF  (R32-10142 
and  R01  MH079971).

Object-Place  Event  and  the  Hippocampus 21

REFERENCES

for 

Amaral  DG  and  Witter  MP  (1995)  The  hippocampal  formation. 
In:  The  rat  nervous  system.  (Paxinos  G,  ed),  pp  443-493. 
Academic  Press,  San  Diego.

Burwell  RD  and  Hafeman  DM  (2003)  Positional  firing  pro-
perties  of  postrhinal  cortex  neurons.  Neuroscience  119: 
577-588.

Burwell  RD,  Shapiro  ML,  O'Malley  MT  and  Eichenbaum  H 
(1998)  Positional  firing  properties  of  perirhinal  cortex  neu-
rons.  Neuroreport  9:3013-3018.

Burwell  RD,  Witter  MP  and  Amaral  DG  (1995)  Perirhinal  and 
postrhinal  cortices  of  the  rat:  a  review  of  the  neuro-
anatomical  literature  and  comparison  with  findings  from 
the  monkey  brain.  Hippocampus  5:390-408.

Chadwick  MJ,  Hassabis  D,  Weiskopf  N  and  Maquire  EA 
(2010)  Decoding  Individual  Episodic  Memory  Traces  in  the 
Human  Hippocampus.  Curr  Biology  20:544-547.

Eacott  MJ,  Gaffan  D  and  Murray  EA 

(1994)  Preserved 
recognition  memory  for  small  sets,  and  impaired  stimulus 
identification 
following  rhinal  cortex  ab-
lations  in  monkeys.  Eur  J  Neurosci  6:1466-1478.

large  sets, 

Eacott  JM  and  Norman  G  (2004) 

for 
object,  place,  and  context  in  rats:  a  possible  model  of 
episodic-like  memory?  J  Neurosci  24:1948-1953.

Integrated  memory 

Ennaceur  A,  Neave  N  and  Aggleton  JP  (1996)  Neurotoxic 
lesions  of  the  perirhinal  cortex  do  not  mimic  the  be-
havioural  effects  of  fornix  transection  in  the  rat.  Behav 
Brain  Res  80:9-25.

Gaffan  D  (1994)  Scene-specific  memory  for  objects:  a  model 
of  episodic  memory  impairment  in  monkeys  with  fornix 
transection.  J  Cog  Neurosci  6:305-320.

Gaffan  D  and  Harrison  S  (1989)  Place  memory  and  scene 
memory:  effects  of  fornix  transection  in  the  monkey.  Ex-
perimental  Brain  Research  74:202-212.

Gaffan  D  and  Saunders    RC  (1985)  Running  recognition  of 
configural  stimuli  by  fornix  transected  monkeys.  The  Quar-
terly  Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology  37:61-71.

Gilbert  PE  and  Kesner  RP  (2003)  Localization  of  function 
within  the  dorsal  hippocampus:  the  role  of  the  CA3  sub-
region  in  paired-associate  learning.  Behav  Neurosci  117: 
1385-1394.

Hasselmo  ME  (2005)  What  is  the  function  of  hippocampal 
theta  rhythm-Linking  behavioral  data  to  phasic  properties 
of  field  potential  and  unit  recording  data.  Hippocampus 
15:936-949.

Hasselmo  ME,  Schnell  E  and  Barkai  E  (1995)  Dynamics  of 
learning  and  recall  at  excitatory  recurrent  synapses  and 
cholinergic  modulation  in  rat  hippocampal  region  CA3.  J 
Neurosci  15:5249-5262.

Hopfield  JJ  (1982)  Neural  networks  and  physical  systems  with 
emergent  collective  computational  abilities.  Proc  Natl  Acad 
Sci  U  S  A  79:2554-2558.

Ishizuka  N,  Weber  J  and  Amaral  DG  (1990)  Organization  of 
intrahippocampal  projections  originating  from  CA3  pyrami-
dal  cells  in  the  rat.  J  Comp  Neurol  295:580-623.

Jo  YS  and  Lee  I  (2010)  Perirhinal  cortex  is  necessary  for 
acquiring,  but  not  for  retrieving  object-place  paired  as-
sociation.  Learning  and  Memory  17:97-103.

Kesner  RP,  Hunsaker  MR  and  Warthen  MW  (2008)  The  CA3 
subregion  of  the  hippocampus  is  critical  for  episodic  me-

22 Jayoung  Byun,  et  al.

mory  processing  by  means  of  relational  encoding  in  rats. 
Behavioral  Neuroscience  122:1217-1225.

Kesner  RP,  Ravindranathan  A,  Jackson  P,  Giles  R  and  Chiba 
AA  (2001)  A  neural  circuit  analysis  of  visual  recognition 
memory:  role  of  perirhinal,  medial,  and  lateral  entorhinal 
cortex.  Learn  Mem  8:87-95.

Kim  JJ  and  Lee 

I  (2010)  Hippocampus 

for 
spatial  discrimination  using  distal  cue-configuration.  Hippo-
campus  (published  online  July  20).

is  necessary 

Komorowski  RW,  Manns  JR  and  Eichenbaum  H 

(2009) 
Robust  Conjunctive 
Item-Place  Coding  by  Hippocampal 
Neurons  Parallels  Learning  What  Happens  Where.  J 
Neurosci  29:9918-9929.

Lee  I,  Rao  G  and  Knierim  JJ  (2004)  A  double  dissociation 
between  hippocampal  subfields:  differential  time  course  of 
CA3  and  CA1  place  cells  for  processing  changed  en-
vironments.  Neuron  42:803-815.

Lee  I  and  Solivan  F  (2008)  The  roles  of  the  medial  prefrontal 
cortex  and  hippocampus  in  a  spatial  paired-association 
task.  Learn  and  Mem  15:357-367.

Leutgeb  JK,  Leutgeb  S,  Moser  M-B  and  Moser  EI  (2007) 
Pattern  Separation  in  the  Dentate  Gyrus  and  CA3  of  the 
Hippocampus.  Science  315:961-966.

Leutgeb  S,  Leutgeb  JK,  Barnes  CA,  Moser  EI,  McNaughton 
BL  and  Moser  MB  (2005)  Independent  codes  for  spatial 
and  episodic  memory  in  hippocampal  neuronal  ensembles. 
Science  309:619-623.

Leutgeb  S,  Leutgeb  JK,  Treves  A,  Moser  MB  and  Moser  EI 
(2004)  Distinct  Ensemble  Codes  in  Hippocampal  Areas 
CA3  and  CA1.  Science  305:1295-1298.

Lingenhohl  K  and  Finch  DM  (1991)  Morphological  Charac-
terization  of  rat  entorhinal  neurons  in  vivo:  soma-dendritic 
structure  and  axonal  domains.  Experimental  Brain  Re-
search  84:57-74.

Marr  D  (1971)  Simple  memory:  a 

theory 

for  archicortex. 

Philos  Trans  R  Soc  Lond  B  Biol  Sci  262:23-81.

McNaughton  BL  and  Morris  RGM  (1987)  Hippocampal  sy-
naptic  enhancement  and 
information  storage  within  a 
distributed  memory  system.  Trends  in  Neuroscience  10: 

408-415.

Mizumori  SJ,  McNaughton  BL,  Barnes  CA  and  Fox  KB  (1989) 
Preserved  spatial  coding  in  hippocampal  CA1  pyramidal 
cells  during  reversible  suppression  of  CA3c  output:  evi-
dence  for  pattern  completion  in  hippocampus.  J  Neurosci 
9:3915-3928.

Rolls  ET  (1989)  Functions  of  neuronal  networks  in  the  hip-
pocampus  and  neocortex  in  memory.  In:  Neural  models  of 
plasticity:  Experimental  and  theoretical  approaches  (Byrne 
JH,  Berry  WO,  eds),  pp  240-265.  Academic  Press,  San 
Diego.

Rolls  ET  and  Kesner  RP  (2006)  A  computational  theory  of 
hippocampal  function,  and  empirical  tests  of  the  theory. 
Progress  in  Neurobiology  79:1-48.

Rolls  ET,  Treves  A,  Robertson  RG,  Georges-Francois  P  and 
Panzeri  S  (1998)  Information  about  spatial  view  in  an 
ensemble  of  primate  hippocampal  cells.  J  Neurophysiol 
79:1797-1813.

Suzuki  WA,  Miller  EK  and  Desimone  R  (1997)  Object  and 
place  memory  in  the  macaque  entorhinal  cortex.  J  Neu-
rophysiol  78:1062-1081.

Treves  A  and  Rolls  ET  (1994)  Computational  analysis  of  the 
in  memory.  Hippocampus  4: 

the  hippocampus 

role  of 
374-391.

Van  Strien  NM,  Cappaert  NLM  and  Witter  MP  (2009)  The 
anatomy  of  memory:  an  interactive  overview  of  the  pa-
rahippocampal-hippocampal  network.  Nat  Rev  Neurosci  10: 
272-282.

Witter  MP  (1993)  Organization  of  the  Entorhinal-Hippocampal 
System:  A  Review  of  Current  Anatomical  Data.  Hippo-
campus  3:33-44.

Young  BJ,  Tim  O,  Gregory  DF  and  Howard  E  (1997)  Me-
mory  Representation  within  the  Parahippocampal  Region. 
J  Neurosci  17:5183-5195.

Zhu  XO,  Brown  MW  and  Aggleton  JP  (1995)  Neuronal 
signalling  of 
to  visual  recognition 
memory  in  rat  rhinal  and  neighbouring  cortices.  Eur  J 
Neurosci  7:753-765.

information 

important 

