Experimental  Neurobiology
Vol.  19,  pages  49∼53,  June  2010

Ectopic  Expression  of  Ephrin-A5  Under 

the  EphA8  Promoter  at  the  Anterior  Region 

of  the  Superior  Colliculus

Hyuna  Noh  and  Soochul  Park*

Department  of  Biological  Science,  Sookmyung  Women’s 

University,  Seoul  140-742,  Korea

ABSTRACT

EphA/ephrin-A  mediated  signaling  has  emerged  as  a  key  mechanism  regulating 
axon  guidance  and  topographic  mapping,  particularly  in  the  well-characterized  visual 
system  from  the  retina  to  the  superior  colliculus  (SC).  In  this  study,  EphA8  bacterial 
artificial  chromosome  (BAC)  was  manipulated  to  contain  a  floxed  eGFP  and  human 
ephrin-A5  expression  cassette  using  homologous  recombination  method.  In  the  mice 
containing  the  recombinant  BAC,  it  was  shown  that  GFP  is  expressed  in  an  anterior＞
posterior  gradient  in  the  SC.  Furthermore,  when  these  mice  were  crossed  with  the 
transgenic  mice  expressing  Cre  under  the  EphA8  promoter,  it  was  evident  that  a  GFP 
expression  cassette  was  eliminated,  and  that  human  ephrin-A5  was  ectopically  ex-
pressed  in  the  anterior  region  of  the  SC.  This  transgenic  model  would  be  useful  to 
analyze  the  role  of  ephrin-A5  in  the  SC  during  the  retinocollicular  topography  formation.

Key  words:  ephrin-A5,  EphA8,  superior  colliculus,  topographic  mapping

INTRODUCTION

    Recent  studies  indicate  that  Eph  receptors  and 
ephrins  coordinate  various  developmental  processes 
but  also  physiological  events  and  homeostasis  of 
diverse  adult  organs  (Klein,  2004;  Pasquale,  2008). 
These  emerging  Eph-ephrin  functions  suggest  that 
the  unbalanced  signaling  of  these  molecules  may 
lead  to  the  genesis  of  a  variety  of  diseases  such  as 
diabetes  and  cancer.  An  intriguing  feature  of  Eph/ 
ephrin  signaling 
that  Ephs  and  ephrins  are 
mutually  exclusively  expressed  and  that  they  elicit 
bidirectional  signaling  between  two  opposing  cells 

is 

*To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed.
TEL:  82-2-710-9330,  FAX:  82-2-715-9331
e-mail:  scpark@sookmyung.ac.kr
Received  June  10,  2010
Accepted  for  publication  June  22,  2010

through  cell-cell  contact  (Davy  and  Soriano,  2005). 
However,  in  some  cases,  Ephs  and  ephrins  are 
co-expressed  in  the  same  cells.  For  example,  it 
was  shown  that  co-expression  of  ephrin-As  with 
EphAs  in  the  nasal  retinal  ganglion  cells  reduced 
the  sensitivity  of  EphAs 
towards  ephrinAs  ex-
pressed  in  the  posterior  region  of  the  superior 
colliculus  (Hornberger  et  al.,  1999).  In  addition, 
formation  of  the  cis  Eph-ephrin  complex  within  the 
same  cell  was  shown  to  cause  an  abolishment  of 
the 
thereby 
leading  to  a  loss  of  sensitivity  towards  ephrin-As 
applied  in  trans  (Carvalho  et  al.,  2006).  These 
results  suggest  that  co-expression  of  Ephs  and 
ephrins  impairs  their  signaling  through  cis-interact-
ion.  In  contrast,  another  study  demonstrated  that 
EphAs  and  ephrinAs  are  localized  to  different  mem-
brane  domains  and  signal  independently.  They 

tyrosine  phosphorylation  of  EphA3, 

50 Hyuna  Noh,  et  al.

showed  that  EphA  forward  signaling  directed  growth 
cone  collapse  and  retraction  while  ephrinA  reverse 
signaling  motor  axon  growth  and  attraction  (Mar-
quardt  et  al.,  2005).
    In  this  study,  we  generated  a  transgenic  mice 
ectopically  expressing  ephrin-A5  at 
the  anterior 
superior  colliculus  (SC)  where  various  EphA  recep-
tors  are  normally  expressed  with  anterior＞posterior 
gradient  (Lemke  and  Reber,  2005).  These  mice 
may  be  a  valuable 
to  elucidate  whether 
ephrin-As  acts  as  an  inhibitor  or  independent  ligand 
in  the  anterior  SC  during  the  retinocollicular  topo-
graphy  formation.

tool 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS

Generation  of  BAC  transgenic  mice

    Construction  of 
targeting  vector,  homologous 
recombination  and  Southern  analyses  were  per-
formed  as  described  previously  (Kim  et  al.,  2007). 
BAC  transgenic  mice  containing  EphA8-eGFP  were 
genotyped  by  PCR  using  the  following  primers: 
5’-TCTTGCCAGCTCTACCACCA-3’  and  5’-CAGA-
GAACTTCAGCGGTCCA-3’.  BAC  transgenic  mice 
containing  EphA8-Cre  mice  were  also  identified  by 
PCR  using  the  primers  5’-CAGGATATCGTAATC-
TGGCATTTC-3’  and  5’-ATGACAATATTTACATTGG-
TCCAGC-3’.

Histology  and  immunohistochemistry

    The  mice  were  perfused  with  4%  PFA  in  1×  PBS 
and  the  brains  were  post-fixed  for  2  hr  in  cold  4% 
PFA  in  1×  PBS,  washed  three  times  for  20  min 
each  with  PBS,  incubated  in  30%  sucrose  in  1× 
PBS  for  overnight  at  4oC  and  then  embedded  in 
were  stored  at −20oC  or −80oC.  For  the  antibody 
tissue  freezing  medium  (Jung).  Sections  (20μm) 

staining,  the  sections  were  washed  two  times  in 
0.1%  Triton  X-100/PBS  (10  minutes  each),  blocked 
with  10%  Horse  serum,  0.1%  Triton  X-100/PBS  1  hr 
at  room  temperature.  The  primary  antibody  was 
diluted  in  blocking  solution  and  incubated  at  4oC 
overnight.  Goat  anti-human  ephrin-A5  antibody  was 
purchased  from  R  and  D  system.  After  three  times 
washes  in  0.1%  Triton  X-100/PBS  (30  minutes 
each),  the  secondary  antibody,  diluted  in  blocking 
solution,  was  applied  for  3  hr  (FITC-conjugated  rab-
bit  anti-goat,  chemicon,  1：200).  After  three  washes 

with  0.1%  Triton  X-100/PBS,  counterstaining  was 
performed  with  DAPI  and 
the  sections  were 
embedded  with  vectasheild  (Vectorlab).

RESULTS

Construction  of  a  recombinant  EphA8  bac-
terial  artificial  chromosome  (BAC)  containing 
a  eGFP-ephrinA5  expression  cassette 

it 

is  expected 

the  EphA8  BAC  clone, 

    Previous  studies  showed  that  co-expressed  Eph 
receptors  and  ephrin  ligands  negatively  regulate  its 
biological  function  or  mediate  opposing  actions  on 
their  counter-partners  presented  in  trans  (McLaugh-
lin  and  O'Leary,  2005).  To  investigate  whether  co- 
expression  of  ephrin-A5  in  the  EphA8-expressing 
superior  collicular  cells  affects  the  retinocollicular 
topography,  we  modified  a  EphA8  BAC  clone, 
RP23-357K18,  which  is  shown  to  express  LacZ 
reporter  gene  in  the  anterior  region  of  the  superior 
colliculus  (SC)  but  not  in  the  retina  (Kim  et  al., 
2007).  Because  the  EphA8  gene  contains  17  exons, 
is  about  28  kb  in  length  and  located  in  the  center 
of 
that 
RP23-357K18  clone  contains  the  regulatory  ele-
ments  and  locus  control  regions  necessary  to  reca-
pitulate  the  endogenous  expression  of  EphA8  in  vivo.
    In  order  to  insert  the  eGFP-ephrinA5  expression 
cassette  into  the  first  exon  of  EphA8  in  the  BAC 
clone,  we  constructed  a  targeting  vector  containing 
a  1.2  kb  EphA8  genomic  DNA  upstream  of  the  first 
exon,  eGFP  flanked  by  two  loxP  sites,  a  human 
ephrin-A5  cDNA,  kanamycin  resistance  gene  flank-
ed  by  two  FRT  sites,  and  a  0.7  kb  EphA8  genomic 
DNA  downstream  of  the  first  exon  (Fig.  1).  This 
targeting  vector  was  transformed  into  the  bacteria 
carrying 
the  EphA8  BAC  DNA  and  pKOBEGA 
plasmid  containing  an  inducible  lamda  phage  re-
combinase  system.  To  induce  the  recombinases, 
bacteria  were 
in  arabinose-containing 
medium,  and  the  first  recombinant  BAC  clones 
were  selected  in  the  presence  of  chloramphenicol 
and  kanamycin.  Southern  blot  analysis  using  GFP 
as  a  probe  revealed  that  a  9.6  kb  KpnI  fragment 
was  detected  in  the  wild  type  BAC,  whereas  a  8.2 
kb  fragment  was  detected  in  the  first  recombinant 
BAC  DNA  (data  not  shown).  When  Southern  blot 
analysis  was  performed  using  ephrinA5  cDNA  as  a 
probe,  a  7.1  kb  fragment  was  detected  in  the  first 

incubated 

Ectopic  Expression  of  Ephrin-A5 51

the 

Fig.  1.  Strategy  for  constructing  a 
recombinant  EphA8  BAC  containing 
a  eGFP-human  ephrinA5  expression 
cassette.  The  EphA8  BAC  clone, 
RP23-357K18,  contains  approximate-
ly  286.6  kb  genomic  DNA,  and  the 
ephA8  gene  is  positioned  approxima-
tely  in  the  middle  of  the  BAC  clone. 
The  ephA8  gene  is  approximately  28 
kb  long  as  represented  by  a  thin 
line,  and  it  comprises  17  exons.  The 
targeting  vector  was  designed 
to 
contain  two  ephA8  genomic  DNAs 
on  its  either  side,  which  allow  a 
specific  homologous 
recombination 
between  the  targeting  vector  and  the 
EphA8  BAC  DNA  at  the  genomic 
region  surrounding 
first  exon. 
floxed  eGFP-human  ephrinA5 
The 
cDNA  expression  cassette  and  kana-
flanked  by 
mycin  resistance  gene 
FRT  sites  were  also 
inserted 
in 
between  two  homologous  genomic 
arms  of  the  targeting  vector.  Through 
the  first  homologous  recombination, 
the  eGFP-human  ephrinA5  cDNA 
and  kanamycin  resistance  cassette 
was 
first  ephA8 
exon 
the  EphA8  BAC  clone. 
Then,  the  kanamycin  resistance  cas-
sette  was  selectively  eliminated  by 
expressing  Flipase,  leading  to  the 
EphA8-eFFP  BAC  clone  containing 
only  the  floxed  eGFP-human  eph-
rinA5  cDNA  expression  cassette. 
Finally, 
the 
expression  Cre  recombinase  elimi-
nate 
the 
EphA8-eGFP  BAC  clone  and  that 
the  EphA8-ephrinA5  BAC  express 
human  ephrin-A5  instead  of  eGFP 
under  the  EphA8  promoter.  K:  kpnI.

it  was  expected 

floxed  eGFP 

inserted 

from 

that 

into 

the 

the 

in 

recombinant  BAC  clone,  whereas  a  9.6  kb  fragment 
was  detected  in  the  wild  type  BAC  clone  (data  not 
shown).  To  eliminate  the  kanamycine  resistance 
cassette  from  the  first  recombinant  BAC  clone,  FLP 
plasmid  was  electroporated  into  cells  containing  the 
first  recombinant  BAC  clone,  selected  at  30oC  in 
the  presence  of  chloramphenicol,  kanamycin  and 
tetracycline,  and 
induced  by 
shifting  temperature  to  42oC  to  eliminate  a  kanamy-

flipase  was 

then 

cin  cassette  between  two  FRT  sites.  To  confirm 
EphA8-eGFP  recombinant,  we  performed  Southern 
blot  analysis  using  ephrinA5  as  a  probe,  revealing 
that  a  5.0  kb  KpnI  digested  fragment  was  detected 
in 
the 
final  recombinant  BAC  clone  (data  not 
shown).

52 Hyuna  Noh,  et  al.

Fig.  2.  Expression  analysis  of  eGFP  at  the  anterior  region  of  the 
superior  colliculus.  (A)  Transgenic  mice  containing  EphA8-eGFP 
BAC  were  crossed  with  those  containing  EphA8-Cre  BAC.  The 
midbrains  were  isolated  from  each  littermate  at  P5  and  the  dorsal 
region  of  each  midbrain  was  visualized  with  GFP  fluorescence. 
The  wild  type  mice  did  not  show  any  GFP  signal  in  the  SC  (the 
first  panel),  whereas  the  EphA8-eGFP  mice  revealed  an  anterior 
＞posterior  gradient  expression  of  GFP  at  the  SC  (the  second 
panel).  In  addition,  GFP  signal  was  barely  detectable  in  the  SC  of 
the  compound  transgenic  line  containing  both  eGFP-ephrinA5  and 
Cre  (the  third  panel).  (B)  PCR  genotyping  was  performed  using  tail 
genomic  DNAs  derived  from  each  littermate  (the  first  and  second 
panels).  Primers  were  designed  to  amplify  a  portion  of  human 
ephrin-A5  cDNA,  which  is  expected  to  produce  a  450  bp  PCR 
product  in  each  transgenic  line  but  not  wild  type  mice  (the  first 
panel).  Likewise,  primers  were  designed  to  amplify  a  portion  of  Cre 
gene,  which  is  expected  to  produce  a  500  bp  PCR  product  only  in 
a  compound  transgenic  line  containing  both  eGFP-ephrinA5  and  Cre 
(the  second  panel).  RT-PCR  analysis  was  also  performed  to  identify 
the  expression  of  human  ephrin-A5  in  a  compound  transgenic  line. 
RNAs  were  purified  from  the  SC  extract  of  each  littermate  and  the 
same  primers  for  human  ephrin-A5  PCR  genotyping  (the  first  panel) 
were  used  for  RT-PCR  analysis  (the  third  panel).  The  expected  450 
bp  RT-PCR  product  was  detected  only  in  the  presence  of  RT  from 
the  SC  of  the  compound  transgenic  line  (lane  4).  SC:  superior 
colliculus,  IC:  inferior  colliculus,  RT:  reverse  transcriptase.

Generation  of  BAC  transgenic  lines  express-
ing  eGFP  or  human  ephrinA5  under  the  EphA8 
promoter

    Next,  EphA8-eGFP  BAC  clone  was  injected  into 
a  fertilized  ICR  mouse  zygote  to  generate  BAC 
transgenic  mice  expressing  eGFP  under  the  EphA8 
promoter.  Transgenic  mice  containing  the  EphA8- 
eGFP  BAC  DNA  were  directly  confirmed  by  PCR 

Fig.  3.  Expression  analysis  of  human  ephrin-A5  at  the  anterior 
region  of  the  superior  colliculus.  (A∼C)  Immunohistochemical 
analyses  of  ephrin-A5  proteins  in  the  sagittal  sections  of  the  SC 
from  the  wild  type  littermate.  Note  that  the  endogenous  ephrinA5 
was  detectable  in  the  posterior  SC  but  not  in  the  anterior  SC.  (D
∼F)  Immunohistochemical  analyses  of  ephrin-A5  proteins  in  the 
sagittal  sections  of 
littermate 
expressing  human  ephrin-A5  under  the  EphA8  promoter.  In 
contrast  to  the  wild  type  littermate,  ephrin-A5  proteins  were 
detectable  in  both  anterior  and  posterior  regions  of  the  SC  in  the 
transgenic  line.

transgenic 

the  SC 

from 

the 

genotyping  as  shown  in  Fig.  2B  (first  panel,  lane  2). 
To  investigate  whether  the  transgenic  line  express 
eGFP  under  the  EphA8  promoter,  we  dissected  out 
the  superior  colliculus  (SC)  from  postnatal  (P)  5  day 
mice  and  then  observed  the  GFP  expression  under 
the  fluorescent  microscope.  As  shown  in  Fig.  2A, 
eGFP  was  detected  as  an  anterior＞posterior  grad-
ient  in  the  SC  of  the  transgenic  mice  (the  second 
panel),  which  is  very  similar  to  the  endogenous 
expression  pattern  of  EphA8  in  the  SC.  In  contrast, 
eGFP  was  not  detectable  in  the  SC  of  the  wild  type 
littermate  (Fig.  2A,  the  first  panel).
    To  further  analyze  whether  the  floxed  eGFP  in 
the  EphA8-eGFP 
is  effectively 
eliminated  by  Cre  recombinase,  we  generated  a 
EphA8-Cre  transgenic  line  using  the  same  EphA8 
BAC  clone  described  in  Fig.  1,  where  P1  bacterio-
phage  Cre  DNA  was  specifically  inserted  into  the 
first  exon  of  EphA8.  This  EphA8-Cre  transgenic  line 
was  crossed  with  the  EphA8-eGFP  BAC  transgenic 
line 
line 
expressing  both  human  ephrin-A5  and  Cre  under 
the  EphA8  promoter  (see  EphA8-ephrinA5  in  Fig. 
1).  It  was  evident  that  this  compound  transgenic 
line  contained  both  EphA8-eGFP  and  EphA8-Cre 
BAC  clones,  based  on  PCR  genotyping  (Fig.  2B, 

to  generate  a  compound 

transgenic  mice 

transgenic 

the  first  and  second  panels,  lane  3).  In  addition, 
eGFP  expression  was  barely  detectable  in  the  SC 
of  the  compound  transgenic  line,  indicating  that  the 
floxed  eGFP  expression  module  was  efficiently 
eliminated  by  Cre  recombinase  in  the  SC  (Fig.  2A, 
third  panel).  To  further  confirm  whether  human 
ephrin-A5  is  expressed  under  the  EphA8  promoter, 
we  performed  RT-PCR  analysis  using  total  RNAs 
isolated  from  the  SC  extracts,  where  the  primers 
were  designed  to  specifically  amplify  human  ephrin- 
A5  cDNA  but  not  mouse  ephrin-A5  cDNA.  As 
expected,  a  PCR  product  corresponding  to  human 
ephrin-A5  gene  was  detected  only  in  the  SC  of  a 
compound  transgenic  line  but  not  its  wild  type 
littermate  (Fig.  2B,  third  panel,  lane  4).

Expression  analysis  of  human  ephrin-A5  in  the 
anterior  region  of  the  mouse  superior  colliculus
    To  further  investigate  whether  human  ephrinA5 
cDNA  in  the  compound  transgenic  mice  is  express-
ed  in  the  anterior  region  of  the  SC,  we  prepared  a 
series  of  cryosections  for  immmunohistochemistry 
using  anti-ephrinA5  antibody.  As  expected,  in  the 
wild  type  littermate,  the  endogenous  ephrin-A5  was 
abundantly  expressed  in  the  posterior  region  of  the 
SC  but  also  in  the  inferior  colliculus  (IC)  (Fig.  3A, 
C).  However,  ephrinA5  was  not  detectable  in  the 
anterior  SC  of  the  wild  type  mice  (Fig.  3B).  In 
contrast,  ephrin-A5  was  detectable  in  both  anterior 
and  posterior  SC  of  the  compound  transgenic  mice 
(Fig.  3D∼F).  These  results  demonstrate  that  the 
compound  transgenic  mice  containing  both  EphA8- 
eGFP  and  EphA8-Cre  BAC  clones  do  ectopically 
express  human  ephrin-  A5  under  the  EphA8  pro-
moter  in  the  anterior  region  of  the  SC.

DISCUSSION

    In  the  present  study,  we  generated  BAC  transgenic 
mice  expressing  human  ephrin-A5  under  the  EphA8 
promoter.  It  was  evident  that  human  ephrin-  A5  cDNA 
was  ectopically  expressed  at  the  anterior  part  of  the 
SC.  However,  unlike  other  studies,  we  were  not  able 
to  observe  any  altered  size  or  morphology  of  the  SC 
in  those  transgenic  mice  despite  the  co-expression  of 
ephrin-A5  with  EphA  receptors,  suggesting  that  mis- 
expression  of  ephrin-  A5  does  not  affect  cell  pro-
liferation  or  cell  survival  at  least  in  the  SC  (Depaepe 

Ectopic  Expression  of  Ephrin-A5 53

et  al.,  2005).  Nevertheless,  these  transgenic  mice 
might  be  an  ideal  animal  model  to  determine  the 
function  of  ephrin-A5  in  the  retinocollicular  topography. 
If  the  ectopic  ephrin-A5  acted  as  a  barrier  for  the 
growth  of  EphA-expressing  retinal  ganglion  cell  (RGC) 
axons,  it  would  be  expected  that  the  number  of  RGC 
axons  is  significantly  reduced  in  the  SC.  If  the  ectopic 
ephrin-A5  acted  as  a  ligand  for  EphA  receptors,  the 
retinocollicular  topography  would  be  significantly  altered.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

    This  work  was  supported  by  a  grant  (No.  2009- 
0083149)  from  Korea  Science  and  Engineering  Foun-
dation  (KOSEF);  a  grant  (No.  2009K001246)  from 
Brain  Research  Center  of  the  21st  Century  Frontier 
Research  Program  funded  by  the  Ministry  of  Edu-
cation,  Science  and  Technology,  the  republic  of  Korea.

REFERENCES

Carvalho  RF,  Beutler  M,  Marler  KJ,  Knoll  B,  Becker-Barroso 
E,  Heintzmann  R,  Ng  T  and  Drescher  U  (2006)  Silencing 
of  EphA3  through  a  cis  interaction  with  ephrinA5.  Nat 
Neurosci  9:322-330.

Davy  A  and  Soriano  P  (2005)  Ephrin  signaling  in  vivo:  look 

both  ways.  Dev  Dyn  232:1-10.

Depaepe  V,  Suarez-Gonzalez  N,  Dufour  A,  Passante  L, 
Gorski  JA,  Jones  KR,  Ledent  C  and  Vanderhaeghen  P 
(2005)  Ephrin  signalling  controls  brain  size  by  regulating 
apoptosis  of  neural  progenitors.  Nature  435:1244-1250.

Hornberger  MR,  Dutting  D,  Ciossek  T,  Yamada  T,  Hand-
werker  C,  Lang  S,  Weth  F,  Huf  J,  Wessel  R,  Logan  C, 
Tanaka  H  and  Drescher  U  (1999)  Modulation  of  EphA 
receptor 
ligands  on 
retinal  ganglion  cell  axons.  Neuron  22:731-742.

function  by  coexpressed  ephrinA 

Kim  Y,  Song  E,  Choi  S  and  Park  S  (2007)  Engineering  lacZ 
Reporter  gene  into  an  ephA8  bacterial  artificial  chromo-
some  using  a  highly  efficient  bacterial 
recombination 
system.  J  Biochem  Mol  Biol  40:656-661.

Klein  R  (2004)  Eph/ephrin  signaling  in  morphogenesis,  neural 
development  and  plasticity.  Curr  Opin  Cell  Biol  16:580-589.
Lemke  G  and  Reber  M  (2005)  Retinotectal  mapping:  new 
insights  from  molecular  genetics.  Annu  Rev  Cell  Dev  Biol 
21:551-580.

Marquardt  T,  Shirasaki  R,  Ghosh  S,  Andrews  SE,  Carter  N, 
Hunter  T  and  Pfaff  SL  (2005)  Coexpressed  EphA  recep-
tors  and  ephrin-A  ligands  mediate  opposing  actions  on 
growth  cone  navigation  from  distinct  membrane  domains. 
Cell  121:127-139.

McLaughlin  T  and  O'Leary  DD  (2005)  Molecular  gradients  and 
development  of  retinotopic  maps.  Annu  Rev  Neurosci  28: 
327-355.

Pasquale  EB  (2008)  Eph-ephrin  bidirectional  signaling  in  phy-

siology  and  disease.  Cell  133:38-52.

