doi:10.5607/en.2011.20.1.54

Experimental  Neurobiology
Vol.  20,  pages  54∼65,  March  2011

Differences  between  Physostigmine-  and 

Yohimbine-induced  States  Are  Visualized  in 

Canonical  Space  Constructed  from  EEG  during 

Natural  Sleep-wake  Cycle  in  Rats

  Maan-Gee  Lee1,4*,  Minji  Kim1,  Mootaek  Roh1,

Il-Sung  Jang3,4  and  Seung  Hee  Won2

Departments  of  1Pharmacology  and  2Psychiatry,  School  of  Medicine, 

3Department  of  Dental  Pharmacology,  School  of  Dentistry,  4Brain  Science  and 
Engineering  Institute,  Kyungpook  National  University,  Daegu  700-422,  Korea

ABSTRACT

Although  quantitative  EEG  parameters,  such  as  spectral  band  powers,  are  sensitive 
to  centrally  acting  drugs  in  dose-  and  time-related  manners,  changes  of  the  EEG 
parameters  are  redundant.  It  is  desirable  to  reduce  multiple  EEG  parameters  to  a  few 
components  that  can  be  manageable  in  a  real  space  as  well  as  be  considered  as 
parameters  representing  drug  effects.  We  calculated  factor  loadings  from  normalized 
values  of  eight  relative  band  powers  (powers  of  0.5,  1.0∼2.0,  2.5∼4.0,  4.5∼5.5,  6.0
∼8.0,  8.5∼12.0,  12.5∼24.5,  and  25∼49.5  Hz  bands  expressed  as  ratios  of  the 
power  of  0.5-49.5  Hz  band)  of  EEG  during  pre-drug  periods  (11:00∼12:00)  by  factor 
analysis  and  constructed  a 
two-dimensional  canonical  space  (reference  canonical 
space)  by  canonical  correlation  analysis.  Eight  relative  band  powers  of  EEG  produced 
by  either  physostigmine  or  yohimbine  were  reduced  to  two  canonical  scores  in  the 
reference  canonical  space.  While  changes  of 
the  band  powers  produced  by 
physostigmine  and  yohimbine  were  too  redundant  to  describe  the  difference  between 
two  drugs,  locations  of  two  drugs  in  the  reference  canonical  space  represented  the 
difference  between  two  drug’s  effects  on  EEG.  Because  the  distance  between  two 
locations  in  the  canonical  space  (Mahalanobis  distance)  indicates  the  magnitude  of 
difference  between  two  different  sets  of  EEG  parameters  statistically,  the  canonical 
scores  and  the  distance  may  be  used  to  quantitatively  and  qualitatively  describe  the 
dose-dependent  and  time-dependent  effects  and  also  tell  similarity  and  dissimilarity 
among  effects.  Then, 
the  combination  of  power  spectral  analysis  and  statistical 
analysis  may  help  to  classify  actions  of  centrally  acting  drugs. 

Key  words:  EEG,  power  spectral  analysis,  factor  analysis,  canonical  correlation  analy-

sis,  physostigmine,  yohimbine

*To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed.
TEL:  82-53-420-4832,  FAX:  82-53-426-4703
e-mail:  mglee@knu.ac.kr
Received  December  16,  2010
Accepted  for  publication  January  14,  2011

INTRODUCTION

    Quantitative  electroencephalography  (qEEG)  has 
been  applied  to  the  various  purposes:  to  charac-

terize  psychotropic  drug  effects 
in  human  and 
animals  (Herrmann,  1982),  to  develop  sensitive  bio-
markers  for  diagnosing  psychiatric  disorders  (John 
et  al.,  2007;  Leiser  et  al.,  in  press),  disease  pro-
gression  (Luckhaus  et  al.,  2008),  treatment  pro-
gnosis  (Hansen  et  al.,  2003),  and  to  predict  clinical 
efficacy  of  putative  psychoactive  substances  (Knott 
et  al.,  1996;  Parker  et  al.,  2001;  Galderisi,  2002). 
Particularly,  it  has  been  tried  to  develop  methods  for 
screening  clinical  effect  of  centrally  acting  drugs. 
    Drug-induced  EEG  changes  have  been  used  as 
an  indicator  of  drug  action.  The  qEEG  parameters 
such  as  power  spectrum  and  band  powers  are 
mostly  used  in  evaluation  of  drug  effects.  There  are 
several  limitations  in  using  the  qEEG  parameters 
for  evaluation  of  drug  effects  (van  Riezen  and  Glatt, 
1993).  Firstly,  drug  effects  on  multiple  qEEG 
parameters  can  not  be  simply  explained  because 
many  drugs  produce  an  increase/decrease  power  of 
same  bands  and  because  the  change  of  one  band 
power  show  non-linear  relationship  with  drug  doses 
and  also  co-vary  with  those  of  neighboring  bands. 
Secondly,  drug  effects  are  confounded  with  fluc-
tuation  of  vigilance  level  such  as  sleep-wake  cycles 
which  affects  EEG  activity  profoundly.  Then,  drug 
effects  can  not  be  separated  from  the  changes  of 
background  activity. 
    To  overcome  the  first  limitation,  multivariate  stati-
stical  methods  have  been  used  to  extract  a  few 
components  which  changes  are  mostly  related  to 
drug  effects  and  reflect  dose-effect  relationship.  For 
example,  a  set  of  band  powers  produced  by 
standard  drugs  having  already  known  mechanism 
or  belong  to  certain  classes,  a  reference  data  set, 
is  fed  as  input  data  to  the  discriminant  analysis  and 
a  few  components  which  well  described  the  classes 
of  known  drugs  are  extracted  (Fairchild  et  al.,  1980; 
Dimpfel  and  Decker,  1984).  Then,  a  test  drug  is 
classified  to  a  certain  class  by  the  rule  constructed 
from  the  reference  data  set.  Although  it  has  been 
used  widely  for  the  classification  of  the  psycho-
active  drugs,  it  requires  a  reference  data  set  from 
standard  psychoactive  drugs  having  known  clinical 
actions.  If  the  data  from  additional  standard  drugs 
have  been  added  to  the  reference  data  set,  the 
classification  rule  should  be  modified.  Different  set 
of  standard  psychoactive  drugs  used  in  building  the 
reference  data  set  also  gives  different  classification 

Drug-induced  State  in  Canonical  Space 55

rule  even  though  the  same  analysis  steps  and 
procedures  are  used.  Then,  to  build  a  ubiquitous 
reference  data  set,  a  standard  set  of  behavioral 
states  which  is  independent  to  the  sets  of  standard 
drugs,  can  be  used. 
    To  overcome  the  second  limitation,  vigilance  con-
trolling  methods  have  been  devised.  For  example,  a 
treadmill  running  was  used  to  maintain  a  certain 
level  of  vigilance  during  the  recording  (Krijzer  et  al., 
1993).  However,  this  and  other  vigilance  controlling 
procedures  can  not  keep  the  level  of  vigilance 
constant  anyhow  because  of  natural  sleep  pressure 
as  well  as  drug  effects  such  as  sedation  or  stimula-
tion  which  directly  affect  vigilance  level  (Lee,  1999). 
Here,  we  considered  that  the  drug  effects  on  the 
EEG  include  EEG  changes  from  natural  fluctuation 
and  drug  effects  on  EEG  and  interactions  between 
them. 
    Therefore,  we  proposed  band  powers  of  EEG 
during  natural  sleep-wake  cycles  can  be  used  as 
reference  data  set  which  is  fed  to  multivariate 
statistics  to  produce  a  few  components  representing 
a  state  and  the  fluctuation  itself  of  vigilance  level  is 
considered  as  basic  components  of  a  state.  To 
maintain  the  average  vigilance  of  reference  data  set 
to  a  certain  level,  we  chose  EEG  signals  during  the 
same  period  (11:00∼12:00)  of  the  day  before  drug 
administration.  Then,  the  reference  canonical  space 
was  constructed  by  factor  analysis  and  canonical 
correlation  analysis  and  the  EEG  effects  of  phy-
sostigmine,  an  anticholinesterase  to  enhance  cho-
linergic  neurotransmission,  and  yohimbine,  an 
to  enhance 
alpha2-adrenergic 
adrenergic 
the 
canonical  space  whether  their  effects  could  be  well 
differentiated. 

transmission,  were  compared 

receptor  blocker 

in 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS

Animals

    Eighteen  male  Sprague-Dawley  rats  (Samtaco, 
Osan,  Korea)  weighing  357∼494  g  (420±43  g) 
were  used.  Each  two  animals  were  housed  in  a 
plastic  cage  (28×42×18  cm)  before  surgery.  Each 
animal  was  housed  in  a  cage  after  surgery.  They 
were  maintained  in  a  controlled  environment  through-
out  the  study:  22∼24oC  ambient  temperature,  12：
12  hour  light-dark  cycle  (light  on  from  7:00  to 

56 Maan-Gee  Lee,  et  al.

food  and 

19:00),  with  a  commercial 
tap  water 
available  ad  libitum  except  on  the  day  of  recording. 
The  rats  were  sacrificed  by  an  overdose  of  CO2 
inhalation  after  the  completion  of  the  experiment. 
Experiments  were  carried  out  in  accordance  with 
the  National  Institutes  of  Health  Guide  for  the  Care 
and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals. 

Surgery

implanted  under  ketamine 

    Surgical  procedure  was  similar  to  those  in  our 
previous  study  (Jang  et  al.,  2009).  In  brief,  epidural 
screw  electrodes  (tip  diameter  ∼1.0  mm)  for  EEG 
recording  were 
(75 
mg/kg,  i.p.)  and  xylazine  (5  mg/kg,  i.p.)  anesthesia. 
After  the  rats  showed  no  movement  in  response  to 
a  tail-pinch,  the  rats  were  placed  in  a  stereotaxic 
apparatus  (David  Kopf  Instruments  Inc.,  Tujunga, 
CA,  USA).  The  midline  scalp  was  locally  anes-
thetized  with  2%  lidocaine,  incised,  and  the  soft 
tissue  over  skull  surface  was  removed.  Six  small 
holes  were  drilled  bilaterally  in  the  frontal  bone  (2.5 
mm  anterior  and  1.25  mm  lateral  to  bregma),  the 
parietal  bone  (6  mm  posterior  and  5  mm  lateral  to 
bregma)  and  the  interparietal  bone  (3  mm  posterior 
and  2  mm  lateral  to  lambda)  without  perforating  the 
dura  mater  using  a  low-speed  drill  (diameter  0.8 
mm)  under  surgical  microscope.  Four  stainless  steel 
screws  were  inserted  into  the  holes  in  the  frontal 
and  parietal  bones  for  EEG  recording  from  the 
frontal  and  parietal  cortices, 
respectively.  Two 
additional  screws  were  inserted  into  the  holes  in  the 
interparietal  bones 
reference  and  ground 
electrodes.  The  electrodes  with  connecting  pins 
were  arranged  together  in  3×2  matrices  and  fixed 
over  the  skull  with  dental  cement.  The  rats  were 
allowed  at  least  7  days  to  recover  from  the  surgery 
before  recording. 

for 

EEG  recording

    At  the  day  of  recording,  two  rats  were  placed  in 
the  recording  chamber  and  connected  to  the  swivel 
before  10:00.  EEG  signals  were  recorded  con-
tinuously  from  10:00  to  17:30.  The  4  signals  from 
the 
frontal  and  parietal  cortices  were  recorded 
monopolarly  with  respect  to  the  reference  electrode. 
The  signals  were  fed  to  the  amplifier  (AxoProbe 
410  and  CyberAmp  380,  Axon  Instruments  Inc., 
Foster  City,  CA,  USA),  where  they  were  amplified 

10,000  times  and  filtered  with  low-pass  60  Hz  and 
high-pass  1  Hz).  They  were  saved  to  a  PC  by  a 
data  acquisition  board  (DigiData  1200A,  Axon  In-
struments  Inc.,  Foster  City,  CA,  USA)  at  a  sampling 
rate  200  Hz. 

Drugs

    Physostigmine  sulfate  2H2O  (Tocris,  Ballwin,  MO, 
USA)  and  yohimbine  hydrochloride  (Sigma  Chemi-
cal  Co.,  St.  Louis,  MO,  USA)  were  purchased  as 
commercial  products.  Physostigmine  sulfate  and 
yohimbine  hydrochloride  were  freshly  dissolved  in 
distilled  water  before  the  first  dosing.  The  admini-
stration  volume  was  0.5  or  1.0  ml/kg. 

Treatment

    The  rats  were  randomly  assigned  to  two  groups 
(n=10  for  physostigmine  treatment,  Phy;  n=8  for 
yohimbine 
treatment,  Yoh).  Drugs  were  always 
administered  at  12:00,  14:00  and  16:00±5  min  with 
each  of  three  doses:  0.2,  0.5  and  1.0  mg/kg  phy-
sostigmine  and  1,  2  and  5  mg/kg  yohimbine  intra-
peritoneally. 

Power  spectrum  analysis

    The  raw  EEG  signals  were  visually  inspected 
prior  to  analysis  and  10-sec  EEG  epochs  with 
artifacts  were  excluded  from  analysis.  The  EEG 
signals  of  11:00∼12:00  (Pre)  before  and  eight 
15-min  segments  (numbered  with  S1,  S2,  S3,  S4, 
S5,  S6,  S7  and  S8)  after  drug  injections  at  12:00, 
14:00  and  16:00  were  analyzed  by  power  spectrum 
analysis.  The  EEG  signals  of±5  min  around  drug 
injection  (beginning  5-min  of  the  first  and  ending 
5-min  of  the  eighth  segments)  were  excluded  from 
analysis  because  of  behavior  disturbed  by  experi-
mental  procedure  for  injection.  Ten  power  spectra 
were  calculated  by  using  a  fast  Fourier  transform 
from  10  Hanning-windowed  2-sec  FFT  epochs 
(1-sec  overlap)  of  one  10-sec  EEG  epoch  and  then 
averaged  to  a  power  spectrum.   
    All  the  power  spectra  from  one  animal  were 
normalized  with  average  total  power  (0.5∼49.5  Hz) 
of  its  Pre  values.  The  spectrum  was  divided  to  8 
frequency  bands  (1,  0.5;  2,  1.0∼2.0;  3,  2.5∼4.0;  4, 
4.5∼5.5;  5,  6.0∼8.0;  6,  8.5∼12.0;  7,  12.5∼24.5; 
and  8,  25∼49.5  Hz).  The  relative  band  powers 
were  expressed  as  ratios  of  the  absolute  powers  of 

Drug-induced  State  in  Canonical  Space 57

8  frequency  bands  to  the  total  power.  The  absolute 
band  powers  were  expressed  as  log10  of  powers  of 
5  frequency  bands  (DE,  0.5∼4.0;  TH,  4.5∼5.5,  6.0
∼8.0;  AL,  8.5∼12.0;  BE,  12.5∼24.5;  GA  25∼49.5; 
and  TO,  0.5∼49.5  Hz).  All  the  calculations  were 
performed  by  custom-made  programs  using  MatLab 
(MathWorks  Inc.,  Natick,  MA,  USA). 

Statistical  analysis

    Data  were  expressed  as  mean  for  power  spectra 
and  Mahalanobis  distance,  mean  ±0.5×standard 
deviation  (SD)  for  the  absolute  band  powers,  mean 
±standard  error  of  mean  (SEM)  for  the  relative 
band  powers  and  mean±95%  confidence  limit  of 
mean  for  canonical  components.  The  power  spectra 
were  compared  with  multiple  t-tests  every  frequency 
bin  between  each  drug  dose  and  Pre.  The  absolute 
band  powers  were  analyzed  by  a  repeated-measure 
ANOVA  and  a  Tukey  test  for  time.  The  eight 
relative  band  powers  of  all  epochs  of  Pre  were 
used  as  input  variables  for  a  factor  analysis  and  a 
canonical  correlation  analysis.  Resultant  factor  load-

ings  of  variables  and  eigenvectors  were  used  to 
calculate  two-dimensional  canonical  scores  of  all 
the  EEG  epochs  of  the  recordings.  The  canonical 
components  were  compared  by  an  ANOVA  and  a 
Tukey  test  with  times  and  confidence  intervals  of 
the  mean  were  compared  among  drugs  and  dosa-
ges.  The  Mahalanobis  distance  (McLachlan,  1999) 
which 
the  distance 
between  two  locations  in  the  canonical  space,  was 
calculated  from  two  canonical  variables.  All  the 
calculations  were  performed  by  custom-made  pro-
grams  using  MatLab  (MathWorks  Inc.,  Natick,  MA, 
USA). 

is  expressed  by  square  of 

RESULTS

Power  spectra

    Significant  changes  in  powers  at  each  frequency 
bin  of  the  mean  spectra  were  produced  by  3  doses 
of  physostigmine  (Phy,  0.2,  0.5  and  1.0  mg/kg)  and 
of  yohimbine  (Yoh,  1,  2  and  5  mg/kg)  (Fig.  1).  No 
significant  difference  was  observed  between  doses 

Fig.  1.  Power  spectra  of  EEG  from 
the  frontal  cortex  (A,  C)  and  the 
parietal  (B,  D)  cortex  of  the  second 
segment  (S2,  15∼30  min)  after  each 
dose  of  drugs.  Significant  changes   
in  powers  at  each  frequency  bin  of 
the  mean  spectra  were  produced  by 
3  doses  of  physostigmine  (Phy:  0.2, 
0.5  and  1.0  mg/kg)  (A,  B)  and  of 
yohimbine  (Yoh:  1,  2  and  5  mg/kg) 
(C,  D).  *p＜0.05,  significantly  different 
from  the  Pre.  FC:  frontal  cortex,  PC: 
parietal  cortex,  S2:  the  2nd  segment 
(15∼30  min  after  a  dose).

58 Maan-Gee  Lee,  et  al.

the 

lower 

in  both  drugs.  Maximum  effect  was  observed  by  the 
highest  dose  of  physostigmine,  while  it  was  ob-
served  by  the  lowest  dose  of  yohimbine.  Shown  in 
maximal  effect  of  physostigmine,  powers  were 
significantly  decreased  at 
frequencies 
below  22  Hz  in  the  frontal  cortex  and  25  Hz  in  the 
parietal  cortex,  and  they  were  increased  at  the 
higher  frequencies  above  32  Hz  in  the  frontal  and 
parietal  cortices  (Fig.  1A,  B).  In  contrast,  shown  in 
maximal  effect  of  yohimbine,  powers  were  signifi-
cantly  decreased  at  the  lower  frequencies  below  20 
Hz  in  the  frontal  cortex  and  17  Hz  in  the  parietal 
cortex,  and  they  were  increased  at  the  higher 
frequencies  above  37  Hz  only  in  the  frontal  cortex 

(Fig.  1C,  D). 

Absolute  band  powers

    All  doses  of  physostigmine  produced  decreases 
of  all  other  band  powers  but  GA  band  power  which 
was 
increased,  while  significant  changes  were 
observed  differently  by  some  doses  of  yohimbine 
according  to  the  bands  in  both  the  frontal  and 
parietal  cortices  (Figs.  2,  3).  In  the  frontal  cortex 
(Fig.  2  Left),  significant  change  was  clearly  shown 
from  the  first  segment  of  5∼15  min  after  the 
highest  dose  injection  in  most  bands  (TH,  AL,  BE 
and  GA),  but  was  delayed  in  DE  band  from  the 
third  segment  of  30∼45  min  after  injection.  This 

Fig.  2.  Time  trends  of  the  absolute  band  powers  of  EEG  fromt  the  frontal  cortex  (FC).  All  doses  of  physostigmine  (Phy:  0.2,  0.5  and  1 
mg/kg,  i.p.)  produced  decreases  of  all  other  band  powers  but  GA  band  power  which  was  increased.  In  contrast,  significant  changes  were 
observed  differently  by  some  doses  of  yohimbine  (Yoh:  1,  2  and  5  mg/kg,  i.p.)  according  to  the  bands.  *p＜0.05,  significantly  different 
from  the  Pre.  DE:  delta,  TH:  theta,  AL:  alpha,  BE:  beta,  GA:  gamma,  and  TO:  total  power,  Pre:  a  period  of  11:00∼12:00,  S1  to  S8:  the 
first  to  8th  segments  (every  15  min  period  after  a  dose).

Drug-induced  State  in  Canonical  Space 59

Fig.  3.  Time  trends  of  the  absolute  band  powers  of  EEG  fromt  the  parietal  cortex  (PC).  Note  that  all  doses  of  physostigmine  (Phy:  0.2, 
0.5  and  1  mg/kg,  i.p.)  produced  decreases  of  all  other  band  powers  but  GA  band  power  which  was  increased.  In  contrast,  note  that 
significant  changes  were  observed  differently  by  some  doses  of  yohimbine  (Yoh:  1,  2  and  5  mg/kg,  i.p.)  according  to  the  bands.  *p＜0.05, 
significantly  different  from  the  Pre.  DE:  delta,  TH:  theta,  AL:  alpha,  BE:  beta,  GA:  gamma,  and  TO:  total  power,  Pre:  a  period  of  11:00∼
12:00,  S1  to  S8:  the  first  to  8th  segments  (every  15  min  period  after  a  dose).

lasted  in  a  range  of  45∼75  min.  Most  band  powers 
seemed  to  be  changed  proportion  to  the  doses.  In 
the  frontal  cortex  (Fig.  2  Right),  the  highest  dose  of 
yohimbine  induced  decreases  of  power  of  some 
bands  (DE,  TH,  AL  and  TO)  with  longer  duration 
while  the  intermediate  dose  induced  larger  magnitude 
but  shorter  duration  of  decrease  in  DE,  TH,  AL,  BE 
and  TO  band  powers.  Significant  changes  in  DE, 
TH  and  TO  bands  lasted  for  approximately  120  min 
from  the  start  after  drug  injection  to  the  end  of 
recording  at  the  largest  dose.
    In  the  parietal  cortex,  similar  changes  as  the 
frontal  cortex  were  observed  (Fig.  3  Left).  Different 
from  the  frontal  cortex,  DE  band  power  changed  at 

the  start  after  drug  injection  and  TH  band  power 
did  not  significantly  decreased  after  injection  with 
the  highest  dose.  TH  band  power  was  significantly 
decreased  with  the  lowest  dose  of  physostigmine. 
Significant  changes  with 
largest  dose  of 
yohimbine  were  observed  in  DE,  TH,  AL  and  TO 
and  lasted  15  to  60  min  depending  on  the  bands 
which  is  shorter  than  the  duration  in  the  frontal 
cortex  (Fig.  3  Right). 

the 

Projections  to  the  reference  canonical  space 
of  the  EEG  from  the  cortex  of  the  same  group
    Despite  some  similarity  and  other  dissimilarity 
between  physostigmine  and  yohimbine  were  men-

60 Maan-Gee  Lee,  et  al.

tioned,  evaluation  of  the  difference  of  the  overall 
drug  effects  was  impossible  due  to  irregularity  and 
complexity  of  the  changes  among  multiple  band 
powers.  Therefore,  the  factor  analysis  based  on  the 
effects  observed  in  the  8  relative  band  powers  in 
each  cortex  during  one-hour  pre-drug  period  (Pre) 
resulted  in  factor  loadings  to  calculate  common 
factors  which  may  represent  drug  effects  on  the 

for 

in  eigenvector 

EEG  and  were  used  to  measure  the  magnitude  of 
the  effects,  and  then  canonical  correlation  analysis 
resulted 
two-dimensional 
reference  canonical  space. 
    The  data  sets  of  relative  band  powers  fed  to  the 
multivariate  statistics  were  shown  on  the  left  panels 
of  Figs.  4  and  5.  Corresponding  projection  on  the 
two-dimensional  canonical  space  for  each  cortex 

the 

Fig.  4.  Projections  to  the  reference  canonical  space  of  the  EEG  from  the  frontal  cortex.  The  data  sets  of  relative  band  powers  fed  to  the 
multivariate  statistics  were  shown  on  A1  to  A3.  Corresponding  projection  on  the  two-dimensional  canonical  space  for  the  frontal  cortex 
were  depicted  on  B1  to  B3.  The  mark  of  the  center  (0,  0)  of  each  graph  is  the  location  of  Pre  and  other  symbol  represents  each  of  eight 
15-min  segments  after  one  dose  of  drug  injection.  A1  and  B1.  low  dose  (Phy:  0.2  mg/kg  and  Yoh:  1  mg/kg);  A2  and  B2.  intermediate 
dose  (Phy:  0.5  mg/kg  and  Yoh:  2  mg/kg);  and  A3  and  B3.  high  dose  (Phy:  1  mg/kg  and  Yoh:  5  mg/kg).  Large  arrows  on  B1  to  B3 
display  the  direction  and  distance  of  projection  of  the  first  segment  from  the  center.  FC:  frontal  cortex,  Phy:  physostigmine,  1  to  8:  eight 
bands,  Pre:  a  period  of  11:00∼12:00,  S1  to  S8:  the  first  to  8th  segments  (every  15  min  period  after  a  dose),  C1  and  C2:  canonical 
variables.

Drug-induced  State  in  Canonical  Space 61

Fig.  5.  Projections  to  the  reference  canonical  space  of  the  EEG  from  the  parietal  cortex.  The  data  sets  of  relative  band  powers  fed  to 
the  multivariate  statistics  were  shown  on  A1  to  A3.  Corresponding  projection  on  the  two-dimensional  canonical  space  for  the  parietal 
cortex  were  depicted  on  B1  to  B3.  The  mark  of  the  center  (0,  0)  of  each  graph  is  the  location  of  Pre  and  other  symbol  represents  each 
of  eight  15-min  segments  after  one  dose  of  drug  injection.  A1  and  B1.  low  dose  (Phy:  0.2  mg/kg  and  Yoh:  1  mg/kg);  A2  and  B2. 
intermediate  dose  (Phy:  0.5  mg/kg  and  Yoh:  2  mg/kg);  and  A3  and  B3.  high  dose  (Phy:  1  mg/kg  and  Yoh:  5  mg/kg).  Large  arrows  on 
B1  to  B3  display  the  direction  and  distance  of  projection  of  the  first  segment  from  the  center.  PC:  parietal  cortex,  Phy:  physostigmine,  1 
to  8:  eight  bands,  Pre:  a  period  of  11:00∼12:00,  S1  to  S8:  the  first  to  8th  segments  (every  15  min  period  after  a  dose),  C1  and  C2: 
canonical  variables. 

were  depicted  on  the  right  panels  of  Figs  4.  and  5. 
The  mark  of  the  center  (0,  0)  of  each  graph  is  the 
location  of  Pre  and  others  represented  at  15-min 
segments  after  one  dose  of  drug  injection. 
the 
    In 
canonical  variables  after  all  doses  of  physostigmine 
injection  started  at  the  location  down  and  left  from 
the  center  of  the  space  and  then  returned  to  the 

the  projections  of 

frontal  cortex, 

the 

center  with  times  (Fig.  4  Left  B1  to  B3).  In  contrast, 
the  projections  after  the  higher  doses  of  yohimbine 
(2  and  5  mg/kg)  started  at  the  location  up  and  right 
from  the  center  and  did  not  returned  to  the  center 
but  ended  at  the  location  up  from  the  center  or  up 
and  slightly  left  from  the  center  (Fig.  4  Right  B2 
and  B3).  The  projections  after  the  lowest  dose  (1 
mg/kg)  returned  to  the  center  (Fig.  4B1). 

62 Maan-Gee  Lee,  et  al.

    In  the  parietal  cortex,  the  projections  started  at 
the  location  right  and  slightly  down  from  the  center 
and  then  returned  to  the  center  with  times  (Fig.  5 
Left  B1  to  B3).  The  projections  after  all  doses  of 
yohimbine  started  at  the  location  down  or  down  and 
left  from  the  center  and  did  not  returned  to  the 
center  with  times  but  ended  at  the  location  down 
and  left  from  the  center  (Fig.  5  Right  B1  to  B3).

Mahalanobis  distances

    The  Mahalanobis  distance  is  expressed  by  square 
of  the  distance  between  two  locations  and  indicates 
dissimilarity  of  the  states,  that  is,  projection  to  the 
reference  canonical  space  of  the  EEG  parameters 
after  drug 
the  reference  canonical 
space  constructed  by  the  EEG  parameters  in  the 
frontal  cortex  before  drug  administration,  the  pro-
jections  after  1  mg/kg  physostigmine  or  1  mg/kg 
yohimbine  were  presented.  Maximal  distances  of 
projections  of  frontal  EEG  were  at  S1  in  both 

injection. 

In 

for 

for 

(left)  and 

Fig.  6.  (A)  Factor  loadings  for  the 
reference  canonical  space 
the 
frontal  cortex  (left)  and  for  the  pari-
etal  cortex  (right).  (B)  Time  trend  of 
Mahalanobis  distance  in  the  refer-
ence  canonical  space  for  the  frontal 
cortex 
the  parietal 
cortex  (right)  before  and  after  drug 
administration.  Maximal  distances  of 
projections  of  frontal  EEG  were  at 
S1  in  both  physostigmine  and  yohim-
bine.  However,  maximal  distances  of 
projections  of  parietal  EEG  were  at 
S1  in  yohimbine  but  at  S4  in  phy-
sostigmine.  Ref:  reference,  FC:  frontal 
cortex,  PC:  parietal  cortex,  1  to  8: 
eight  bands,  Pre:  a  period  of  11:00
∼12:00,  S1  to  S8:  the  first  to  8th 
segments  (every  15  min  period  after 
a  dose),  C1  and  C2:  canonical  vari-
ables. 

physostigmine  and  yohimbine  (Fig  6A  Left).  How-
ever,  maximal  distances  of  projections  of  parietal 
EEG  were  at  S1  in  yohimbine  but  at  S4  in  phy-
sostigmine  (Fig.  6B  Left). 

DISCUSSION

    The  present  study  demonstrates  that  the  relative 
band  powers  of  EEG  during  natural  sleep-wake 
cycles  were  used  as  a  reference  data  set  repre-
senting  standard  states  including  all  natural  levels 
of  vigilance  and  the  resulted  reference  canonical 
space  was  well  used  for  differentiating  psychotropic 
agents  and  for  time  trend  of  their  actions.  Thus,  the 
EEG  effects  of  physostigmine,  an  anticholinesterase 
to  enhance  cholinergic  neurotransmission,  and  those 
of  yohimbine,  an  alpha2-adrenergic  receptor  blocker 
to  enhance  adrenergic  neurotransmission,  were 
differentiated  quantitatively  and  qualitatively  by  the 
location  in  the  canonical  space,  that  is,  distance 

and  direction  from  its  center. 
    In  general,  it  is  believed  that  the  action  of  psy-
chotropic  drugs  on 
the  specific  neurotransmitter 
system(s)  or  receptors  induces  specific  changes  in 
power  spectral  profile.  In  this  study,  physostigmine 
induced  a  spectral  profile  different  from  one  of 
pre-drug  state  and  also  from  yohimbine  in  some 
frequency  bins  but  not  in  others  as  power  at  each 
frequency  bin  of  power  spectrum  was  compared. 
Some  characteristics  such  as  significant  power 
difference  over  a  wider  range  observed  after  phy-
sostigmine  than  yohimbine,  prominent  theta  peak 
disclosed  by  decreased  powers  around  the  peak, 
no  significant  power  differences  over  the  higher 
frequency  ranges 
in  yohimbine  even  significant 
power  increases  observed  in  lower  dose  of  yohim-
bine  in  the  frontal  cortex,  and  etc.,  were  apparent 
in  visual  inspection.  But  the  description  of  drug 
induced  change  or  recording  regions  was  only 
possible  verbosely  in  every  frequency  bin. 
    After  data  reduction  from  the  power  spectrum  to 
the  absolute  powers  over  some  specific  frequency 
bands  which  are  divided  by  empirically  or  statisti-
cally  (Herrmann,  1982),  the  simpler  description  of 
drug  effects  was  possible.  For  example,  the  peak 
time  of  the  band  powers  are  different  from  different 
drugs  on  different  cortex.  This  may 
indicate 
temporal  pattern  of  pharmacokinetic  characteristic  of 
the  drugs  but  still  does  not  say  direct  relationship 
between  single  band  powers  and  drug  concen-
tration  on  the  action  site.  Some  researchers  use 
specific  EEG  parameters,  such  as  beta  spindle 
activity  or  beta  power  with  benzodiazepines  action 
as  indicator  of  drug  concentration  in  action  site 
(Mandema  et  al.,  1991).  Other  researchers  use  a 
delta  band  and  theta  band  during  specific  sleep 
state  as  indicator  of  different  action  mechanism  on 
the  receptors  (Xi  and  Chase,  2008).  However,  there 
are  subjective  and  empirical  selection  of  the  EEG 
parameters  correlated  with  pharmacokinetic/pharma-
codynamic  actions  (Bol  et  al.,  2000). 
    Therefore,  we  used  multivariate  statistics  whether 
we  can  describe  the  characteristics  of  drug  action 
potency  and 
trend  with  simplicity  and 
quantitatively.  We  used  the  relative  band  powers  for 
the  input  to  multivariate  statistics  because  they  are 
less  dependent  to  the  recording  setup  such  as 
amplifier  gain  and  electrode  impedance  than  the 

temporal 

Drug-induced  State  in  Canonical  Space 63

for 

the 

absolute  band  powers.  Even  though  information  of 
magnitude  of  power  may  be  removed,  the  power 
distribution  profile  of  EEG  induced  by  drugs  was 
conserved.  Then,  we  used 
factor  analysis  and 
canonical  correlation  analysis  in  order  to  extract 
from  8  relative  band  powers  to  two  meaningful 
parameters  which  can  be  easily 
interpreted  by 
human  brain.  We  showed  that  the  action  at  a  time 
can  be  projected  on  the  canonical  space  con-
structed  from  a  reference  data  set.  As  the  reference 
data  set,  the  relative  band  powers  of  epochs  of 
EEG  from  the  cortex  during  pre-drug  period  of 
same  time  period  of  the  day  (11:00∼12:00)  were 
used.  It  includes  all  natural  levels  of  vigilance,  but 
the  state  as  a  whole  was  not  different  among 
animals  (data  not  shown).  That  is,  the  same  period 
of  the  day  included  all  the  natural  sleep-wake 
states  with  consistent  proportions  of  sleep-wake 
states  among  animal.  Then,  it  could  be  standard 
classes 
reference  data  set.  Between 
different  cortices,  there  was  different  factor  loading 
for  the  canonical  variables,  which  may  reflect  the 
different  brain  state  between  the  brain  regions.   
    In  this  study,  we  did  not  used  standard  psycho-
tropic  drugs  belong  to  several  known  classes  as 
reference  data  sets 
in 
classification  of  psychotropic  drugs  by  discriminant 
analysis  with  predefined  classes  (Itil  et  al.,  1979; 
Ruigt  et  al.,  1993;  Dimpfel,  2003).  Fairchild  et  al. 
(1975)  calculated  sleep-dependent  canonical  com-
ponents  and  residuals  canonical  correlation  analysis 
from  EEG  of  representative  segments  of  visually 
classified  sleep  stages,  which  was  used  as  depen-
dant  variable,  and 
two  sleep- 
independent  canonical  variables  from  the  residuals. 
Instead,  we  used  factor  analysis  to  calculate  factor 
loadings  from  the  data  sets  of  the  relative  band 
powers  of  all  the  epochs  during  normal  sleep-wake 
cycles,  in  which  all  the  epochs  were  considered  as 
all  different  classes  or  states,  and  then  canonical 
correlation  analysis  to  calculate  canonical  variables 
from  drug  induced  EEG  profile.  This  procedure  is 
not  affected  by  existence  of  very  few  standard 
drugs  in  predefined  classes.  Some  studies  have 
used  different  multivariate  statistical  analysis  such 
as  cluster  analysis  on  the  data  without  predefining 
the  class  to  classify  psychiatric  disorders  (John  et 
al.,  1983;  John  et  al.,  1992).  The  multivariate  stati-

that  have  been  used 

then  calculated 

64 Maan-Gee  Lee,  et  al.

in 

stical  analysis  not  requiring  predefined  class  can  be 
more  realistic  procedure  to  investigate  the  corre-
spondence  between 
the  definable  classes  and 
psychotropic  drugs  and  to  find  new  classes. 
    Since  different  drug  actions  on  specific  receptors 
and  neurotransmissions  result 
in  different  EEG 
changes  and  then  they  result  in  different  projection 
locations,  it  is  possible  to  suppose  that  the  location 
in  the  canonical  space  represent  a  brain  functional 
state.  And  a  distance 
the  canonical  space, 
Mahalanobis  distance,  indicates  a  magnitude  of  the 
difference  between  two  states  (McLachlan,  1999). 
After  physostigmine  administration,  the  farthest  pro-
jections  from  the  center  in  the  reference  canonical 
space  for  the  frontal  cortex  were  dose-dependant 
and  the  projection  of  the  segments  became  closer 
to  the  center  with  time  after  dose.  Similarly,  the 
farthest  projections  in  the  space  for  the  parietal 
cortex  were  also  dose  dependant  and  the  projection 
returned  to  the  center  with  time.  The  direction  of 
the  farthest  projections  was  left  and  down  from  the 
center  in  the  space  for  the  frontal  cortex  while  were 
right  from  the  center  in  the  space  for  the  parietal 
cortex.  This  does  not  explain  what  are  the  different 
action  on  the  different  cortex  but  may  still  indicate 
there  is  difference  in  action. 
    In  contrast,  the  pattern  of  projections  in  the  space 
after  yohimbine  was  different  from  that  of  physo-
stigmine.  The  farthest  projections  in  the  space  for 
the  frontal  cortex  were  up  and  right  from  the  center 
similar  to  the  physostigmine,  but  the  farthest  among 
them  was  observed  at  lowest  dose  of  yohimbine 
not  in  higher  doses.  The  projections  did  not  return 
to  the  center  but  moved  to  the  up  and  right  from 
the  center.  In  the  space  for  the  parietal  cortex,  the 
farthest  projection  was  observed  at  lowest  dose  of 
yohimbine  and  the  projections  did  not  return  to  the 
center  but  moved  to  left  from  the  center.  Three 
doses  were  administered  cumulatively  and 
then 
pre-exposure  to  drug  may  affect  the  sensitivity  of 
the  neurotransmission.  These  results  may  indicate 
that  pre-exposure  to  physostigmine  does  not  modify 
the  sensitivity  of  the  cholinergic  neurotransmission 
but  pre-exposure  to  yohimbine  does  modify  the 
sensitivity  of  the  adrenergic  neurotransmission. 
    If  we  accept  that  a  location  in  the  canonical 
space  represents  a  brain  functional  state  and  that  a 
distance  between  two  locations  indicates  magnitude 

the 

of  a  difference  between 
two  states,  we  could 
differentially  describe  the  effects  of  physostigmine 
and  yohimbine.  In  the  reference  canonical  space  of 
the  frontal  cortex,  physostigmine  changed  the  nor-
mal  functional  state  to  a  functional  state  of  low  and 
left  location  while  yohimbine  changed  to  a  state  of 
up  and  right  location.  In  the  reference  canonical 
space  of  the  parietal  cortex,  both  physostigmine 
and  yohimbine  changed  from  the  normal  functional 
state  to  a  state  of  low  and  right  location.  It  may  be 
interpreted  that  two  drugs  produced  different  func-
tional  states  on 
frontal  cortex  but  similar 
functional  state  on  the  parietal  cortex.  However, 
these  results  can  not  show  what  mechanism  of 
action  affect  differentially  on  the  different  cortex. 
    In  this  study,  it  may  be  possible  that  the  mag-
nitude  of  changes  produced  by  different  drugs  can 
be  compared  with  Mahalanobis  distances  calculated 
in  the  reference  canonical  space.  The  effect  of  1 
mg/kg  of  physostigmine  is  similar  to  that  of  1  mg/kg 
yohimbine  on  the  frontal  cortex  and  the  parietal 
cortex.  Both  drugs  produce  maximal  effect  at  the 
first  segment  after  drugs  on  the  frontal  cortex.  In 
contrast,  physostigmine  produces  maximal  effect  at 
the  first  segment  after  drug  but  yohimbine  produces 
maximal  effect  at  the  4-th  segment  after  drug.  Both 
drugs  have  bigger  effects  on  the  frontal  cortex  than 
the  parietal  cortex.  Temporal  changes  can  also  be 
compared. 
    Taken  together,  these  results  suggest  that  the 
EEG  effects  of  physostigmine  and  those  of  yohim-
bine  can  be  compared  quantitatively  and  qualitatively 
by  the  distance  and  direction  from  its  center  in  the 
reference  canonical  space. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

    This  research  was  supported  by  Basic  Science 
Research  Program  through  the  NRF  funded  by  the 
Ministry  of  Education,  Science  and  Technology  (2010- 
0022362). 

REFERENCES

Bol  CJ,  Vogelaar  JP,  Tang  JP  and  Mandema  JW  (2000) 
Quantification  of  pharmacodynamic 
interactions  between 
dexmedetomidine  and  midazolam  in  the  rat.  J  Pharmacol 
Exp  Ther  294:347-355.

Dimpfel  W  (2003)  Preclinical  data  base  of  pharmaco-specific 

rat  EEG  fingerprints  (tele-stereo-EEG).  Eur  J  Med  Res 
8:199-207.

Dimpfel  W  and  Decker  H  (1984)  Classification  of  drugs  by 
stereotactic  recording  of  focal  brain  activity  in  the  rat 
(stereo-EEG).  Neuropsychobiology  12:188-195.

Fairchild  MD,  Jenden  DJ  and  Mickey  MR  (1975)  An  appli-
cation  of  long-term  frequency  analysis  in  measuring  drug- 
specific  alterations  in  the  EEG  of  the  cat.  Electroencephalogr 
Clin  Neurophysiol  38:337-348.

Fairchild  MD,  Jenden  DJ,  Mickey  MR  and  Yale  C  (1980)  The 
quantitative  measurement  of  changes  in  EEG  frequency 
spectra  produced  in  the  cat  by  sedative-hypnotics  and 
neuroleptics.  Electroencephalogr  Clin  Neurophysiol  49:382- 
390.

Galderisi  S  (2002)  Clinical  applications  of  pharmaco-EEG  in 
psychiatry:  the  prediction  of  response  to  treatment  with 
antipsychotics.  Methods  Find  Exp  Clin  Pharmacol  24 
Suppl  C:85-89.

Hansen  ES,  Prichep  LS,  Bolwig  TG  and  John  ER  (2003) 
Quantitative  electroencephalography  in  OCD  patients  treated 
with  paroxetine.  Clin  Electroencephalogr  34:70-74.

Herrmann  WM  (1982)  Electroencephalography  in  drug  research. 

Gustav  Fischer  Verlag.

Itil  TM,  Shapiro  DM,  Herrmann  WM,  Schulz  W  and  Morgan  V 
(1979)  HZI  systems 
for  EEG  parametrization  and 
classification  of  psychotropic  drugs.  Pharmakopsychiatr 
Neuropsychopharmakol  12:4-19.

Jang  HS,  Kim  JY,  Kim  SH  and  Lee  MG  (2009)  Role  of 
dopamine  receptors  on  electroencephalographic  changes 
produced  by  repetitive  apomorphine  treatments  in  rats. 
Korean  J  Physiol  Pharmacol  13:147-151.

John  ER,  Prichep  L,  Ahn  H,  Easton  P,  Fridman  J  and  Kaye 
H  (1983)  Neurometric  evaluation  of  cognitive  dysfunctions 
and  neurological  disorders  in  children.  Prog  Neurobiol  21: 
239-290.

John  ER,  Prichep  LS  and  Almas  M  (1992)  Subtyping  of 
psychiatric  patients  by  cluster  analysis  of  QEEG.  Brain 
Topogr  4:321-326.

John  ER,  Prichep  LS,  Winterer  G,  Herrmann  WM,  diMichele 
F,  Halper  J,  Bolwig  TG  and  Cancro  R  (2007)  Electro-
physiological  subtypes  of  psychotic  states.  Acta  Psychiatr 
Scand  116:17-35.

Drug-induced  State  in  Canonical  Space 65

Knott  VJ,  Telner  JI,  Lapierre  YD,  Browne  M  and  Horn  ER 
(1996)  Quantitative  EEG  in  the  prediction  of  antidepressant 
response  to  imipramine.  J  Affect  Disord  39:175-184.

Krijzer  F,  Koopman  P  and  Olivier  B  (1993)  Classification  of 
psychotropic  drugs  based  on  pharmaco-electrocorticogra-
phic  studies  in  vigilance-controlled  rats.  Neuropsychobiology 
28:122-137.

Lee  MG  (1999)  Pharmacodynamic  interactions  of  diazepam 
and  flumazenil  on  cortical  EEG  in  rats.  J  Appl  Pharmacol 
7:242-248.

Leiser  SC,  Dunlop  J,  Bowlby  MR  and  Devilbiss  DM  (2010) 
Aligning  strategies  for  using  EEG  as  a  surrogate  bio-
marker:  a  review  of  preclinical  and  clinical  research.  Bio-
chem  Pharmacol.

Luckhaus  C,  Grass-Kapanke  B,  Blaeser  I,  Ihl  R,  Supprian  T, 
Winterer  G,  Zielasek  J  and  Brinkmeyer  J  (2008)  Quantitative 
EEG  in  progressing  vs  stable  mild  cognitive  impairment 
(MCI):  results  of  a  1-year  follow-up  study.  Int  J  Geriatr 
Psychiatry  23:1148-1155.

Mandema  JW,  Sansom  LN,  Dios-Vieitez  MC,  Hollander-Jansen 
M  and  Danhof  M  (1991)  Pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic 
modeling  of  the  electroencephalographic  effects  of  benzo-
diazepines.  Correlation  with  receptor  binding  and  anticon-
vulsant  activity.  J  Pharmacol  Exp  Ther  257:472-478.

McLachlan  GJ  (1999)  Mahalanobis  distance.  Resonance  4: 

20-26.

Parker  TJ,  Della  Pasqua  OE,  Loizillon  E,  Chezaubernard  C, 
Jochemsen  R  and  Danhof  M  (2001)  Pharmacokinetic-pharma-
codynamic  modelling  in  the  early  development  phase  of 
anti-psychotics:  a  comparison  of  the  effects  of  clozapine, 
S  16924  and  S  18327  in  the  EEG  model  in  rats.  Br  J 
Pharmacol  132:151-158.

Ruigt  GS,  Engelen  S,  Gerrits  A  and  Verbon  F  (1993)  Computer- 
based  prediction  of  psychotropic  drug  classes  based  on  a 
discriminant  analysis  of  drug  effects  on  rat  sleep.  Neuro-
psychobiology  28:138-153.

van  Riezen  H  and  Glatt  AF  (1993)  Introduction  and  history  of 
the  use  of  electroencephalography  in  animal  drug  studies. 
Neuropsychobiology  28:118-121.

Xi  M  and  Chase  MH  (2008)  Effects  of  eszopiclone  and  zolpi-
dem  on  sleep  and  waking  states  in  the  adult  guinea  pig. 
Sleep  31:1043-1051.

