doi:10.5607/en.2011.20.1.18

Experimental  Neurobiology
Vol.  20,  pages  18∼28,  March  2011

Mammalian  Molecular  Clocks

Ilmin  Kwon,  Han  Kyoung  Choe,  Gi  Hoon  Son  and  Kyungjin  Kim*

Department  of  Biological  Sciences,  Seoul  National  University  and 

the  Brain  Research  Center  for  the  21st  Century  Frontier  Program  in  Neuroscience,

Seoul  151-742,  Korea

ABSTRACT

As  a  consequence  of  the  Earth’s  rotation,  almost  all  organisms  experience  day  and 
night  cycles  within  a  24-hr  period.  To  adapt  and  synchronize  biological  rhythms  to 
external  daily  cycles,  organisms  have  evolved  an  internal  time-keeping  system.  In 
mammals,  the  master  circadian  pacemaker  residing  in  the  suprachiasmatic  nucleus 
(SCN)  of  the  anterior  hypothalamus  generates  circadian  rhythmicity  and  orchestrates 
numerous  subsidiary  local  clocks  in  other  regions  of  the  brain  and  peripheral  tissues. 
Regardless  of  their  locations,  these  circadian  clocks  are  cell-autonomous  and  self- 
sustainable,  implicating  rhythmic  oscillations  in  a  variety  of  biochemical  and  metabolic 
processes.  A  group  of  core  clock  genes  provides  interlocking  molecular  feedback  loops 
that  drive  the  circadian  rhythm  even  at  the  single-cell  level.  In  addition  to  the  core 
transcription/translation  feedback  loops,  post-translational  modifications  also  contribute 
to  the  fine  regulation  of  molecular  circadian  clocks.  In  this  article,  we  briefly  review  the 
molecular  mechanisms  and  post-translational  modifications  of  mammalian  circadian 
clock  regulation.  We  also  discuss  the  organization  of  and  communication  between 
central  and  peripheral  circadian  oscillators  of  the  mammalian  circadian  clock.

Key  words:  circadian  pacemaker,  SCN,  feedback  loop,  mammalian  circadian  clock

CIRCADIAN  TIMING  SYSTEM

    Regardless  of  disparate  phylogenetic  origins  and 
huge  differences 
in  complexity  among  species, 
organisms  have  evolved  internal  timing  systems  to 
adapt  to  the  external  day  and  night  cycles.  This 
daily  time-keeping  system  is  referred  to  as  the 
‘circadian  clock’  from  the  Latin  circa  diem,  literally 
meaning  ‘approximately  one  day’.  Circadian  clocks 
from  all  organisms  have  many  similar  properties. 
Circadian  rhythms  are  entrained  by  an  external  cue 

*To  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed.
Tel:  82-2-880-6694/872-9100,  Fax:  82-2-872-9108
e-mail:  kyungjin@snu.ac.kr
Received  December  28,  2010
Accepted  for  publication  January  5,  2011

the  endogenous 

called  a  ‘zeitgeber’.  Any  exogenous  cue  can  synchro-
nize 
time-keeping  system.  The 
primary  zeitgeber  is  light  for  organisms  on  Earth, 
and  specialized  photoreceptive  and  phototransductive 
mechanisms  have  evolved  in  almost  all  biological 
clock  systems  (Moore,  1997).  Consequently,  changes 
in  the  zeitgeber  time  (e.g.,  traveling  to  a  different 
time  zone)  result  in  the  resetting  and  phase  shifting 
of  internal  rhythmicity.  Such  an  internal  rhythm  is 
generated 
self-sustainable 
(Reppert  and  Weaver,  2002).  In  other  words,  the 
circadian  rhythm  persists  even  in  the  absence  of 
cyclic  environmental  zeitgebers.  However,  the  free- 
running  period  in  the  absence  of  an  external  time 
cue  differs  from  the  period  under  light-dark  cycles. 
Thus,  free-running  periodicity  under  constant  condi-

intrinsically  and 

is 

Mammalian  Molecular  Clocks 19

Fig.  1.  Components  of  the  mammalian  circadian  clock  system.  Changes  in  light  due  to  the  day/night  cycle  are  directly  detected  by  eyes. 
The  light  information  is  transported  to  the  suprachiasmatic  nucleus  (SCN)  in  the  anterior  hypothalamus  by  the  retinohypothalamic  tract 
(RHT).  The  SCN  functions  as  a  master  circadian  oscillator  where  circadian  rhythmicity  is  generated.  The  generated  circadian  rhythmicity 
is  converted  into  output  pathways  that  control  the  behavior,  physiology  and  metabolism  of  the  organisms.  These  environmental  signals, 
core  circadian  oscillator  and  output  rhythms  are  three  basic  components  of  circadian  clock  system.

tions  is  often  described  by  circadian  time  (CT),  a 
standardized  24-hour  phase  in  a  circadian  cycle 
that  represents  an  estimation  of  the  organism’s  sub-
jective  time.  Circadian  rhythm  is  temperature  com-
pensated  (Hastings  et  al.,  2008),  meaning 
that 
organisms  can  maintain  their  circadian  periodicity 
over  a  range  of  environmental  temperatures.  Cir-
cadian  periodicity  is  not  affected  by  changes  in 
temperature,  even  though  the  rates  of  most  phy-
siological  processes are  easily  susceptible  to  changes 
in  temperature.  Therefore,  unresolved  mechanisms 
are  likely  participating  in  the  circadian  clock  ma-
chinery  and  can  compensate  for  the  temperature- 
related  changes  in  biophysical  and  biochemical  pro-
cesses.
    The  mammalian  circadian  clock  system  is  com-
posed  of  three  basic  components:  input  signals 
(environmental  timing  cue),  a  circadian  oscillator 
(rhythm  generator)  and  output  signals  (overt  rhythm). 
In  opaque  animals,  including  mammals,  the  light 
signal 
is  mainly  detected  by  eyes.  Behavioral 

studies  using  laboratory  animals,  such  as  mice,  rats 
and  hamsters,  revealed  that  intact  animals  exhibit 
approximately  24  hr  of  circadian  rhythm  even  in  the 
absence  of  external 
time  cues  (e.g.,  constant 
darkness).  These  findings  strongly  support  the  exis-
tence  of  a  ‘master  circadian  oscillator’,  which  gene-
rates  intrinsic  circadian  rhythmicity  (Fig.  1).  In  an 
effort  to  determine  the  master  circadian  pacemaker 
of  mammals,  the  suprachiasmatic  nucleus  (SCN)  of 
the  hypothalamus  was  anatomically  found  to  be  a 
direct 
fibers  (Reppert  and 
Weaver,  2002).  More  importantly,  selective  disrup-
tion  of  the  SCN  revealed  a  complete  loss  of  circa-
dian  rhythmicity,  whereas  transplantation  of  an  intact 
SCN  to  the  mutant  animal  restored  circadian  rhythm-
icity  (Stephan  and  Zucker,  1972;  Ralph  et  al., 
1990).  Thus,  the  SCN  is  currently  regarded  as  the 
master  circadian  oscillator  where  the  circadian  rhythm 
is  generated.  The  circadian  rhythm  generated  in  the 
SCN  is  likely  converted  into  neuronal  or  hormonal 
signals  that  affect  the  behavior,  physiology  and 

the  retinal 

target  of 

20 Ilmin  Kwon,  et  al.

metabolic  processes  of  entire  animals  (Schibler  and 
Sassone-corsi,  2002).
    In  addition  to  the  central  pacemaker,  numerous 
subsidiary  circadian  clocks  exist  outside  the  SCN  in 
peripheral  tissues  (including  the  liver,  heart,  lung 
and  muscle)  and  even  in  immortalized  cell  lines, 
which  are  kept  ex  vivo  for  long  periods  of  time 
(Yamazaki  et  al.,  2000).  The  presence  of  mammalian 
peripheral  clocks  has  been  demonstrated  by  mea-
suring  circadian  gene  expression  in  cultured  fibro-
blasts  or  tissue  explants.  Schibler  and  colleagues 
showed  that  immortalized  fibroblasts  could  generate 
rhythmic  gene  expression  when  cells  are  exposed 
to  a  serum  shock  (a  brief  treatment  with  50%  horse 
serum  for  two  hours)  (Balsalobre  et  al.,  1998). 
These  peripheral  clocks  are  now  believed  to  have 
tissue-  or  organ-specific  roles  in  controlling  circadian 
rhythms.  Unlike  the  central  pacemaker  in  the  SCN, 
these  peripheral  oscillators  are  not  directly  entrained 
by  light.  Instead,  output  signals  from  the  SCN  or 
other  external  stimuli,  such  as  feeding,  can  control 
the  circadian  rhythmicity  of 
local 
clocks  (Fig.  1).  Despite  such  differences,  the  under-
lying  molecular  bases  of  the  peripheral  circadian 
clocks  are  very  similar  to  those  of  the  central 
oscillator.

the  peripheral 

MOLECULAR  CIRCADIAN

CLOCKWORK

the  molecular  basis  of 

    Most  recent  chronobiological  studies  have  focused 
on 
the  circadian  clock. 
Intensive  studies  have  revealed  that  at  least  one 
internal  autonomous  circadian  oscillator  consisting 
of  positive  and  negative  elements  of  autoregulatory 
feedback  loops  is  at  the  center  of  all  examined 
circadian  clocks.  For  example,  the  circadian  clock  of 
cyanobacteria  is  regulated  by  a  cluster  of  three 
genes:  kaiA,  kaiB  and  kaiC  (Ishiura  et  al.,  1998). 
This  clock  sustains  a  22-hr  rhythm  over  several 
days  upon  the  addition  of  ATP.  In  Neurospora,  the 
molecular  clock  is  composed  of  the  positive  regulator, 
White  collar  complex  (Wcc),  and 
the  negative 
regulator,  Frequency  (Frq)  (Dunlap,  1999).  In  Dro-
sophila,  Clock  (Clk)  and  Cycle  (Cyc)  activate  the 
transcription  of  several  circadian  clock  genes.  Among 
these  genes,  Period  (Per)  and  Timeless  (Tim)  form 
heterodimers  in  the  cytoplasm  and  then  translocate 

to  the  nucleus,  where  PER  inhibits  the  transc-
riptional  activity  of  the  CLK/CYC  complex  (Gallego 
and  Virshup,  2007). 
    The  Drosophila  Per  gene  is  the  first  identified 
molecular  circadian  clock  component.  In  1971,  Kono-
pka  and  Benzer  identified  a  genetic  component  of 
the  biological  clock  for  the  first  time  using  the  fruit 
fly  as  a  model  system  (Konopka  and  Benzer,  1971). 
They  found  three  mutant  lines  of  flies  displaying 
aberrant  circadian  behaviors;  one  had  a  shorter 
period,  the  second  had  a  longer  one  and  the  third 
had  no  apparent  periodicity.  All  three  mutations 
mapped  to  the  same  gene,  which  was  named 
Period.  Thirty  years  later,  a  human  ortholog  of  this 
gene  was  found  to  be  defective  in  patients  with  the 
sleep  disorder 
familial  advanced  sleep  phase 
syndrome  (FASPS)  (Vanselow  et  al.,  2006).  The 
first  circadian  mutant  in  mammals  was  identified  in 
tau  (τ).  Ralph  and 
1988  and  designated  as 
Menaker  found  a  single  male  hamster  exhibiting  an 
abnormally  short  period  in  constant  darkness  (DD). 
Whereas  the  normal  circadian  period  for  golden 
hamsters  averages  about  24.1  hr  and  is  rarely 
shorter  than  23.5  hr,  the  free-running  period  of  the 
abnormal  male  was  22.0  hr  (Ralph  and  Menaker, 
1988).  About  10  years  later,  Takahashi  and  collea-
gues  identified  tau  as  an  allele  of  casein  kinase  1ε 
(CK1ε),  a  protein  kinase  that  can  phosphorylate 
mammalian  PER  proteins  (Lowrey  et  al.,  2000). 
    The  mammalian  circadian  oscillator  consists  of  a 
network  of 
transcriptional-translational 
feedback  loops  that  drive  rhythmic  expression  of 
core  clock  components 
(Reppert  and  Weaver, 
2002).  The  core  clock  components  are  established 
by  genes  whose  protein  products  are  necessary  for 
the  generation  and  maintenance  of  circadian  rhythms 
within  individual  cells  throughout  the  organism.  As 
core  components  of  the  mammalian  circadian  mole-
cular  clock,  CLOCK  and  BMAL1,  which  belong  to 
the 
transcription 
factors,  constitute  a  positive  feedback  loop.  CLOCK 
and  BMAL1  form  a  heterodimer,  which  binds  to  the 
E-box  cis-regulatory  enhancer  elements  of 
their 
target  genes,  including  Periods  (Per1,  Per2  and 
Per3)  and  Cryptochromes  (Cry1  and  Cry2;  Fig.  2). 
A  negative  feedback  loop  is  achieved  when  the 
PERs  and  CRYs  form  heterocomplexes  that  trans-
locate  back  to  the  nucleus  and  inhibit  their  own 

family  of  bHLH-PAS-containing 

interlocking 

Mammalian  Molecular  Clocks 21

Fig.  2.  Mammalian  molecular  circadian  clock.  Several  core  clock  genes  constitute  interlocking  molecular  feedback  loops.  In  this  molecular 
clock,  the  bHLH-PAS  (basic  helix-loop-helix,  Per-Arnt-Sim)-containing  transcription  factors  BMAL1  and  CLOCK  function  as  positive 
regulators.  Upon  heterodimerization,  they  translocate  into  the  nucleus,  where  they  bind  to  the  E-box  enhancer  element  in  the  promoter 
region  of  downstream  clock  genes  such  as  Periods  (Pers)  and  Cryptochromes  (Crys).  Rhythmically  expressed  PER  and  CRY  form  a 
heterocomplex.  In  the  nucleus,  PER  and  CRY  constitute  a  negative  feedback  loop  by  repressing  their  own  transcriptional  activation  by 
CLOCK/BMAL1  heterodimer.  The  CLOCK/BMAL1  heterodimer  also  induces  the  transcription  of  the  nuclear  receptors  Rev-erbα and  Rorα. 
Rev-erbα and  Rorα constitute  another  feedback  loop  by  repressing  and  activating  Bmal1  transcription,  respectively.

transcription  (Gallego  and  Virshup,  2007).  In  addi-
tion  to  the  primary  feedback  loops,  another  regula-
tory  feedback  loop  is  formed  by  the  orphan  nuclear 
receptors  REV-ERBα  and  RORα  (Gallego  and 
Virshup,  2007).  Expression  of  these  nuclear  receptors 
is  also  controlled  by  the  CLOCK/BMAL1  heterodimer. 
In  the  nucleus,  REV-ERBα competes  with  RORα 
for  binding  to  the  ROR-responsive  element  (RORE) 
in  the  Bmal1  promoter.  Whereas  RORα activates 
transcription  of  Bmal1,  REV-ERBα  represses  it. 
Consequently,  the  cyclic  expression  of  Bmal1  is 
achieved  by  both  positive  and  negative  regulation  of 
RORs  and  REV-ERBs,  respectively.  This  secondary 
feedback  loop  is  called  the  ‘stabilizing  loop’.
    In  addition  to  the  feedback  loops  of  transcription 
and  translation,  various  post-translational  modifications 
are  also  involved  in  the  normal  functioning  of  the 
circadian  clockwork.  A  few  hours  would  be  sufficient 
for  a  molecular  feedback  loop  to  run  a  cycle  by 
only  transcriptional  activation  and  following  feedback 
repression.  Therefore,  if  not  for  the  significant  delay 
between  transcriptional  activation  and  repression, 
24-hr  circadian  periodicity  would  not  be  achieved. 
Increasing  evidence  supports  the  involvement  of 

for 

the 

involved 

found  several  protein  kinases 

post-translational  modifications 
required 
delay  (Gallego  and  Virshup,  2007).  Studies  in  mole-
cular  circadian  clock  machinery  in  various  phyla 
have 
in 
circadian  regulation.  The  double-time  (DBT)  kinase 
was  the  first  enzyme  identified  as  an  essential  com-
ponent  of  the  Drosophila  circadian  clock.  Mutations 
in  DBT  result  in  abnormal  locomotor  activity  periods 
and  eclosion 
(Price  et  al.,  1998).  Mammalian 
orthologs  of  DBT,  casein  kinase  members  CK1δ 
and  CK1ε were  also  identified  as  clock  components. 
Mutation  in  CK1ε resulted  in  a  shorter  free-running 
period  of  hamsters  (Lowrey  et  al.,  2000).  In  humans, 
mutations  in  the  CK1δ and  CK1ε phosphorylation 
sites  in  PER2  have  been  found  in  families  with 
FASPS  (Toh  et  al.,  2001).  More  recently,  inhibition 
of  glycogen  synthase  kinase  3  (GSK-3)  was  reported 
to  shorten  the  mammalian  circadian  period  (Hirota 
et  al.,  2008).  Moreover,  the  cAMP-dependent  protein 
kinase  (PKA)  and  mitogen-activated  protein  kinase 
(MAPK)  pathways  are  also  implicated  in  the  CRE- 
mediated  induction  of  Per1  (Travnickova-Bendova 
et  al.,  2002).  In  addition  to  the  CREB-mediated 
induction, 
-dependent  protein  kinase  C 

the  Ca2＋

22 Ilmin  Kwon,  et  al.

(PKC)-mediated  phosphorylation  of  CLOCK  seems 
to  be  important  for  phase  resetting  of  the  mam-
malian  circadian  clock  (Shim  et  al.,  2007).  Treat-
ment  with  PMA,  a  PKC-activating  phorbol  ester, 
induces  the  phosphorylation  of  CLOCK  and  rapid 
induction  of  Per1  mRNA  expression  in  fibroblasts 
cultured  in  vitro. 
    Phosphorylation  is  a  prerequisite  step  for  the 
recruitment  of  ubiquitin  ligases  and  the  subsequent 
degradation  of  PERs.  In  Drosophila,  DBT  kinase 
reduces  the  stability  of  PER;  in  the  absence  of  DBT 
kinase  activity,  the  protein  levels  of  PER  remain 
constitutively  high  (Price  et  al.,  1998).  In  mammals, 
PER  proteins  bind  to  and  are  phosphorylated  by 
CK1s.  The  half-lives  of  PER1  and  PER2  proteins 
are  moderately  shortened  when  CK1δ or  CK1ε is 
overexpressed  (Akashi  et  al.,  2002).  Phosphory-
lation  of  PERs  creates  binding  sites  for  β-trans-
ducin  repeat-containing  protein  (βTrCP),  an  F-box- 
containing  E3  ubiquitin  ligase  (Eide  et  al.,  2005; 
Shirogane  et  al.,  2005).  Another  F-box  protein, 
Fbxl3,  is  an  E3  ligase  of  CRYs  (Busino  et  al., 
2007).  Mutation  in  Fbxl3  results  in  impaired  ubiquiti-
nation  and  subsequent  degradation  of  CRYs.  Con-
sequently,  prolonged  stability  of  the  CRY  proteins 
leads  to  an  extended  negative  phase  and  period 
lengthening.  The  post-translational  modifications  of 
BMAL1  have  also  been  extensively  studied.  BMAL1 
is  rhythmically  sumoylated  in  vivo,  and  the  inter-
action  with  CLOCK  is  necessary  for  proper  sumo-
ylation  (Cardone  et  al.,  2005).  More  recently,  we 
showed  that  BMAL1  sumoylation  is  closely  related 
to  protein  turnover  of  BMAL1  itself  (Lee  et  al., 
2008).  Sumoylation  localizes  BMAL1  exclusively  to 
promyelocytic  leukemia  (PML)  nuclear  bodies  and 
simultaneously  promotes 
transactivation  and 
ubiquitin-dependent  degradation  (Kwon  et  al.,  2006; 
Lee  et  al.,  2008).  BMAL1  also  can  be  acetylated,  a 
process  essential  for  the  maintenance  of  circadian 
rhythmicity  (Hirayama  et  al.,  2007).  Phosphorylation 
of  BMAL1  by  casein  kinase  2  alpha  (CK2α)  is 
known  to  be  important  for  nuclear  accumulation  of 
BMAL1  and  circadian  clock  function  (Tamaru  et  al., 
2009).  Thus,  these  BMAL1  modifications  are  required 
for  proper  functioning  of  BMAL1  in  the  circadian 
clockwork.

its 

CENTRAL  VS.  PERIPHERAL

CLOCKS

the  master  pacemaker 

    Although  the  peripheral  oscillators  share  the  same 
basic  molecular  components  with  the  central  pace-
maker,  the  peripheral  clocks  are  thought  to  be  less 
self-sustainable  while 
is 
indispensible  for  rhythm  generation  in  peripheral 
clocks.  Indeed,  circadian  rhythms  in  peripheral  clocks 
of  liver,  lung  and  skeletal  muscle  are  damped  in 
two  to  seven  days,  whereas  the  SCN  exhibits  robust 
rhythmicity  up  to  30  days  in  vitro  (Yamazaki  et  al., 
2000).  These  findings  strongly  support  the  hierarchical 
organization  of  circadian  oscillators,  where 
the 
self-sustainable  SCN  clock  entrains  other  easily 
dampened  peripheral  oscillators.  However,  Takahashi 
and  coworkers  reported  in  2004  that  the  explants  of 
peripheral  tissues,  such  as  liver  and  lung,  could 
also  sustain 
the  circadian  rhythmicity  of  PER2 
expression  for  more  than  20  days  (Yoo  et  al.,  2004). 
Moreover,  SCN  lesions  did  not  abolish  circadian 
rhythmicity  in  peripheral  tissues  of  mPer2-luciferase 
transgenic  mice.  Instead,  SCN  lesions  resulted  in 
dispersed  phases  in  peripheral  tissues  within  and 
among  animals.  These 
results  contradict  other 
reports  in  that  the  SCN  lesions  caused  dampening 
and  abrogation  of  circadian  gene  expression  (Saka-
moto  et  al.,  1998;  Akhtar  et  al.,  2002;  Terazono  et 
al.,  2003).  Therefore,  the  SCN  is  a  master  synch-
ronizer  rather  than  a  driver  for  persistent  circadian 
rhythmicity  in  the  peripheral  tissues.  Considering  the 
possibility  of  differential  regulation  of  Per1  and  Per2 
in  peripheral  tissues,  the  peripheral  tissues  and 
cells  seem  to  possess  self-sustainable  circadian 
clocks 
the 
absence  of  the  central  pacemaker  (Dibner  et  al., 
2010).
    The  roles  of  such  self-sustainable  peripheral 
oscillators  are  still  unknown.  The  adrenal  local  clock 
is  a  good  example  of  a  peripheral  clock.  The 
adrenal  cortex  is  well  known  for  synthesis  and 
secretion  of  the  steroid  hormone  glucocorticoid  (GC). 
This  hormone  is  secreted  in  a  circadian  rhythmic 
pattern  and  is  implicated  in  a  wide  variety  of  bio-
logical  processes,  including  stress  response,  growth, 
reproduction  and  immune  response  (Buckingham, 
2006).  Interestingly,  injection  of  a  synthetic  GC, 
dexamethasone  (DEX),  induced  a  phase  shift  of 

that  can  generate  overt  rhythms 

in 

in 

to 

for 

intrinsic 

in  mouse 

liver,  while 

the 
circadian  rhythmicity 
the  SCN  was  barely  affected 
central  clock 
(Balsalobre  et  al.,  2000),  suggesting  that  GC  is  also 
important 
the  synchronization  of  circadian 
rhythmicity.  The  SCN  has  been  reported  to  directly 
modulate  GC  secretion  via  the  splanchnic  nerve 
system  (Ishida  et  al.,  2005;  Ulrich-Lai  et  al.,  2006). 
Thus,  the  rhythmic  GC  signaling  evoked  by  either 
the  hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal  gland  (HPA)  axis 
or  sympathetic  nervous  system  is  believed  to  be  a 
possible  mediator  of  cues  from  the  SCN  to  peri-
pheral  local  clocks.  However,  neither  hypophysectomy 
nor  DEX  suppression  abolished  circadian  secretion 
of  GC  (Meier,  1976;  Torres-Farfan  et  al.,  2008).  In 
addition,  denervation  of  the  splanchnic  nerve  did 
not  completely  blunt  rhythmic  GC  secretion  (Ulrich- 
Lai  et  al.,  2006).  These  reports  raised  the  possibility 
of  additional  regulatory  mechanisms  of  GC  synthesis 
and/or  secretion 
the  adrenal  gland. 
Recently,  we  demonstrated  the  functional  importance 
of  the  adrenal  local  clock  (Son  et  al.,  2008);  the 
clock-controlled  adrenal  steroidogenic  acute  regu-
latory  protein  (StAR)  expression  mediates  circadian 
production  of  GC,  and  the  adrenal-specific  knock- 
down  of  a  key  clock  protein,  BMAL1,  significantly 
dampened  the  circadian  rhythmicity  of  GC  in  vivo. 
Given  that  GC  is  one  of  the  key  mediators  between 
the  central  and  peripheral  circadian  clocks,  the 
adrenal  local  clock  appears  to  have  pivotal  roles  in 
harmonizing  the  central  and  other  peripheral  clocks 
by  generating  a  robust  GC  rhythm.  Moreover,  as 
previously  reported,  GC  receptor  (GR)  is  expressed 
in  almost  all  cells  of  an  organism  except  for  the 
SCN  (Rosenfeld  et  al.,  1993;  Balsalobre  et  al., 
2000).  Thus,  regulation  of  the  rhythmicity  of  GC 
secretion  by  the  adrenal  local  clock  as  well  as  the 
central  clock  can  be  crucial  for  understanding  the 
connection  between  the  master  clock  in  the  SCN 
and  other 
in  both  peripheral  and 
local  clocks 
extra-SCN  brain  tissues. 
    The  food-entrainable  oscillator  (FEO)  is  another 
good  example  of  a  SCN-independent  local  clock. 
Unlike  the  central  circadian  oscillator,  the  mammalian 
peripheral  circadian  oscillators  are  not  entrained  by 
light.  Instead,  feeding  time  and/or  hormone  stimul-
ation  can  be  a  dominant  zeitgeber  for  several  peri-
pheral  circadian  clocks  (Balsalobre  et  al.,  2000; 
Stokkan  et  al.,  2001).  SCN-disrupted  animals  were 

Mammalian  Molecular  Clocks 23

time, 

to  a  certain 

reported  to  still  be  able  to  respond  to  rhythmic  food 
availability  (Krieger  et  al.,  1977).  In  addition,  SCN 
lesions  do  not  abolish  food-anticipatory  behaviors  in 
rats  (Stephan  et  al.,  1979).  When  the  feeding  was 
restricted 
laboratory  animals 
showed  a  food  anticipatory  activity  (FAA),  namely 
increased  locomotor  activity  prior  to  food  presen-
tation.  Thus,  mammals  surprisingly  can  exhibit  FAA 
despite  the  presence  of  SCN  lesions.  Another  local 
clock  in  stomach  gland  oxyntic  cells  that  rhythmi-
cally  secrete  ghrelin,  a  hormone  stimulating  hunger, 
was  reported  recently  to  play  a  role  in  mouse  FAA 
(LeSauter  et  al.,  2009).  In  these  cells,  rhythmic 
expression  of  ghrelin  was  controlled  by  circadian 
clock  machinery,  and 
loss  of  ghrelin  receptors 
resulted  in  diminished  FAA.  However,  the  mechanisms 
by  which  the  gastric  local  clocks  and  their  products 
act  on  the  central  nervous  system  to  generate 
food-anticipation  behaviors  remain  unclear. 

EXTRA-SCN  CLOCKS  IN  THE  CENTRAL 

NERVOUS  SYSTEM  (CNS)

tissues  such  as 

    Circadian  oscillators  also  exist  in  various  areas  of 
the  brain  outside  of  the  SCN.  Several  transgenic 
animal  models  have  been  developed  whose  circa-
dian  rhythmicity  can  be  measured  in  a  real  time- 
enabled  evaluation  of  the  molecular  properties  of 
these  extra-SCN  brain  clocks.  For  example,  14  of 
27  Per1-luciferase 
transgenic  animals  exhibited 
circadian  rhythmicities  in  tissue  cultures,  and  brain 
regions  other  than  the  SCN  exhibited  dampened 
rhythmicities  (Abe  et  al.,  2002).  Cellular  circadian 
rhythm  was  especially  robust  in  the  olfactory  bulb. 
Other  brain 
the  pineal  gland, 
pituitary  and  arcuate  nucleus  also  exhibited  apparent 
circadian  rhythms,  but  the  amplitudes  were  atte-
nuated  within  approximately  six  days  (Abraham  et 
al.,  2005).  Interestingly,  the  peak  expression  of 
Per1-luciferase  occurred  at  dusk  or  at  night  in  the 
olfactory  bulb  and  other  brain  tissues,  including  the 
pituitary,  pineal  gland,  and  certain  nuclei  of  the 
hypothalamus  and  thalamus,  while  the  SCN  exhi-
bited  peak  expression  during  the  daytime.  In  addition, 
the  circadian  rhythm  phase  was  quite  variable 
among 
the  olfactory  bulb 
although 
the  rhythmic  nature  of  Per1-luciferase 
expression  was  not  abolished  in  the  absence  of  the 

individual  neurons  of 

24 Ilmin  Kwon,  et  al.

Fig.  3.  Circadian  clocks  in  the  SCN  and  other  regions  of  the  brain.  In  addition  to  the  central  pacemaker  residing  in  the  suprachiasmatic 
nucleus  (SCN),  other  clocks  exist  in  various  regions  of  the  brain.  Light  induces  the  generation  of  circadian  rhythm  in  the  master  circadian 
clock,  SCN.  The  SCN  master  clock  seems  to  function  as  a  synchronizer  of  the  brain  clocks.  A  metabolic  signal,  such  as  feeding,  can  be 
delivered  to  the  CNS  via  a  local  clock  in  the  DMH  region.  OB:  olfactory  bulb,  SCN:  suprachiasmatic  nucleus,  PVN:  paraventricular 
nucleus,  PVT:  paraventricular  nuclei  of  the  thalamus,  MBH:  mediobasal  hypothalamus,  Arc:  arcuate  nucleus,  CNS:  central  nervous 
system.

SCN  (Granados-Fuentes  et  al.,  2004;  Abraham  et 
al.,  2005).  Therefore  the  SCN  appears  to  coordinate 
and  synchronize  the  individual  brain  oscillators  like 
local  clocks  in  peripheral  tissues  rather  than  drive 
the  circadian  rhythmicity  itself  (Fig.  3;  Dibner  et  al., 
2010).  The  communication  of  the  SCN  with  other 
oscillators  in  several  brain  regions  remains  to  be 
elucidated;  a  number  of  neurochemical  messengers, 
including  transforming  growth  factor  alpha  (TGF-α ), 
cardiotrophin-like  cytokine  and  vasopression,  have 
been  proposed  as  possible  output  signals  from  the 
SCN  (Kramer  et  al.,  2001;  Kalsbeek  and  Buijs, 
2002;  Kraves  and  Weitz,  2006).  Prokineticin  2,  a 
cysteine-rich  secreted  protein, 
is  another  strong 
candidate  (PK2;  Cheng  et  al.,  2002).  In  the  SCN, 
PK2  mRNA 
the 
phase  is  entrained  by  light.  Moreover,  PK2  receptor 
(PKR2)  is  widely  expressed  in  discrete  brain  target 
regions  of  SCN  pathways,  such  as  the  paraven-
tricular  nucleus,  dorsal  medial  hypothalamic  nucleus, 

is  rhythmically  expressed,  and 

thalamic  paraventricular  nucleus,  paracentral  thalamic 
nuclei,  lateral  habenular  nucleus,  lateral  septal  nucleus, 
lateral  globus  pallidus  and  amygdala  (Cheng  et  al., 
2002).  The  intracerebroventricular  injection  of  recom-
binant  PK2  alters  the  locomotor  activity  of  rats 
(Cheng  et  al.,  2002).  However,  additional  factors 
that  mediate  the  signal  output  of  the  SCN  are  likely 
because  mice 
lacking  PK2  or  PKR2  exhibited 
reduced,  but  not  completely  abolished  circadian 
rhythms  (Li  et  al.,  2006;  Prosser  et  al.,  2007).  Taken 
together,  several  self-sustainable  circadian  oscil-
lators  may  exist  in  discrete  brain  regions,  inde-
pendent  of  the  SCN  central  pacemaker.  Therefore, 
the  physiological  roles  of  brain  clocks  outside  the 
SCN  need  to  be  studied.  Piggins  and  coworkers 
recently  revealed  a  role  for  the  brain  clock  residing 
in 
the 
regulation  of  metabolic  homeostasis  (Guilding  et  al., 
2009).  The  MBH  is  crucial  for  maintenance  of  internal 
homeostasis  and  encompasses  the  arcuate,  dorso-

the  mediobasal  hypothalamus  (MBH) 

in 

the  SCN.  However, 

medial  hypothalamus,  ventromedial  hypothalamus, 
median  eminence  and  pars  tuberalis.  Using  Per2- 
luciferase  knock-in  mice,  they  showed  the  presence 
of  extra-SCN  circadian  oscillators  in  the  MBH  region. 
Circadian  rhythmicities  in  median  eminence  and 
pars  tuberalis  were  maintained  even  when  synaptic 
transmission  was  inhibited.  Moreover,  the  circadian 
oscillators  residing  in  the  median  eminence  and 
pars  tuberalis  were  reset  by  food  deprivation,  while 
the  SCN  was  not  affected.  These  results  can  pro-
vide  new  insights  into  the  relationship  between 
metabolic  cues  and  circadian  oscillators  in  the  CNS 
outside 
the  mechanism  of 
integration  of  metabolic  changes 
into  circadian 
homeostasis  by  circadian  oscillators  in  MBH  and 
other  brain  regions  remains  unclear.
    The  extra-SCN  brain  clocks  are  also  associated 
with  a  reward  system  (Dibner  et  al.,  2010).  This 
reward  system  is  closely  related  to  the  survival  of 
individual  organisms,  and  accessibility  to  food  and 
water  can  be  a  primary  reward.  Rewards  can 
influence  the  higher  brain  functions  of  an  organism, 
including  behaviors,  learning  capability  and  mood. 
Several  groups  recently  described  the  relationship 
between  the  brain  reward  system  and  the  circadian 
clock.  For  example,  mice  lacking  Per1  or  Per2 
exhibited  diffent  responses 
to  repeated  cocaine 
injection:  the  behavioral  sensitization  was  absent  in 
the  Per1  KO  mice,  whereas  Per2  KO  mice  showed 
a  hypersensitized  response  to  cocaine  (Abarca  et 
al.,  2002).  Moreover,  Per2  mutant  animals  exhibited 
an 
increased  alcohol  preference  compared  with 
wild-type  animals  (Spanagel  et  al.,  2005),  which 
seems  to  result  from  an  alteration  in  glutamatergic 
transmission.  In  Per2  mutant  mice,  expression  of 
the  glutamate  transporter  Eaat1  was  significantly 
decreased,  resulting  in  reduced  glutamate  uptake 
by  astrocytes  and  thus  increased  glutamate  concen-
trations 
Interestingly, 
treatment  with  acamprosate,  a  drug  used  with 
alcoholic  patients,  decreased  extracellular  glutamate 
levels  and  subsequently  reduced  the  alcohol  con-
sumption  of  Per2  mutant  mice.  Therefore, 
the 
circadian  timing  system  and  components  of  the 
molecular  clockwork  are  related  to  diverse  CNS 
functions.

the  extracellular  space. 

in 

Mammalian  Molecular  Clocks 25

PERSPECTIVES

    Circadian  clock  research  during  recent  decades 
has  focused  on  the  elucidation  of  the  molecular 
mechanisms  involved  in  regulating  these  processes. 
However,  studies  have  become  more  diverse,  con-
centrating  on  the  understanding  of  functional  roles 
of  molecular  circadian  clocks  in  the  regulation  of 
physiology,  behaviors  and  metabolism.  In  particular, 
the  circadian  clock  is  associated  with  various  meta-
bolic  processes.  In  unicellular  organisms  such  as 
cyanobacteria,  the  circadian  clock  system  segre-
gates  two  essential  metabolic  processes,  nitrogen 
fixation  and  photosynthesis,  which  are  incompatible 
with  each  other  (Tu  and  McKnight,  2006).  By  sepa-
rating  nitrogen  fixation  and  photosynthesis  between 
night  and  day, 
respectively,  cyanobacteria  can 
resolve  the  incompatibility  of  these  two  key  pro-
cesses.  Even  in  mammals,  expression  of  many 
metabolic  genes  is  tissue-specifically  regulated  by 
circadian  clockwork  (Panda  et  al.,  2002).  In  addi-
tion,  nuclear  receptors  involved  in  lipid  and  carbo-
hydrate  metabolism  are  expressed  in  a  circadian 
manner  in  various  tissues,  including  liver,  skeletal 
muscle  and  white  and  brown  adipose  tissues  (Yang 
et  al.,  2006).  In  a  more  recent  study,  the  core  clock 
gene  Per2  was  reported  to  interact  directly  and 
indirectly  with  several  nuclear  receptors  implicated 
in  various  biological  processes  (Schmutz  et  al., 
2010).  Mice  lacking  functional  Per2  and  Rev-erbα 
exhibit  abnormal  glucose  metabolism  in  the  liver. 
The  interaction  between  nuclear  receptors  and  core 
clock  components  may  confer  another  phase  of  the 
circadian  clock  system  controlling  cellular  metabolism.
    The  circadian  clock  is  also  implicated  in  mental 
disorders,  such  as  bipolar  disorder  and  depression. 
The  mania-like  behavior  is  defined  as  a  state  of 
abnormal  mood,  arousal  and  energy  levels.  Recently, 
mice  bearing  a  mutant  form  of  CLOCK  were  re-
ported  to  exhibit  mania-like  behavior  (Roybal  et  al., 
2007).  The  Clock  mutant  mice  displayed  a  lower 
level  of  anxiety-  and  depression-like  behaviors 
mimicking  symptoms  of  human  bipolar  disorder,  and 
restoration  of 
these 
abnormal  behaviors.  Moreover,  Cry2  mRNA  expre-
ssion  tends  to  be  significantly  decreased  in  depre-
ssed  patients,  but  a  known  antidepressant  did  not 
increase  Cry2  mRNA  levels  in  depressed  patients 

functional  CLOCK  rescued 

26 Ilmin  Kwon,  et  al.

(Lavebratt  et  al.,  2010).  Therefore, 
the  precise 
molecular  mechanisms  associated  with  the  core  clock 
components  and  mood  regulation  need  to  be  fur-
ther  explored.
    The  most  important  development  in  the  history  of 
circadian  clock  research  was  the  recognition  of  the 
development  of  animal  models  harboring  mutations 
in  core  clock  genes.  Using  these  animals,  investi-
gators  have  identified  the  functions  and  implications 
of  specific  core  clock  components  in  various  bio-
logical  processes  and  diseases.  Although  most  of 
the  components  of  molecular  clock  loops  and  their 
interlocking  networks  are  relatively  well  established 
using  these  animal  models,  several  unsolved  ques-
tions,  particularly  in  terms  of  the  human  circadian 
clock  system,  still  remain.  In  fact,  the  circadian  clock 
is  closely  related  to  the  everyday  lives  of  humans. 
For  example,  travel  to  a  different  time  zone  results 
in  fatigue,  mild  depression  and  sleep  disorders. 
These  symptoms  are  generally  called  jet  lag  and 
are  caused  by  desynchronization  of  the  internal 
body  clock  to  day/night  cycles.  Moreover,  tumor- 
suppressive  actions  of  the  molecular  clock  com-
ponent  Pers  have  been  reported  in  mouse  models 
(Fu  et  al.,  2002).  Interestingly,  metastatic  colorectal 
cancer  patients  with  marked  24-hr 
rest/activity 
rhythm  exhibited  higher  survival  rates  compared 
with  the  patients  with  altered  daily  rhythms  (Mormont 
et  al.,  2000).  We  expect  that  more  knowledge 
about  the  human  circadian  clock  will  contribute  to  a 
further  understanding  of  circadian  disturbances  and 
lead  to  improved  well-being.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

    This  work  was  supported  by  the  Brain  Research 
Center  for  the  21st  Century  Frontier  Program  in 
Neuroscience,  MEST,  Korea.

REFERENCES

Abarca  C,  Albrecht  U  and  Spanagel  R  (2002)  Cocaine  sensiti-
zation  and  reward  are  under  the  influence  of  circadian 
genes  and  rhythm.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  99:9026- 
9030.

Abe  M,  Herzog  ED,  Yamazaki  S,  Straume  M,  Tei  H,  Sakaki 
Y,  Menaker  M  and  Block  GD  (2002)  Circadian  rhythms  in 
isolated  brain  regions.  J  Neurosci  22:350-356.

Abraham  U,  Prior  JL,  Granados-Fuentes  D,  Piwnica-Worms 

DR  and  Herzog  ED  (2005)  Independent  circadian  oscillations 
of  Period1  in  specific  brain  areas  in  vivo  and  in  vitro.  J 
Neurosci  25:8620-8626.

Akashi  M,  Tsuchiya  Y,  Yoshino  T  and  Nishida  E  (2002) 
Control  of 
intracellular  dynamics  of  mammalian  Period 
proteins  by  Casein  kinase  Iepsilon  (CKIε)  and  CKIdelta 
in  cultured  cells.  Mol  Cell  Biol  22:1693-1703.

Akhtar  RA,  Reddy  AB,  Maywood  ES,  Clayton  JD,  King  VM, 
Smith  AG,  Gant  TW,  Hastings  MH  and  Kyriacou  CP 
(2002)  Circadian  cycling  of  the  mouse  liver  transcriptome, 
as 
the 
suprachiasmatic  nucleus.  Curr  Biol  12:540-550.

revealed  by  cDNA  microarray, 

is  driven  by 

Balsalobre  A,  Brown  SA,  Marcacci  L,  Tronche  F,  Kellendonk 
C,  Reichardt  HM,  Schütz  G  and  Schibler  U  (2000)  Re-
setting  of  circadian  time  in  peripheral  tissues  by  gluco-
corticoid  signaling.  Science  289:2344-2347.

Balsalobre  A,  Damiola  F  and  Schibler  U  (1998)  A  serum  shock 
induces  circadian  gene  expression  in  mammalian  tissue 
culture  cells.  Cell  93:929-937.

Buckingham  JC  (2006)  Glucocorticoids:  exemplars  of  multi- 

tasking.  Br  J  Pharmacol  147:S258-S268.

Busino  L,  Bassermann  F,  Maiolica  A,  Lee  C,  Nolan  PM,  Godinho 
SIH,  Draetta  GF  and  Pagano  M  (2007)  SCFFbxl3  controls 
the  oscillation  of 
the 
degradation  of  Cryptochrome  proteins.  Science  316:900- 
904.

the  circadian  clock  by  directing 

Cardone  L,  Hirayama  J,  Giordano  F,  Tamaru  T,  Palvimo  JJ 
and  Sassone-Corsi  P  (2005)  Circadian  clock  control  by 
SUMOylation  of  BMAL1.  Science  309:1390-1394.

Cheng  MY,  Bullock  CM,  Li  C,  Lee  AG,  Bermak  JC,  Belluzzi 
J,  Weaver  DR,  Leslie  FM  and  Zhou  QY  (2002)  Proki-
neticin  2  transmits  the  behavioural  circadian  rhythm  of  the 
suprachiasmatic  nucleus.  Nature  417:405-410.

Dibner  C,  Schibler  U  and  Albrecht  U  (2010)  The  mammalian 
circadian  timing  system:  organization  and  coordination  of 
central  and  peripheral  clocks.  Annu  Rev  Physiol  72:517- 
549.

Dunlap  JC  (1999)  Molecular  bases  for  circadian  clocks.  Cell 

96:271-290.

Eide  EJ,  Woolf  MF,  Kang  H,  Woolf  P,  Hurst  W,  Camacho  F, 
Vielhalber  EL,  Giovanni  A  and  Virshup  DM  (2005)  Control 
of  mammalian  circadian  rhythm  by  CKIε-regulated  proteasome- 
mediated  PER2  degradation.  Mol  Cell  Biol  25:2795-2807.
Fu  L,  Pelicano  H,  Liu  J,  Huang  P  and  Lee  C  (2002)  The 
circadian  gene  Period2  plays  an  important  role  in  tumor 
suppression  and  DNA  damage  response  in  vivo.  Cell  111: 
41-50.

Gallego  M  and  Virshup  DM  (2007)  Post-translational  modifica-
tions  regulate  the  ticking  of  the  circadian  clock.  Nat  Rev 
Mol  Cell  Biol  8:139-148.

Granados-Fuentes  D,  Prolo  LM,  Abraham  U  and  Herzog  ED 
(2004)  The  suprachiasmatic  nucleus  entrains,  but  does  not 
sustain,  circadian  rhythmicity  in  the  olfactory  bulb.  J  Neurosci 
24:615-619.

Guilding  C,  Hughes  AT,  Brown  TM,  Namvar  S  and  Piggins 
HD  (2009)  A  riot  of  rhythms:  neuronal  and  glial  circadian 
oscillators  in  the  mediobasal  hypothalamus.  Mol  Brain  2: 
28.

Hastings  MH,  Maywood  ES  and  O'Neill  JS  (2008)  Cellular 
circadian  pacemaking  and  the  role  of  cytosolic  rhythms. 
Curr  Biol  18:R805-R815.

Hirayama  J,  Sahar  S,  Grimaldi  B,  Tamaru  T,  Takamatsu  K, 
Nakahata  Y  and  Sassone-Corsi  P  (2007)  CLOCK-mediated 
acetylation  of  BMAL1  controls  circadian  function.  Nature 
450:1086-1090.

Hirota  T,  Lewis  WG,  Liu  AC,  Lee  JW,  Schultz  PG  and  Kay 
SA  (2008)  A  chemical  biology  approach  reveals  period 
shortening  of  the  mammalian  circadian  clock  by  specific 
inhibition  of  GSK-3beta.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  105: 
20746-20751.

Ishida  A,  Mutoh  T,  Ueyama  T,  Bando  H,  Masubuchi  S, 
Nakahara  D,  Tsujimoto  G  and  Okamura  H  (2005)  Light 
activates  the  adrenal  gland:  timing  of  gene  expression 
and  glucocorticoid  release.  Cell  Metab  2:297-307.

Ishiura  M,  Kutsuna  S,  Aoki  S,  Iwasaki  H,  Andersson  CR, 
Tanabe  A,  Golden  SS,  Johnson  CH  and  Kondo  T  (1998) 
Expression  of  a  gene  cluster  kaiABC  as  a  circadian  feed-
back  process  in  cyanobacteria.  Science  281:1519-1523.

Kalsbeek  A  and  Buijs  RM  (2002)  Output  pathways  of  the 
mammalian  suprachiasmatic  nucleus:  coding  circadian  time 
by  transmitter  selection  and  specific  targeting.  Cell  Tissue 
Res  309:109-118.

Konopka  RJ  and  Benzer  S  (1971)  Clock  mutants  of  Drosophila 

melanogaster.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  68:2112-2116.

Kramer  A,  Yang  FC,  Snodgrass  P,  Li  X,  Scammell  TE,  Davis 
FC  and  Weitz  CJ  (2001)  Regulation  of  daily  locomotor 
activity  and  sleep  by  hypothalamic  EGF  receptor  signaling. 
Science  294:2511-2515.

Kraves  S  and  Weitz  CJ  (2006)  A  role  for  cardiotrophin-like 
cytokine  in  the  circadian  control  of  mammalian  locomotor 
activity.  Nat  Neurosci  9:212-219.

Krieger  DT,  Hauser  H  and  Krey  LC  (1977)  Suprachiasmatic 
nuclear  lesions  do  not  abolish  food-shifted  circadian  adrenal 
and  temperature  rhythmicity.  Science  197:398-399.

Kwon  I,  Lee  J,  Chang  SH,  Jung  NC,  Lee  BJ,  Son  GH,  Kim 
K  and  Lee  KH  (2006)  BMAL1  shuttling  controls  transacti-
vation  and  degradation  of  the  CLOCK/BMAL1  heterodimer. 
Mol  Cell  Biol  26:7318-7330.

Lavebratt  C,  Sjöholm  LK,  Soronen  P,  Paunio  T,  Vawter  MP, 
Bunney  WE,  Adolfsson  R,  Forsell  Y,  Wu  JC,  Kelsoe  JR, 
Partonen  T  and  Schalling  M  (2010)  CRY2  is  associated 
with  depression.  PLoS  One  5:e9407.

Lee  J,  Lee  Y,  Lee  MJ,  Park  E,  Kang  SH,  Chung  CH,  Lee 
KH  and  Kim  K  (2008)  Dual  modification  of  BMAL1  by 
SUMO2/3  and  ubiquitin  promotes  circadian  activation  of 
the  CLOCK/BMAL1  complex.  Mol  Cell  Biol  28:6056-6065.
LeSauter  J,  Hoque  N,  Weintraub  M,  Pfaff  DW  and  Silver  R 
(2009)  Stomach  ghrelin-secreting  cells  as  food-entrainable 
circadian  clocks.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  106:13582-13587.
Li  JD,  Hu  WP,  Boehmer  L,  Cheng  MY,  Lee  AG,  Jilek  A, 
Siegel  JM  and  Zhou  QY  (2006)  Attenuated  circadian 
rhythms  in  mice  lacking  the  prokineticin  2  gene.  J  Neurosci 
26:  11615-11623.

Lowrey  PL,  Shimomura  K,  Antoch  MP,  Yamazaki  S,  Zemenides 
PD,  Ralph  MR,  Menaker  M  and  Takahashi  JS  (2000) 
Positional  syntenic  cloning  and  functional  characterization 
of  the  mammalian  circadian  mutation  tau.  Science  288: 
483-492.

Meier  AH  (1976)  Daily  variation  in  concentration  of  plasma 
in  hypophysectomized  rats.  Endocrinology 

corticosteroid 
98:1475-1479.

Moore  RY  (1997)  Circadian  rhythms:  basic  neurobiology  and 

Mammalian  Molecular  Clocks 27

clinical  applications.  Annu  Rev  Med  48:253-266.

Mormont  MC,  Waterhouse  J,  Bleuzen  P,  Giacchetti  S,  Jami  A, 
Bogdan  A,  Lellouch  J,  Misset  JL,  Touitou  Y  and  Lévi  F 
(2000)  Marked  24-h  rest/activity  rhythms  are  associated 
with  better  quality  of  life,  better  response,  and  longer 
survival  in  patients  with  metastatic  colorectal  cancer  and 
good  performance  status.  Clin  Cancer  Res  6:3038-3045.
Pando  MP,  Morse  D,  Cermakian  N  and  Sassone-Corsi  P 
(2002)  Phenotypic  rescue  of  a  peripheral  clock  genetic 
defect  via  SCN  hierarchical  dominance.  Cell  110:107-117.
Price  JL,  Blau  J,  Rothenfluh  A,  Abodeely  M,  Kloss  B  and 
Young  MW  (1998)  double-time  is  a  novel  Drosophila  clock 
gene  that  regulates  PERIOD  protein  accumulation.  Cell 
94:83-95.

Prosser  HM,  Bradley  A,  Chesham  JE,  Ebling  FJ,  Hastings  MH 
and  Maywood  ES  (2007)  Prokineticin  receptor  2  (Prokr2) 
is  essential  for  the  regulation  of  circadian  behavior  by  the 
suprachiasmatic  nuclei.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  104:648- 
653.

Ralph  MR,  Foster  RG,  Davis  FC  and  Menaker  M  (1990) 
Transplanted  suprachiasmatic  nucleus  determines  circadian 
period.  Science  247:975-978.

Ralph  MR  and  Menaker  M  (1988)  A  mutation  of  the  circadian 

system  in  golden  hamsters.  Science  241:1225-1227.

Reppert  SM  and  Weaver  DR  (2002)  Coordination  of  circadian 

timing  in  mammals.  Nature  418:935-941.

Rosenfeld  P,  van  Eekelen  JA,  Levine  S  and  de  Kloet  ER 
(1993)  Ontogeny  of  corticosteroid  receptors  in  the  brain. 
Cell  Mol  Neurobiol  13:295-319.

Roybal  K,  Theobold  D,  Graham  A,  DiNieri  JA,  Russo  SJ, 
Krishnan  V,  Chakravarty  S,  Peevey  J,  Oehrlein  N,  Birnbaum 
S,  Vitaterna  MH,  Orsulak  P,  Takahashi  JS,  Nestler  EJ, 
Carlezon  WA  Jr  and  McClung  CA  (2007)  Mania-like 
behavior  induced  by  disruption  of  CLOCK.  Proc  Natl  Acad 
Sci  USA  104:6406-6411.

Sakamoto  K,  Nagase  T,  Fukui  H,  Horikawa  K,  Okada  T, 
Tanaka  H,  Sato  K,  Miyake  Y,  Ohara  O,  Kako  K  and 
Ishida  N  (1998)  Multitissue  circadian  expression  of  rat 
period  homolog 
the 
mammalian  circadian  clock,  the  suprachiasmatic  nucleus 
in  the  brain.  J  Biol  Chem  273:27039-27042.

is  governed  by 

(rPer2)  mRNA 

Schibler  U  and  Sassone-Corsi  P  (2002)  A  web  of  circadian 

pacemakers.  Cell  111:919-922.

Schmutz  I,  Ripperger  JA,  Baeriswyl-Aebischer  S  and  Albrecht 
U  (2010)  The  mammalian  clock  component  PERIOD2 
coordinates  circadian  output  by  interaction  with  nuclear 
receptors.  Genes  Dev  24:345-357.

Shim  HS,  Kim  H,  Lee  J,  Son  GH,  Cho  S,  Oh  TH,  Kang  SH, 
Seen  DS,  Lee  KH  and  Kim  K  (2007)  Rapid  activation  of 
CLOCK  by  Ca2＋-dependent  protein  kinase  C  mediates 
resetting  of  the  mammalian  circadian  clock.  EMBO  Reports 
8:366-371.

Shirogane  T,  Jin  J,  Ang  XL  and  Harper  JW  (2005)  SCFbeta- 
TRCP  controls  clock-dependent 
transcription  via  casein 
kinase  1-dependent  degradation  of  the  mammalian  period-1 
(Per1)  protein.  J  Biol  Chem  280:26863-26872.

Son  GH,  Chung  S,  Choe  HK,  Kim  HD,  Baik  SM,  Lee  H,  Lee 
HW,  Choi  S,  Sun  W,  Kim  H,  Cho  S,  Lee  KH  and  Kim  K 
(2008)  Adrenal  peripheral  clock  controls  the  autonomous 
circadian  rhythm  of  glucocorticoid  by  causing  rhythmic 
steroid  production.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  105:20970- 

28 Ilmin  Kwon,  et  al.

10975.

in 

Spanagel  R,  Pendyala  G,  Abarca  C,  Zghoul  T,  Sanchis-Segura 
C,  Magnone  MC,  Lascorz  J,  Depner  M,  Holzberg  D, 
Soyka  M,  Schreiber  S,  Matsuda  F,  Lathrop  M,  Schumann 
G  and  Albrecht  U  (2005)  The  clock  gene  Per2  influences 
the  glutamatergic  system  and  modulates  alcohol  consump-
tion.  Nat  Med  11:35-42.

Stephan  FK,  Swann  JM  and  Sisk  CL  (1979)  Anticipation  of 
the 

24-hr 
suprachiasmatic  nucleus.  Behav  Neural  Biol  25:346-363.

feeding  schedules 

lesions  of 

rats  with 

Stephan  FK  and  Zucker  I  (1972)  Circadian  rhythms  in  drinking 
behavior  and  locomotor  activity  of  rats  are  eliminated  by 
hypothalamic  lesions.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  69:1583- 
1586.

Stokkan  KA,  Yamazaki  S,  Tei  H,  Sakaki  Y  and  Menaker  M 
(2001)  Entrainment  of  the  circadian  clock  in  the  liver  by 
feeding.  Science  291:490-493.

Tamaru  T,  Hirayama  J, 

Isojima  Y,  Nagai  K,  Norioka  S, 
Takamatsu  K  and  Sassone-Corsi  P  (2009)  CK2alpha  phos-
phorylates  BMAL1  to  regulate  the  mammalian  clock.  Nat 
Struct  Mol  Biol  16:446-448.

Terazono  H,  Mutoh  T,  Yamaguchi  S,  Kobayashi  M,  Akiyama 
M,  Udo  R,  Ohdo  S,  Okamura  H  and  Shibata  S  (2003) 
Adrenergic  regulation  of  clock  gene  expression  in  mouse 
liver.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  100:6795-6800.

Toh  KL,  Jones  CR,  He  Y,  Eide  EJ,  Hinz  WA,  Virshup  DM, 
Ptácek  LJ  and  Fu  YH  (2001)  An  hPer2  phosphorylation 
site  mutation  in  familial  advanced  sleep  phase  syndrome. 
Science  291:1040-1043.

Torres-Farfan  C,  Valenzuela  FJ,  Ebensperger  R,  Méndez  N, 
Campino  C,  Richter  HG,  Valenzuela  GJ  and  Serón-Ferré 
M  (2008)  Circadian  cortisol  secretion  and  circadian  adrenal 
responses 
in  dexamethasone 

to  ACTH  are  maintained 

suppressed  capuchin  monkeys  (Cebus  apella).  Am  J  Pri-
matol  70:93-100.

in 

Travnickova-Bendova  Z,  Cermakian  N,  Reppert  SM  and 
Sassone-Corsi  P  (2002)  Bimodal  regulation  of  mPeriod 
promoters  by  CREB-dependent  signaling  and  CLOCK/BMAL1 
activity.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  99:7728-7733.

Tu  BP  and  McKnight  SL  (2006)  Metabolic  cycles  as  an 
underlying  basis  of  biological  oscillations.  Nat  Rev  Mol 
Cell  Biol  7:  696-701.

Ulrich-Lai  YM,  Arnhold  MM  and  Engeland  WC  (2006)  Adrenal 
splanchnic  innervation  contributes  to  the  diurnal  rhythm  of 
plasma  corticosterone 
rats  by  modulating  adrenal 
sensitivity  to  ACTH.  Am  J  Physiol  Regul  Integr  Comp 
Physiol  290:R1128-R1135.

Vanselow  K,  Vanselow  JT,  Westermark  PO,  Reischl  S,  Maier 
B,  Korte  T,  Herrmann  A,  Herzel  H,  Schlosser  A  and 
Kramer  A  (2006)  Differential  effects  of  PER2  phosphorylation: 
molecular  basis  for  the  human  familial  advanced  sleep 
phase  syndrome  (FASPS).  Genes  Dev  20:2660-2672.

Yamazaki  S,  Numano  R,  Abe  M,  Hida  A,  Takahashi  R,  Ueda 
M,  Block  GD,  Sakaki  Y,  Menaker  M  and  Tei  H  (2000) 
Resetting  central  and  peripheral  circadian  oscillators  in 
transgenic  rats.  Science  288:682-685.

Yang  X,  Downes  M,  Yu  RT,  Bookout  AL,  He  W,  Straume  M, 
Mangelsdorf  DJ  and  Evans  RM  (2006)  Nuclear  receptor 
expression  links  the  circadian  clock  to  metabolism.  Cell 
126:801-810.

Yoo  SH,  Yamazaki  S,  Lowrey  PL,  Shimomura  K,  Ko  CH, 
Buhr  ED,  Siepka  SM,  Hong  HK,  Oh  WJ,  Yoo  OJ,  Menaker 
M  and  Takahashi  JS  (2004)  PERIOD2::LUCIFERASE  real- 
time  reporting  of  circadian  dynamics  reveals  persistent 
circadian  oscillations  in  mouse  peripheral  tissues.  Proc 
Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  101:5339-5346.

