METHODS ARTICLE
published: 23 January 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00017

Novel degenerate PCR method for whole-genome
ampliﬁcation applied to Peru Margin (ODP Leg 201)
subsurface samples

Amanda J. Martino1, Matthew E. Rhodes 1, Jennifer F. Biddle 2, Leah D. Brandt 1, Lynn P. Tomsho3 and
Christopher H. House 1*

1 Department of Geosciences, Penn State Astrobiology Research Center, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA
2 School of Marine Science and Policy, College of Earth Ocean and Environment, University of Delaware, Lewes, DE, USA
3 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA

Edited by:
Andreas Teske, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA
Reviewed by:
Julie A. Huber, Marine Biological
Laboratory, USA
John R. Spear, Colorado School of
Mines, USA
*Correspondence:
Christopher H. House, Department
of Geosciences, Penn State
Astrobiology Research Center,
Pennsylvania State University, 220
Deike Building, University Park, PA
16802, USA.
e-mail: chrishouse@psu.edu

A degenerate polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based method of whole-genome ampliﬁca-
tion, designed to work ﬂuidly with 454 sequencing technology, was developed and tested
for use on deep marine subsurface DNA samples. While optimized here for use with Roche
454 technology, the general framework presented may be applicable to other next gen-
eration sequencing systems as well (e.g., Illumina, Ion Torrent). The method, which we
have called random ampliﬁcation metagenomic PCR (RAMP), involves the use of speciﬁc
primers from Roche 454 amplicon sequencing, modiﬁed by the addition of a degenerate
region at the 3(cid:2) end. It utilizes a PCR reaction, which resulted in no ampliﬁcation from
blanks, even after 50 cycles of PCR. After efforts to optimize experimental conditions, the
method was tested with DNA extracted from cultured E. coli cells, and genome coverage
was estimated after sequencing on three different occasions. Coverage did not vary greatly
with the different experimental conditions tested, and was around 62% with a sequenc-
ing effort equivalent to a theoretical genome coverage of 14.10×. The GC content of the
sequenced ampliﬁcation product was within 2% of the predicted values for this strain of E.
coli.The method was also applied to DNA extracted from marine subsurface samples from
ODP Leg 201 site 1229 (Peru Margin), and results of a taxonomic analysis revealed micro-
bial communities dominated by Proteobacteria, Chloroﬂexi, Firmicutes, Euryarchaeota, and
Crenarchaeota, among others. These results were similar to those obtained previously for
those samples; however, variations in the proportions of taxa identiﬁed illustrates well the
generally accepted view that community analysis is sensitive to both the ampliﬁcation tech-
nique used and the method of assigning sequences to taxonomic groups. Overall, we ﬁnd
that RAMP represents a valid methodology for amplifying metagenomes from low-biomass
samples.

Keywords: whole-genome ampliﬁcation, metagenomics, deep biosphere,
next-gen sequencing

low biomass, bacteria, archaea,

INTRODUCTION
The deep subseaﬂoor biosphere represents a frontier for the dis-
covery of new microbial life, and for investigations of the extent,
versatility, and perseverance of life on earth. However, there are
many challenges in studying this community of microorgan-
isms, and the past 20 years of study have only begun to produce
an understanding of this vast and complex ecosystem. Marine
subsurface microorganisms are isolated from the direct energy
of sunlight, receive limited nutrients, and sometimes experience
extreme pressures and challenging temperatures. Investigations
to date suggest that many of these microbes appear to be only
distantly related to those we know from the study of surface envi-
ronments (Sørensen et al., 2004; Inagaki et al., 2006; Lipp et al.,
2008). Cultivation studies have produced some useful results (Bale
et al., 1997; Mikucki et al., 2003; Tofﬁn et al., 2004), but the major-
ity of microbes in this environment (as well as most microbes
on Earth) still evade cultivation efforts. Cultivation-independent

methods such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) ampliﬁcation
and subsequent sequencing directly from environmental DNA
hold great promise, and have provided the majority of the infor-
mation obtained to date (Jørgensen and Boetius, 2007; Orcutt
et al., 2011); however, there are still many challenges to overcome
in utilizing these methods to their full potential.

Among the available cultivation-independent methods, auto-
mated metagenomic sequencing via platforms such as Roche 454,
is one of the most promising tools for probing the depths of diver-
sity and exploring metabolic capabilities of subsurface microbes.
However, even with recent advances in technology, this type of
high-throughput sequencing requires, ideally, at least 500 ng of
sample DNA (as per Roche 454 protocol). The relatively low con-
centrations of cells in the marine subsurface coupled with the
difﬁculties of extracting DNA from marine sediment (Webster
et al., 2003) results in quantities of extracted DNA which are often
too low for direct, unampliﬁed, metagenomic sequencing.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 17 | 1

Martino et al.

PCR method for genome ampliﬁcation

Over the past couple of decades, researchers have been exper-
imenting with different methods of amplifying genomic DNA.
Some of the resulting whole-genome ampliﬁcation (WGA) meth-
ods are modiﬁcations to the standard PCR, which reduce its
speciﬁcity, allowing for a general ampliﬁcation of DNA. These
methods include interspersed repetitive sequence PCR (IRS-
PCR; Nelson et al., 1989), primer-extension-preampliﬁcation
PCR (PEP-PCR; Zhang et al., 1992), improved primer-extension-
preampliﬁcation PCR (I-PEP-PCR; Dietmaier et al., 1999), degen-
erate oligonucleotide-primed PCR (DOP-PCR; Telenius et al.,
1992), and long products from low DNA quantities DOP-PCR
(LL-DOP-PCR; Kittler et al., 2002). In addition to the PCR-
based methods, a non-PCR method called multiple displacement
ampliﬁcation (MDA) was developed in attempt to overcome prob-
lems with the PCR methods, which included incomplete coverage,
ampliﬁcation artifacts, and DNA too short for some applications
(Dean et al., 2002). MDA is an isothermal, strand-displacing reac-
tion employing the phi29 DNA polymerase and random hexamer
primers. Several commercial versions of MDA now exist, includ-
ing the REPLI-g Whole-Genome Ampliﬁcation Kit (Qiagen) and
the GenomiPhi DNA Ampliﬁcation Kit (GE Healthcare). Two
commercial MDA kits, along with PEP-PCR and DOP-PCR, were
analyzed for genome coverage bias in a 454 metagenomic sequenc-
ing study and all were found to induce signiﬁcant bias (Pinard
et al., 2006). For both microbial genomes utilized in that study, the
MDA reactions resulted in the least bias, followed by PEP-PCR,
and lastly, DOP-PCR. These results were consistent with those
obtained through a TaqMan quantitative PCR analysis of eight
genes after ampliﬁcation of human genomic DNA using MDA,
DOP-PCR, and PEP-PCR (Dean et al., 2002).

As a result, MDA-based techniques are most often the method
of choice in applications where bias and coverage are signiﬁcant
concerns. For metagenomic sequencing of subseaﬂoor environ-
mental DNA samples, however, the use of MDA as an ampliﬁcation
technique is often problematic. In particular, the tendency of MDA
to synthesize a DNA product even in the absence of added cells,
means that a reliable negative control for the ampliﬁcation reac-
tion is very difﬁcult to achieve (Raghunathan et al., 2005). These
products that form in the negative controls can be as large as 15 kb
and greater (Biddle, 2006). While they have not been sequenced,
failure of attempts to PCR amplify speciﬁc genes from the products
suggests that they are more likely primer-dimer type formations
rather than microbial contamination (Biddle, 2006). This may be a
consequence of the competitive nature of the reaction, whereby in
the absence of anything else of which to anneal, the random hexa-
mers anneal to each other. If this were the case, the problem would
be of greatest signiﬁcance when sample DNA template is very
low, and unable to compete with the hexamers for annealing and
ampliﬁcation. It has been shown that the DNA product formed
in negative controls can be avoided if the reaction is monitored
closely with a qPCR protocol and stopped before ampliﬁcation in
the negative control begins (Biddle et al., 2011). However, in many
cases, this occurs after less than 2 h reaction time, and stopping
the reaction at this length of time may hinder the ampliﬁcation of
sample DNA as well, particularly when the sample had very small
amounts of DNA to begin with (Biddle et al., 2011), as is the case
with most deep subseaﬂoor samples.

Due to the difﬁculties with using available WGA methods for
amplifying subseaﬂoor DNA samples, we undertook efforts to
develop an alternative method of WGA that may be of use when
sequencing low-biomass environmental samples. We hypothesized
that the production of DNA in reaction negatives of MDA was a
result of the high level of degeneracy of the primers. We recog-
nized, however, that this high level of degeneracy was critical in
obtaining ampliﬁed DNA with the least amount of bias, which
appears to be the reason that the PEP-PCR and MDA meth-
ods produce less bias than the PCR methods with more speciﬁc
primers. Consequently, our strategy was to design a PCR method
with primers that would be more degenerate than IRS-PCR and
DOP-PCR – and thus applicable to environmental DNA sam-
ples, but less degenerate than PEP-PCR and MDA. In addition,
with the rapidly increasing use of next generation metagenomic
sequencing technology, we aimed to have our new method aid in
streamlining the process of preparing samples for metagenomic
sequencing using these new technologies. The result was a PCR-
based method of WGA utilizing 454 amplicon primers with an
(cid:2)
attached degenerate region at the 3
end. We refer to this method
as random ampliﬁcation metagenomic PCR (RAMP). While opti-
mized here for use with Roche 454 sequencing, the developed
method may be viewed as a general framework for using PCR for
WGA of low-biomass environmental DNA samples in preparation
for metagenomic sequencing using next generation sequencing
technologies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
DNA EXTRACTION
E. coli DNA was extracted from a culture of E. coli Mach1™-T1R
cells from a TOPO TA Cloning® Kit (Invitrogen, Inc.). The parental
strain of Mach1™-T1R E. coli is the non-K-12, wild-type W strain
(ATCC #9637, S. A. Waksman), and the cells contain slight mod-
iﬁcations to the genome necessary for the cloning process. The
cells were grown overnight in Luria–Bertani (LB) broth at 37˚C.
Cells for DNA extraction were pelleted using a centrifuge from
5 mL of the liquid culture. Cell pellets were added to bead tubes of
a Mo Bio UltraClean DNA Isolation kit (MO BIO Laboratories).
The kit protocol was followed except for the substitution of 30 s of
vortexing in place of bead beating.

The environmental DNA samples used in this study were
aliquots remaining from a previous study (Biddle et al., 2008),
frozen at −80˚C after the original extraction. The method of DNA
extraction is described therein and summarized as follows: Frozen
sediment cores from ODP Leg 201 Site 1229 were processed by
removal of the top ∼1 cm of potentially contaminated sediment.
Aliquots of the remaining sediment were homogenized and DNA
was extracted using the Mo Bio UltraClean Microbial DNA kit
(MO BIO Laboratories) with some modiﬁcations, including the
addition of a 65˚C water bath incubation step and a decrease in
the recommended amount of bead beating time to 1 min (Biddle
et al., 2008).

PRIMER DESIGN
The non-degenerate 5
ends of the RAMP primers were chosen
from the primers utilized in Roche 454 sequencing technology.
These included a set of primers used for amplicon sequencing,

(cid:2)

Frontiers in Microbiology | Extreme Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 17 | 2

Martino et al.

PCR method for genome ampliﬁcation

(cid:2)

and a set of adaptors used for metagenomic sequencing. Both the
amplicon primers and metagenomic adaptors were updated with
the switch to “Titanium” sequencing reagents, providing a total
of four sets of available primers to be tested. These sequencing
primers were then altered by the addition of degenerate bases to
the 3
ends, with the goal of maximizing degeneracy while lim-
iting the possibility of primer-dimers and DNA hairpins. A total
of 12 unique primers were tested on culture DNA as well as envi-
ronmental DNA for use in the RAMP protocol (Table 1). Success
of the primers was evaluated by visualization of the ampliﬁed
products after electrophoretic separation on 1% agarose gels. All
primers were ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. “B”
primers included a 5
biotin tag (for sequencing preparations) and
HPLC puriﬁcation, while “A” primers were ordered with standard
desalting puriﬁcation.

(cid:2)

PCR OPTIMIZATION
The following PCR conditions were chosen for RAMP reactions
of samples sequenced in this study: Reagents (Per 25 μL reac-
tion): 1.6 μM each FLXampA+ 5N and FLXampB+ 5N primers
(Table 1), 1.25 units SpeedSTAR™HS DNA Polymerase (Takara
Bio, Inc.) with 2.5 μL accompanying FB1 buffer containing 30 mM
MgCl2, and 2.0 μL accompanying dNTP mixture containing
2.5 mM each dNTP. Cycling conditions: 5 min at 94˚C, followed
by 25 cycles of 10 s at 94˚C, 15 s at 47 (or 25)˚C, 20 s at 72˚C,
followed by a ﬁnal extension of 10 min at 72˚C. The amount of

Table 1 | All primer designs tested during method development.

Ampliﬁcation

Sequence (5(cid:2) → 3(cid:2))

GCCTCCCTCGCGCCATCAGNNNND Yes
GCCTCCCTCGCGCCATCAGNNNNN Yes
GCCTTGCCAGCCCGCTCAGNNNNN Yes
No

Name
FLXampA+ 4ND
FLXampA+ 5N
FLXampB+ 5N
FLXadpA+ B4NTY CCATCTCATCCCTGCGTGTCCCATC
TGTTCCCTCCCTGTCTCAGBNNNNTY
FLXadpB+ B4NTY CCTATCCCCTGTGTGCCTTGCCTAT
FLXampA+ 6N
TIadpA+ 5N
TIadpB+ 5N
TIadpA+ 5N (cut)
TIadpB+ 5N (cut)
TIampA+ 5N
TIampB+ 5N

CCCCTGTTGCGTGTCTCAGBNNNNTY
GCCTCCCTCGCGCCATCAGNNNNNN No
CCATCTCATCCCTGCGTGTCTC
No
CGACTCAGNNNNN
CCTATCCCCTGTGTGCCTTGGC
AGTCTCAGNNNNN
CTGCGTGTCTCCGACTCAGNNNNN No
No
TGTGCCTTGGCAGTCTCAGNNNNN
CGTATCGCCTCCCTCGCGCCAT
Yes
CAGNNNNN
CTATGCGCCTTGCCAGCCCGCT
CAGNNNNN

Yes

No

No

In primer names, “FLX” refers to the use of sequence from 454 FLX reagents,
while “TI” refers to use of sequence from the 454 Titanium reagents. Fur-
ther, “amp” denotes amplicon sequencing primers, while “adp” denotes
metagenome adaptors, and “A” and “B” are the two primers or adaptors uti-
lized as a set during 454 sequencing. Primers were tested in pairs except in two
cases (FLXampA+ 4ND and FLXampA+ 6N), where only the forward primer was
tested. In primer sequences, N= ACGT, D= AGT, B= CGT, and Y= CT.

DNA template used per reaction varied by sample, but the sensi-
tivity of the RAMP reaction to concentration of DNA template was
tested using a dilution series of E. coli DNA ranging from about
10 ng/μL down to about 0.0625 ng/μL. Multiple ranges of other
PCR parameters were tested as well during protocol optimization.
For primers, concentrations tested included 1–7 μM in increments
of 1, plus lower concentrations of 0.0016–1.6 μM by powers of 10,
and higher concentrations of 8 and 36.5 μM (data not shown).
Annealing temperature tested ranged from 25 to 70˚C, and num-
ber of cycles ranged from 25 to 60. Another DNA Taq polymerase
was tested, TaKaRa Ex Taq™(Takara Bio, Inc.), as well as a Pfu DNA
polymerase, Stratagene PfuUltra™High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase
(Agilent Technologies, Inc.), with PCR reagents and conditions as
recommended by those manufacturers. Optimal values for each
parameter were assessed, prior to sequencing, by visualization of
product after electrophoretic separation on 1% agarose gels. All
ampliﬁcations were performed in either an MJ Research PTC-100
Thermal Cycler or an Eppendorf Mastercycler Gradient Thermal
Cycler. Only products ampliﬁed with SpeedSTAR polymerase were
used for sequencing.

454 SEQUENCING
Ampliﬁed DNA products were puriﬁed via a gel extraction, to
remove excess primer and to select for a size range of DNA
fragments that worked well with the current 454 sequencing tech-
nology. Products were subject to electrophoretic separation on a
1% agarose gel, along with DNA markers to estimate the size of
the fragments. The portion of the gel containing ampliﬁed prod-
ucts ranging in size from about 650 to 850 base pairs (bp) long
for E. coli and environmental DNA samples sequenced with “Tita-
nium” reagents (or 250–500 bp long for E. coli samples sequenced
with FLX reagents) was excised, and the DNA was puriﬁed using
a QIAEX II Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen). After gel puriﬁcation,
DNA was quantiﬁed using PicoGreen, on a handheld ﬂuorom-
eter (Turner Biosystems, TBS-380). Because the RAMP primers
incorporated the 454 sequencing primers, the library preparation
step usually needed to ligate the sequencing primers to the DNA
fragments was unnecessary. Isolation of only those DNA frag-
ments with both “A” and “B” primers was accomplished using
a biotin–streptavidin selection protocol, employing the biotin
label incorporated onto the RAMP “B” primers. Sequencing was
carried out by the Schuster Lab at the Pennsylvania State Uni-
versity on a Roche 454 Genome Sequencer FLX sequencing sys-
tem (454 Life Sciences) as described (Poinar et al., 2006). For
E. coli coverage tests, ¼ of a picotiter plate was sequenced on
each of three separate occasions using FLX chemistry for tests
1 and 2, and the newer Titanium chemistry for test 3 due to
upgrades in 454 technology. For sequencing of RAMP-ampliﬁed
environmental samples, ¼ of a picotiter plate was sequenced
for each sample using the Titanium chemistry. The two new
RAMP-ampliﬁed environmental metagenomes were uploaded to
MG-RAST (metagenomics.anl.gov) as job numbers 37975 and
37977.

PROCESSING OF SEQUENCE DATA
Raw metagenomic sequence datasets
from three samples
sequenced in 2008 (Biddle et al., 2008) were downloaded from the

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 17 | 3

Martino et al.

PCR method for genome ampliﬁcation

National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank
archive (SRA001015) and converted into FASTA format using the
online resource, Galaxy (Giardine et al., 2005; Blankenberg et al.,
2010; Goecks et al., 2010). These three metagenomes, along with
all metagenomes generated in the present study, were screened to
remove replicate sequences and sequences containing ambiguous
bases.

Random ampliﬁcation metagenomic PCR-ampliﬁed metageno
mes from E. coli genomic DNA were compared to the reference E.
coli W genome (downloaded from the NCBI genome database) in
order to estimate genome coverage. Comparisons were carried out
−15. Genomic locations
via a BLASTN search with an e-value of 10
of the respective top BLAST results were recorded, and the total
number of matched base pairs was tabulated using a 98% identity
cut-off value. This approach may have overlooked some highly
repetitive regions and thus should serve as a slight underestimate.
Genome coverage for test 3 of E. coli sequencing (carried out with
newer sequencing technology) was estimated both for the whole
dataset and for a random sub-sampling of the dataset, equivalent
in size to those available from E. coli tests 1 and 2. The GC content
of the metagenomic datasets was assessed via simple mathematical
calculations performed with a home written Python script.

Environmental metagenomes from the 2008 study as well as
the present study were further processed to include only those
sequence reads greater than 150 bp in length. The environmen-
tal metagenomes were compared to the NCBI database of non-
redundant (nr) protein sequences (downloaded August 2010) via
−2, to the Silva database of 16S
BLASTX with an e-value of 10
rRNA nucleotide sequences (downloaded July 2010) via BLASTN
−9, and to a compiled database containing all
with an e-value of 10
available sequences of the RNA polymerase beta-subunit encod-
ing gene (rpoB; downloaded September 2011, DOE Joint Genome
−2. For matches to
Institute) via BLASTX with an e-value of 10
the nr and rpoB databases detected by BLASTX, the software pro-
gram MEGAN v.4.60.2 (Huson et al., 2007) was used to assign the
sequences to phylogenetic groups, using the following parame-
ter settings: minscore: 35.0, toppercent: 10.0, minsupport: 5, and
winscore: 0.0. In short, MEGAN assigns BLAST-hit sequences to
phylogenetic groups using bit-score to retain only signiﬁcant hits,
based on the parameters chosen. 16S matches detected by BLASTN
were assigned to phylogenetic groups based on the most similar
sequence found via the BLAST algorithm.

RESULTS
METHOD ASSESSMENT
Of the 12 primers tested in the development of the RAMP pro-
tocol (some as pairs and some singly), two sets and one single
primer resulted in some ampliﬁcation of DNA (Table 1). Only
one set, however, ampliﬁed environmental DNA consistently and
robustly. That set was the FLXampA+ 5N/FLXampB+ 5N com-
bination. These primers worked best at concentrations from 1
to 3 μM, although ampliﬁcation of template DNA was observed
for all concentrations up to 7 μM (Figure 1A). Lower and higher
concentrations of primers did not result in ampliﬁcation of DNA
template (data not shown). Further, ampliﬁcation of DNA was
observed over a wide range of annealing temperatures (25–70˚C).
The most concentrated ampliﬁed product occurred in the reaction

FIGURE 1 | (A) Products of RAMP-ampliﬁed E. coli DNA using a
range of primer concentrations from 1 to 7 μM and their
corresponding negative controls (no DNA added). Sizes of two of the
DNA marker bands (far left) are included on the image. (B) Products
of RAMP-ampliﬁed E. coli DNA using a range of annealing
temperatures, from 30 to 50˚C. (C) Products of RAMP-ampliﬁed E.
coli DNA of a series of concentrations [∼10, 2, 1, 0.5, 0.25, 0.125,
0.0625, and 0 (negative control) ng/μL]. (D) Products of ampliﬁcation
of environmental DNA (lane 1) and two negative controls (lanes 2
and 3) after 60 cycles of RAMP. Sizes of a few DNA marker bands (far
left) are included on the image.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Extreme Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 17 | 4

Martino et al.

PCR method for genome ampliﬁcation

at 47˚C, and concentrations appeared to decline at both lower
and higher annealing temperatures (Figure 1B). Ampliﬁcation
was more consistent when using the SpeedSTAR DNA polymerase
than when using the Ex Taq DNA polymerase, and the Pfu DNA
polymerase failed to produce ampliﬁcation at all. Using a primer
concentration of 1.6 μM, an annealing temperature of 47˚C, and
SpeedSTAR DNA polymerase, the sensitivity of the method to ini-
tial concentration of DNA in a sample was tested using a dilution
series of E. coli DNA ranging from 10 to 0.0625 ng/μL. Ampliﬁ-
cation, as viewed on an agarose gel, was seen for all but the lowest
concentration and the negative control (Figure 1C). Therefore,
the threshold starting DNA concentration for visible ampliﬁcation
by RAMP under these reaction conditions is somewhere between
0.125 and 0.0625 ng/μL. However, when testing the method on
environmental DNA, it was observed that increasing the number
of PCR cycles and/or increasing the volume of sample added to
the reaction resulted in greater ampliﬁcation in some samples,
which suggests that the method’s sensitivity could be improved
in some cases. Experimentation revealed that the number of PCR
cycles for RAMP could be increased to as much as 50, but increas-
ing to 60 cycles resulted in high molecular weight ampliﬁcation
products in the negative controls (Figure 1D). Attempts to use
qPCR to better quantify a minimum threshold of DNA needed
for RAMP ampliﬁcation and to monitor possible formation of
products in negative controls were unsuccessful. Further experi-
mentation with the qPCR reaction suggested that the PicoGreen
added to the qPCR reaction for quantiﬁcation of the product may
have been interfering in some way with the RAMP reaction. As an
alternative means of quantiﬁcation of ampliﬁed samples and neg-
atives, future applications of RAMP could be coupled with other
highly precise DNA quantiﬁcation methods such as the use of a
bioanalyzer or ﬂuorometer.

The method was further tested by sequencing ampliﬁed DNA
products extracted from E. coli, chosen because its complete
sequenced genome was available for reference in estimating cover-
age bias. The ﬁrst sequencing test was carried out on E. coli DNA
ampliﬁed with the chosen primer set, with an annealing temper-
ature of 47˚C, and 25 cycles of RAMP. Based on the amount of
sequence data received, a theoretical genome coverage of 3.64×
was calculated, while the actual genome coverage for this sequenc-
ing test was estimated at 0.30×, or 30% of the genome (Table 2).
The GC content of the sequenced metagenome was calculated
as 50.9%. For the second sequencing test, all PCR conditions
remained the same; however, 15 separate ampliﬁcation reactions
were carried out on the same DNA sample and pooled together
prior to sequencing. The results were nearly the same as those from
the ﬁrst test – perhaps slightly poorer, with a theoretical coverage of
3.86× and again, actual coverage of 30%. GC content was 52.15%
for this metagenome. For test three, only one reaction was carried
out, but the annealing temperature during PCR cycling was low-
ered from 47 to 25˚C. Because this third test was sequenced with
newer technology, the amount of data was far greater than the ﬁrst
two, but after accounting for that difference by randomly analyz-
ing only a portion of the metagenome equivalent in size to the ﬁrst
two tests, the results showed a slight increase in genome coverage
with sequencing effort, with 37% actual coverage resulting from a
3.51× sequencing effort.

Table 2 | Results of sequencing tests of RAMP-ampliﬁed E. coli DNA.

Test 1

Test 2

Test 3

Annealing temperature (˚C)
No. of pooled reactions
No. of reads
Theoretical genome coverage
Actual genome coverage
GC content (compare to 50%)

47
1
69,965
3.64×
0.30×
50.90% 52.15% 51.76%

47
15
80,009
3.86×
0.30×

25
1
197,496 (40,000)
14.10× (3.51×)
0.62× (0.37×)

For test 3, numbers shown in parentheses are values pertaining to only a ran-
domly sub-sampled portion of the larger dataset, included to make comparison
even with the previous two tests, sequenced with earlier 454 technology. In addi-
tion to having more reads, test 3 had reads that were substantially longer than
those in Tests 1 and 2, so fewer reads were needed for the same theoretical
coverage.

When analyzing the entire third metagenome, theoretical
genome coverage was 14.10×, and actual genome coverage was
about 62%. Given this signiﬁcant increase, an estimate of genome
coverage in relation to sequencing effort was performed, by
analyzing sequentially larger and larger portions of this third
metagenome (Figure 2). Using a logarithmic ﬁt relationship as an
estimate [y = 16.33Ln(x)− 9.4203], complete coverage would be
achieved with 813 million base pairs of sequence data, or about two
whole plates of 454 sequencing with current Titanium chemistry.
In all sequencing tests, the initial concentration of E. coli DNA
prior to ampliﬁcation with RAMP was ∼10 ng/μL. The concen-
tration of DNA after ampliﬁcation was not measured until after
gel puriﬁcation, which consumes a large portion of sample DNA,
so absolute values are not available for the amount of DNA pro-
duced by the various RAMP conditions. However, by examining
the values obtained for concentration after gel puriﬁcation, we
can still make relative comparisons. The concentrations for E. coli
tests 1, 2, and 3 after gel puriﬁcation were 8.2 ng/μL, 5.5 ng/μL,
and 51 pg/μL, respectively. The concentrations of the 1- and 32-m
below seaﬂoor (mbsf) environmental samples after gel puriﬁca-
tion were 54 and 12.5 pg/μL, respectively. From this data, we see
that DNA concentrations are orders of magnitude higher after
RAMP at 47˚C annealing (E. coli tests 1 and 2) than after RAMP
at 25˚C annealing (E. coli test 3 and both environmental samples).

ENVIRONMENTAL APPLICATION
The RAMP method utilized for “test 3” of sequencing in method
development was also applied to two environmental DNA samples
extracted from marine subsurface sediment. The marine sediment
was from two depths – 1 and 32 mbsf – of a Peru Margin subsurface
location (ODP Leg 201 site 1229). Aliquots of the DNA extracted
from these two samples for an earlier study (Biddle et al., 2008)
were available for re-analysis using the new method. In this way,
RAMP could be compared to the WGA method used in the ear-
lier study without concerns of DNA extraction bias inﬂuencing
results. In the Biddle et al. study, the 1-mbsf sample was sequenced
with no prior WGA, as well as with WGA via the REPLI-g kit
(Qiagen) using the available 454 GS 20 technology. The 32-mbsf
sample was sequenced only after WGA using REPLI-g as concen-
tration of DNA was too low for unampliﬁed sequencing. In the

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 17 | 5

Martino et al.

PCR method for genome ampliﬁcation

FIGURE 2 | Estimated percentage of genome coverage in relation to sequencing effort of RAMP-ampliﬁed E. coli genomic DNA.

present study, both the 1- and 32-mbsf samples were sequenced
after ampliﬁcation with RAMP.

In all, ﬁve metagenomes were analyzed,

three old and
two new: 1 mbsf, unampliﬁed; 1 mbsf ampliﬁed with REPLI-g;
32 mbsf ampliﬁed with REPLI-g; 1 mbsf ampliﬁed with RAMP;
and 32 mbsf ampliﬁed with RAMP. After comparing all ﬁve
metagenomes to the nr, 16S rRNA, and rpoB databases, RAMP
metagenomes were found to have higher percentages of sequences
with identiﬁable homologs in all cases (Table 1). Further, within
each ampliﬁcation method, matches to the databases decreased
with increasing depth of the sample.

Matches to the nr, 16S rRNA, and rpoB databases were used
to analyze community composition of the sample metagenomes
and to compare the results obtained via the different ampli-
ﬁcation methods (Figure 3). Examining ﬁrst the results from
phylogeny assigned via the nr dataset, the different ampliﬁca-
tion methods appear to give very similar results to each other
as well as to the unampliﬁed control, with a few notable differ-
ences. Most apparent is the over-representation of the Chloroﬂexi
sequences in the RAMP 1 mbsf metagenome (17.9% higher for
RAMP than unampliﬁed). In the REPLI-g 1 mbsf metagenome,
the Euryarchaeota appear to be over-represented, although to a
lesser degree (6.4% higher for REPLI-g than unampliﬁed). Though
there is no unampliﬁed control for the 32-mbsf sample, compar-
ison of the REPLI-g and RAMP samples to each other, appears
to conﬁrm these two patterns of over-representation, with the
RAMP 32 mbsf metagenome displaying a higher percentage of
Chloroﬂexi sequences by 17.2%, and the REPLI-g metagenome
having more Euryarchaeota sequences by 10.1%. An additional
trend is the under-representation of the Bacteroidetes/Chlorobi
group in the RAMP samples, as compared with the unampliﬁed
and REPLI-g metagenomes, at both depths.

In comparing the community composition of the 1-mbsf sam-
ple to the 32-mbsf sample using the nr results, both REPLI-g and
RAMP samples reveal the same trends of increasing or decreas-
ing of certain taxa with depth, with only the degree of these
changes differing slightly between the methods. According to both
REPLI-g and RAMP datasets, the Chloroﬂexi, Crenarchaeota, and

Euryarchaeota all show a notable increase with depth (6.9 and
5.7% higher at depth, respectively), while the Proteobacteria show
a notable decrease with depth (15.3 and 13.5% lower at depth,
respectively). Most other taxa also decrease with depth, perhaps
only as a result of the increased dominance of the Chloroﬂexi
and archaeal sequences. The exceptions are the Firmicutes, which
increase slightly in the REPLI-g dataset only, and the minor taxa
Thermotogae, which increases slightly in both datasets. These
conclusions are consistent with those in the Biddle et al. (2008)
study.

As another perspective of community composition,

the
metagenomes were also compared against the Silva 16S rRNA
database. Using classiﬁcation of organisms based on the most
signiﬁcant hit in these BLAST results, the community composi-
tion between metagenomes is not as consistent for either sample
as it was when viewed via the nr results. In the 1-mbsf sample,
the REPLI-g metagenome has several stark differences from the
unampliﬁed metagenome, including the complete absence of the
Crenarchaeota and Proteobacteria, which make up 16.7 and 24.1%
of the unampliﬁed metagenome, respectively. Instead the REPLI-g
sample is almost entirely dominated by Chloroﬂexi, at 71.4% of the
16S hits compared with 22.2% in the unampliﬁed metagenome.
The REPLI-g metagenome, however, had only 21 16S hits, com-
pared with 54 in the unampliﬁed metagenome, so the absence of
some groups may be a result of under-sampling.

In contrast to the REPLI-g metagenome for the 1-mbsf sam-
ple, the RAMP metagenome for this sample had sequences from
all of the major taxonomic groups represented in the unampliﬁed
metagenome, differing only in their relative proportions. In this
case, the most apparent differences are the over-representation of
the Firmicutes (8.6% higher) and the under-representation of the
Euryarchaeota (9.5% lower) in the RAMP 1 mbsf metagenome as
compared with the unampliﬁed.

For the 32-mbsf sample, the RAMP metagenome shows a
much larger proportion of Proteobacteria and Firmicutes than
the REPLI-g sample (28.7 and 21.1% higher), which is consistent
with the comparisons in the 1-mbsf sample. However, there is a
discrepancy between the 1- and 32-mbsf samples concerning the

Frontiers in Microbiology | Extreme Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 17 | 6

Martino et al.

PCR method for genome ampliﬁcation

FIGURE 3 | Phylogenetic identities of sequences in all ﬁve metagenomes
as revealed through comparison to the nr, 16S, and rpoB databases.

Shown are the percentages of total identiﬁable hits. Total number of
identiﬁable hits for each condition is listed at the top of the bars.

Crenarchaeota. In the 1-mbsf sample, the RAMP metagenome
contained 13.1% Crenarchaeota sequences while the REPLI-g
metagenome contained less than 1%. However, for the 32-mbsf
sample, the REPLI-g metagenome contains 41.7% Crenarchaeota
sequences while the RAMP metagenome contains less than 1%,
essentially opposite trends.

Due to the inconsistent ﬁnding of the nr and 16S methods,
the metagenomes were also compared against a dataset of rpoB
gene sequences. In the rpoB classiﬁcation, Proteobacteria heavily
dominated all metagenomes, followed by Chloroﬂexi. In contrast

to the nr classiﬁcations, and consistent with results of the 16S
classiﬁcation, the Proteobacteria increase with depth for both the
REPLI-g and RAMP metagenomes (7.8 and 19.6% higher), while
Chloroﬂexi decrease (8.7 and 3.0% lower). Also in contrast to the
nr classiﬁcation results, the Euryarchaeota decrease with depth
in both the REPLI-g and RAMP metagenomes (1.9 and 2.4%
lower). This is consistent with the 16S classiﬁcation results for the
REPLI-g metagenomes only. Finally, in this rpoB classiﬁcation,
the Crenarchaeota make up a signiﬁcant percent of the classiﬁed
sequences of the unampliﬁed sample (9.1%), and while present

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 17 | 7

Martino et al.

PCR method for genome ampliﬁcation

to a lesser degree in the REPLI-g dataset, still reveal an increase
with depth (1.7–4.8%), consistent with the nr classiﬁcation data
and the 16S data for this ampliﬁcation method. In the RAMP
metagenomes however, the Crenarchaeota make up less than 1%
of the rpoB-classiﬁed sequences.

In an attempt to clear up the trends associated with the archaea
at the two depths in the different metagenomes, a classiﬁcation of
sequences at the domain level was performed, again using com-
parisons to the nr, 16S, and rpoB databases (Figure 4). In this
interpretation, archaea increase in relative proportion with depth
while bacteria decrease in relative proportion with depth in all
cases except in the 16S classiﬁcation of the RAMP metagenomes,
where the opposite trend exists. Speciﬁcally, in the REPLI-g
metagenomes, the proportion of archaeal sequences increases with
depth by 11.9, 29.8, and 8.9% in the nr, 16S, and rpoB analy-
ses, respectively. In the RAMP metagenomes, the proportion of
archaeal sequences increases with depth by 12.2 and 12.3% in the
nr and rpoB analyses, respectively, but decreases by 10.3% in the
16S analysis.

DISCUSSION
METHOD ASSESSMENT
General ampliﬁcation of environmental DNA via the developed
RAMP protocol is a means of producing DNA fragments suitable
for immediate use in 454 metagenomic sequencing. The utilization
of the PCR reaction with primers possessing a degenerate 3
end

(cid:2)

results in general ampliﬁcation of the genetic material without
the creation of products in ampliﬁcation reaction negative con-
trols, allowing for conﬁdent ampliﬁcation of low-biomass samples
compared to MDA methods. Bias in coverage of starting genetic
material is suggested by the estimated levels of coverage of the
E. coli genome after sequencing of ampliﬁed products (Table 2).
An increase in coverage levels with relation to sequencing effort
(Figure 2), however, suggests that even with no improvements to
the method, full coverage could be achieved with high enough lev-
els of sequencing (estimated at 813 million base pairs or about two
full plates of 454 sequencing). We had several hypotheses about
the cause of bias in coverage. The ﬁrst was that the bias was occur-
ring due to the initial locations of primer annealing in the ﬁrst
cycle of PCR. After the ﬁrst round of PCR, those regions ampli-
ﬁed would be present in higher number than other regions and
hence, more likely to amplify in subsequent rounds of PCR. This
hypothesis was tested by combining the ampliﬁcation products
of 15 separate reactions, in theory allowing for 15 different sets
of initial primer annealing locations due to random chance (test
2, Table 2). Analysis of sequenced products, however, revealed
no signiﬁcant reduction in bias. A second hypothesis was that the
annealing temperature of the PCR reaction was favoring ampliﬁca-
tion of GC-rich regions of the genome, and that a lower annealing
temperature may permit annealing at less GC-rich regions to be
competitive. Sequencing after the use of a lower annealing tem-
perature revealed a small reduction in bias, however, analysis of

FIGURE 4 | Domain classiﬁcation of sequences in all ﬁve metagenomes, as revealed through comparison to the nr, 16S, and rpoB databases. Shown
are percentages of total identiﬁable hits. Total number of identiﬁable hits for each condition is listed at the top of the bars.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Extreme Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 17 | 8

Martino et al.

PCR method for genome ampliﬁcation

the GC content of sequenced products suggested no change in the
proportion of GC-rich to GC-poor regions (test 3, Table 2). One
observed problem with lowering the annealing temperature was
a decrease in the yield of ampliﬁed DNA by a couple orders of
magnitude.

(cid:2)

Our current hypothesis on the cause of the bias is that it is
related to the speciﬁc DNA sequence of the primer, particularly,
the region closest to the degenerate 3
end of the primer. Por-
tions of the genome that match not only the ﬁve base pairs at
the end of a primer, but also the next base or bases, would have
a higher likelihood of primer annealing. This could explain the
slight improvement in coverage resulting from a reduced anneal-
ing temperature, as less stringent PCR conditions allow for more
non-speciﬁc annealing. One of the goals of primer development
had been to maximize degeneracy while limiting the creation of
DNA artifacts such as primer-dimers. In this effort, we attempted
to increase the number of degenerate base pairs at the 3
end of
(cid:2)
the primer. With six degenerate bases at the 3
end of the primer,
however, ampliﬁcation failed for all PCR conditions attempted.
This was more likely a result of hairpin formation of the primers
than rampant primer-dimer formation, as primer-dimers viewed
on the gel were less bright than those for the ﬁve degenerate base
primer, ran as a control. One possible way to increase degeneracy
of the primers without causing an increase in hairpin formation
or primer-dimers, might be to create multiple primers, each with a
different base preceding the 5-nucleotide degenerate 3
end, carry
out separate reactions with each primer, and combine the products
at the end. In this way, the same effect of adding a sixth degenerate
base might be achieved, without the problems of hairpin forma-
tion resulting from too many degenerate bases at the end of any
one primer. However, this idea has not yet been tested.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Another possible limitation of the method is the sensitivity of
the reaction to the concentration of starting DNA template. The
E. coli dilution series test indicated that below a certain starting
concentration of DNA, no signiﬁcant ampliﬁcation would occur
(Figure 1C). In this test, ampliﬁcation occurred with a starting
concentration of 0.125 ng/μL but not for a starting concentration
of 0.0625 ng/μL. As experimentation with environmental samples
showed, increasing the number of cycles is one way to increase the
sensitivity of the method, but this has not been quantiﬁed. Also,
testing RAMP at 60 cycles revealed that there is a limit to how many
cycles can be run before DNA artifacts appear in negative controls.
Even so, there is likely much to be gained in terms of sensitivity
between 25 and 50 cycles, and this is something we would like to
test further in the future.

APPLICATION TO ENVIRONMENT
When applied to environmental samples from the Peru Margin
subsurface, at 1 and 32 mbsf, RAMP again produced ampliﬁed
DNA product suitable for use with 454 metagenomic sequenc-
ing. In order to make a qualitative assessment of coverage bias,
the community composition of these environmental samples was
analyzed, and compared to that obtained using REPLI-g ampliﬁca-
tion for both samples, as well as to that obtained by sequencing the
unampliﬁed 1 mbsf sample, using data from Biddle et al. (2008).
In terms of the quality of data obtained (length of sequence,
genuine sequence versus ampliﬁcation artifact, etc.), it is difﬁcult
to compare the sequenced RAMP products to the unampliﬁed
and REPLI-g ampliﬁed samples, as sequencing technology was
greatly improved in the length of time between studies. However,
we can say that both methods resulted in sequenced products of
a length which was typical for the sequencing technology of the
time [∼100 bp (2008) and ∼400 bp (2010)]. When the sequenced
products were compared to the nr, rpoB, and 16S rRNA databases,
RAMP products had much higher percentages of sequences with
identiﬁable homologs in all cases except the 16S database, where
they were still higher, but to a lesser degree (Table 3). This might be
contributable entirely to the increase in read length capable with
the newer sequencing technology, as longer reads would increase
the likelihood of a match in the protein databases, but may make
less of a difference in the nucleic acid-based 16S rRNA database,
where shorter reads lead to identiﬁcation almost as often as longer
ones (Biddle et al., 2008). The fact that both of the 2008 ampliﬁed
samples have similar values to the unampliﬁed sample for per-
cent of the metagenome with identiﬁable homologs in the three
databases, suggests that the cause of the low identiﬁcation rates is
likely not due to the production of ampliﬁcation artifacts by MDA,
a question we had wanted to explore. These results are slightly dif-
ferent than those obtained by analysis of the data in 2008, where the
ampliﬁed 32 mbsf sample did have a signiﬁcantly lower percent-
age of identiﬁed sequences than the 1-mbsf unampliﬁed sample
(5.83% to nr as compared with 13.39%). The current analysis was
done using more recent databases, and the identiﬁable percentage
of all three 2008 metagenomes was higher than in the 2008 analy-
sis, but it may be that the 32-mbsf sample beneﬁted most from the
addition of new sequences to the available databases.

Comparing the ampliﬁcation methods using assessments of
community composition via matches to the nr, rpoB, and 16S
rRNA databases proved problematic, largely as a result of con-
ﬂicting data between databases. When examining the community
composition of all ﬁve metagenomes using results from the nr

Table 3 | Analysis of environmental sequence data.

Metagenome

No. of reads/Mb

Percentage of Metagenome

BLASTX (nr)

MEGAN (nr)

MEGAN (rpoB)

BLASTN (16S)

1 m Unampliﬁed (Biddle et al., 2008)
1 m REPLI-g (Biddle et al., 2008)
32 m REPLI-g (Biddle et al., 2008)
1 m RAMP
32 m RAMP

94,332/7.14
111,964/8.00
148,041/17.24
219,909/80.89
246,979/84.74

22.54
20.51
19.08
65.83
65.21

8.69
7.92
6.73
27.99
25.93

0.05
0.05
0.04
0.29
0.43

0.06
0.02
0.06
0.11
0.09

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 17 | 9

Martino et al.

PCR method for genome ampliﬁcation

database, both methods appear successful in paralleling the unam-
pliﬁed 1 mbsf sample in terms of major taxonomic groups. In
addition, RAMP and REPLI-g appear to give similar results to each
other for the deeper 32 mbsf, which had no unampliﬁed control.
Further, patterns of increasing and decreasing of the proportions
of taxa are consistent between RAMP and REPLI-g. In this analysis,
both methods imply that the Chloroﬂexi and the archaeal groups
increase with depth, while the Proteobacteria decrease with depth.
These trends are consistent with results from the Biddle et al.
(2008) study.

The nr database, however, suffers from bias toward groups of
organisms with many sequenced representatives; hence, the rela-
tive proportions of taxa may be misleading. The Silva 16S rRNA
database, on the other hand, has a far greater diversity of organ-
isms represented, including many environmental sequences from
organisms not yet cultivated or sequenced. We chose to com-
pare our metagenomes to this database, as another perspective
of community composition. The results of this method of com-
munity analysis were much less consistent between ampliﬁcation
techniques and between the ampliﬁed and unampliﬁed samples.
Several factors may be contributing to these results. First, unlike
the analysis using the nr database, the 16S rRNA database is only
of a single gene. Therefore, there is the possibility of missing that
one gene in any given organism due to under-sampling, whereas,
one would have a higher chance of hitting at least one gene in the
organism’s genome that would provide a match to the nr data-
base. This may be the issue with the 1-mbsf REPLI-g sample, as
only 21 16S rRNA genes were identiﬁed (as contrasted with 84 in
the 32-mbsf sample, of a similar dataset size). In the 2008 study,
where more depths were examined, this 1 mbsf sample was a sort
of outlier in the 16S analysis, where trends across the other depths
were much more consistent (Biddle et al., 2008).

Other possibilities for the inconsistencies in this analysis could
be related to WGA-induced bias as a result of DNA quantity or
quality. It has been noted before for MDA that bias increases when
less DNA template is used (Binga et al., 2008). In addition, the
quality of the extracted DNA may result in differences in the suc-
cess of ampliﬁcation, favoring some DNA sequences over others.
Perhaps such a bias in ampliﬁcation could explain why the Cre-
narchaeota 16S rRNA genes are nearly completely absent from
the 32-mbsf RAMP metagenome (matches were found, but con-
stituted less than 1% of the identiﬁed reads). Alternatively, it is
possible that REPLI-g has a strong bias toward the 16S rRNA of
Crenarchaeota when starting DNA template is low or poor. As we
do not have an unampliﬁed metagenome for this deeper sample, it
is very difﬁcult to determine whether or not the trends we see are a
result of WGA-induced bias of either or both of the ampliﬁcation
methods employed.

Attempting to use another marker gene, rpoB, did little to
answer any questions about bias induced by WGA at depth, and

added more confusion to the issue of what happens to the archaeal
groups with depth, in some cases agreeing with the nr analysis, and
in some cases with the 16S analysis. Hypothesizing that many of
the archaeal sequences at depth were not being classiﬁed at the
phylum level in the nr or rpoB analyses, we decided to carry out
an analysis at the domain level, to get a better idea of archaeal
trends in the subsurface, an ongoing question in deep biosphere
research. This analysis, at least, revealed more consistency among
the nr, 16S, and rpoB analysis, and showed that in nearly all cases,
the proportion of archaea increased with depth (Figure 4). This
is most consistent with the phylum level nr analysis, where both
Crenarchaeota and Euryarchaeota increased with depth.

This study has introduced a new method of WGA, termed
RAMP, which is a viable option for increasing DNA concentration
for use with metagenomic sequencing. The method was designed
speciﬁcally for the pyrosequencing platform of Roche 454, and
helps to reduce preparation steps, as the 454 sequencing primers
are attached to each fragment of DNA as it is ampliﬁed. With modi-
ﬁcations to the primers and further optimization, this method may
also be an option for use with other sequencing technologies, such
as the Illumina or Ion Torrent sequencing systems, which utilize
similar preparations as the 454 system. The method may have par-
ticular utility in very low-biomass samples, where the production
of DNA artifacts produced by other methods of WGA may inhibit
the ampliﬁcation of sample DNA altogether. The method has room
and ﬂexibility for improvement, such as through further optimiza-
tion of the primer design and cycling conditions, which may reduce
some of the problems with potential biases. Based on the results of
this study, however, it is clear that using any method of WGA may
have a signiﬁcant impact in community composition and diversity
analyses. In addition, the results displayed herein should reinforce
the caution that must be employed when analyzing community
composition using any one method of analysis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the ODP shipboard scientiﬁc party, and D. Jones and Z.
Zhang for technical assistance. Samples for this research were pro-
vided by the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program [sponsored by the
National Science Foundation (NSF) and participating countries].
This work was supported by NSF Grant OCE 05-50601, by the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Astrobi-
ology Institute (NAI) under NASA–Ames Cooperative Agreement
NNA09DA76A, and through support from the Gordon and Betty
Moore Foundation. The Roche 454 facility at the Pennsylvania
State University Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioin-
formatics was funded, in part, by a grant from the Pennsylvania
Department of Health using Tobacco Settlement Funds appropri-
ated by the legislature. Jennifer F. Biddle was also supported by
a NASA Postdoctoral Program Fellowship administered by Oak
Ridge Associated Universities (ORAU).

REFERENCES
Bale, S. J., Goodman, K., Rochelle, P. A.,
Marchesi, J. R., Fry, J. C, Weight-
man, A.
J.
(1997).
profun-
dus
sp. nov., a novel barophilic
sulfate-reducing bacterium from
deep sediment layers in the Japan

J., and Parkes, R.
Desulfovibrio

Sea.
Int.
515–521.

J. Syst. Bacteriol. 47,

Biddle, J. F. (2006). Microbial Pop-
in Sub-
ulations and Processes
seaﬂoor Marine Environments. Pro-
Quest Dissertations and Theses, The
Pennsylvania State University, Uni-
versity Park, PA, 179.

Biddle, J. F., Fitz-Gibbon, S., Schus-
J. E., and
ter, S. C., Brenchley,
House, C. H.
(2008). Metage-
nomic signatures of the Peru Mar-
gin subseaﬂoor biosphere
show
a genetically distinct environment.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
10583–10588.

Biddle, J. F., White, J. R., Teske, A.
(2011).
P., and House, C. H.
Metagenomics of
the subsurface
Brazos-Trinity Basin (IODP site
comparison with other
1320):
pyrosequenced
sediment
metagenomes.
5,
1038–1047.

ISME

and

J.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Extreme Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 17 | 10

Martino et al.

PCR method for genome ampliﬁcation

Binga, E. K., Lasken, R. S., and
Neufeld, J. D. (2008). Something
from (almost) nothing: the impact
of multiple displacement ampliﬁca-
tion on microbial ecology. ISME J. 2,
233–241.

Blankenberg, D., Von Kuster, G., Coraor,
N., Ananda, G., Lazarus, R., Man-
gan, M., Nekrutenko, A., and Tay-
lor, J. (2010). Galaxy: a web-based
genome analysis tool for experimen-
talists. Curr. Protoc. Mol. Biol. 19,
1–21.

Dean, F. B., Hosono, S., Fang, L., Wu, X.,
Faruqi, A. F., Bray-Ward, P., Sun, Z.,
Zong, Q., Du, Y., Du, J., Driscoll, M.,
Song, W., Kingsmore, S. F., Egholm,
M., and Lasken, R. S. (2002). Com-
prehensive human genome ampliﬁ-
cation using multiple displacement
ampliﬁcation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 99, 5261–5266.

Dietmaier, W., Hartmann, A., Wallinger,
S., Heinmöller, E., Kerner, T., Endl,
E.,
Jauch, K. W., Hofstädter, F.,
and Rüshoff, J. (1999). Multiple
mutation analysis in single tumor
cells with improved whole genome
ampliﬁcation. Am. J. Pathol. 154,
83–95.

Giardine, B., Riemer, C., Hardison, R.
C., Burhans, R., Elnitski, L., Shah, P.,
Zhang, Y., Blankenberg, D., Albert,
I., Taylor, J., Miller, W., Kent, W. J.,
and Nekrutenko, A. (2005). Galaxy:
a platform for interactive large-scale
genome analysis. Genome Res. 15,
1451, 1455.

Goecks, J., Nekrutenko,A., Taylor, J., and
The Galaxy Team. (2010). Galaxy:
a comprehensive approach for sup-
porting accessible, reproducible, and
transparent computational research
in the life sciences. Genome Biol. 11,
R86.

Huson, D. H., Auch, A. F., Qi,
(2007).

J., and Schuster, S. C.

MEGAN analysis of metagenomic
data. Genome Res. 17, 377–386.

Inagaki, F., Nunoura, T., Nakagawa, S.,
Teske,A., Lever, M., Lauer,A., Suzuki,
M., Takai, K., Delwiche, M., Col-
well, F. S., Nealson, K. H., Horikoshi,
K., D’Hondt, S., and Jørgensen, B.
B. (2006). Biogeographical distri-
bution and diversity of microbes
in methane hydrate-bearing deep
marine sediments on the Paciﬁc
Ocean Margin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 103, 2815–2820.

Jørgensen, B. B., and Boetius, A. (2007).
Feast and famine – microbial life in
the deep-sea bed. Nature 5, 770–781.
Kittler, R., Stoneking, M., and Kayser,
M. (2002). A whole genome ampli-
ﬁcation method to generate long
fragments from low quantities of
genomic DNA. Anal. Biochem. 300,
237–244.

Lipp, J. S., Morono, Y., Inagaki, F., and
Hinrichs, K.-U. (2008). Signiﬁcant
contribution of Archaea to extant
biomass in marine subsurface sedi-
ments. Nature 454, 991–994.

Mikucki, J. A., Liu,Y., Delwiche, M., Col-
well, F. S., and Boone, D. R. (2003).
Isolation of a methanogen from
deep marine sediments that con-
tain methane hydrates, and descrip-
tion of Methanoculleus submarinus
sp. nov. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69,
3311–3316.

Nelson, D. L., Ledbetter, S. A., Corbo,
L., Victoria, M. F., Ramirez-Solis,
R., Webster, T. D., Ledbetter, D. H.,
and Caskey, C. T. (1989). Alu poly-
merase chain reaction: a method
for
rapid isolation of human-
speciﬁc sequences from complex
DNA sources. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 86, 6686–6690.

Orcutt, B. N., Sylvan, J. B., Knab, N. J.,
and Edwards, K. J. (2011). Micro-
bial ecology of the dark ocean above,

at, and below the seaﬂoor. Microbiol.
Mol. Biol. Rev. 75, 361–422.

Pinard, R., de Winter, A., Sarkis,
G.
J., Gerstein, M. B., Tartaro,
K. R., Plant, R. N., Egholm, M.,
Rothberg, J. M., and Leamon, J.
H. (2006). Assessment of whole
genome ampliﬁcation-induced bias
through high-throughput, massively
parallel whole genome sequenc-
ing. BMC Genomics 7, 216–236.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-7-216

Poinar, H. N., Schwarz, C., Qi,

J.,
Shapiro, B., Macphee, R. D., Buigues,
B., Tikhonov, A., Huson, D. H.,
Tomsho, L. P., Auch, A., Rampp,
M., Miller, W., and Schuster, S.
C. (2006). Metagenomics to pale-
ogenomics:
large-scale sequencing
of mammoth DNA. Science 311,
392–394.

Raghunathan, A., Ferguson, H. R.
Jr, Bornarth, C.
J., Song, W.,
Driscoll, M., and Lasken, R. S.
(2005). Genomic DNA ampliﬁ-
cation from a single bacterium.
Appl.
71,
3342–3347.

Environ. Microbiol.

Sørensen, K. B., Lauer, A., and Teske,
A. (2004). Archaeal phylotypes in
a metal-rich and low-activity deep
subsurface sediment of
the Peru
Basin, ODP Leg 202, Site 1231. Geo-
biology 2, 151–161.

Telenius, H., Carter, N. P., Bebb,
C. E., Nordenskjöld, M., Pon-
der, B. A. J., and Tunnacliffe, A.
(1992). Degenerate oligonucleotide-
primed PCR: general ampliﬁca-
tion of
target DNA by a single
degenerate primer. Genomics 13,
718–725.

Tofﬁn, L., Webster, G., Weightman, A.
J, Fry, J. C., and Prieur, D. (2004).
Molecular monitoring of culturable
bacteria from deep-sea sediment of
the Nankai Trough, Leg 190 Ocean

Drilling Program. FEMS Microbiol.
Ecol. 48, 357–367.

Webster, G., Newberry, C. J., Fry, J.
C., and Weightman, A. J. (2003).
Assessment of bacterial community
structure in the deep sub-seaﬂoor
biosphere by 16S rDNA-based tech-
niques: a cautionary tale. J. Micro-
biol. Methods 55, 155–164.

Zhang, L., Cui, X., Schnitt, K., Hubert,
R., Navidi, W., and Arnheim, N.
(1992). Whole genome ampliﬁca-
tion from a single cell: implications
for genetic analysis. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 89, 5847–5851.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 14 October 2011; paper pending
published: 03 November 2011; accepted:
09 January 2012; published online: 23
January 2012.
Citation: Martino AJ, Rhodes ME, Bid-
dle JF, Brandt LD, Tomsho LP and
House CH (2012) Novel degenerate
PCR method for whole-genome ampliﬁ-
cation applied to Peru Margin (ODP Leg
201) subsurface samples. Front. Microbio.
3:17. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00017
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Extreme Microbiology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Martino, Rhodes, Bid-
dle, Brandt , Tomsho and House. This is
an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attri-
bution Non Commercial License, which
permits non-commercial use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in other forums,
provided the original authors and source
are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 17 | 11

