REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 25 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00156

Microbial transformations of nitrogen, sulfur, and iron
dictate vegetation composition in wetlands: a review

Leon P. M. Lamers 1*, Josepha M. H. van Diggelen2, Huub J. M. Op den Camp 3, Eric J. W. Visser 4,
Esther C. H. E. T. Lucassen1,2, Melanie A. Vile 5, Mike S. M. Jetten3, Alfons J. P. Smolders 1,2 and
Jan G. M. Roelofs 1

1 Department of Aquatic Ecology and Environmental Biology, Institute for Water and Wetland Research, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands
2 B-Ware Research Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands
3 Department of Microbiology, Institute for Water and Wetland Research, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands
4 Department of Experimental Plant Ecology, Institute for Water and Wetland Research, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands
5 Department of Biology, Villanova University, Villanova, PA, USA

Edited by:
Paul Bodelier, Netherlands Institute of
Ecology, Netherlands
Reviewed by:
Brajesh Singh, University of Western
Sydney, Australia
Peter Frenzel, MPI for Terrestrial
Microbiology, Germany
*Correspondence:
Leon P. M. Lamers, Department of
Aquatic Ecology and Environmental
Biology, Institute for Water and
Wetland Research, Radboud
University Nijmegen,
Heyendaalseweg 135, 6525 AJ
Nijmegen, Netherlands.
e-mail: l.lamers@science.ru.nl

The majority of studies on rhizospheric interactions focus on pathogens, mycorrhizal sym-
biosis, or carbon transformations. Although the biogeochemical transformations of N, S,
and Fe have profound effects on vegetation, these effects have received far less atten-
tion. This review, meant for microbiologists, biogeochemists, and plant scientists includes
a call for interdisciplinary research by providing a number of challenging topics for future
ecosystem research. Firstly, all three elements are plant nutrients, and microbial activity
signiﬁcantly changes their availability. Secondly, microbial oxidation with oxygen supplied
by radial oxygen loss from roots in wetlands causes acidiﬁcation, while reduction using
alternative electron acceptors leads to generation of alkalinity, affecting pH in the rhizos-
phere, and hence plant composition. Thirdly, reduced species of all three elements may
become phytotoxic. In addition, Fe cycling is tightly linked to that of S and P. As water level
ﬂuctuations are very common in wetlands, rapid changes in the availability of oxygen and
alternative terminal electron acceptors will result in strong changes in the prevalent micro-
bial redox reactions, with signiﬁcant effects on plant growth. Depending on geological and
hydrological settings, these interacting microbial transformations change the conditions
and resource availability for plants, which are both strong drivers of vegetation develop-
ment and composition by changing relative competitive strengths. Conversely, microbial
composition is strongly driven by vegetation composition. Therefore, the combination of
microbiological and plant ecological knowledge is essential to understand the biogeochem-
ical and biological key factors driving heterogeneity and total (i.e., microorganisms and
vegetation) community composition at different spatial and temporal scales.

Keywords: biodiversity, eutrophication, heterogeneity, nutrients, plant–microbe interactions, plants, rhizosphere,
toxicity

INTRODUCTION
Plant ecologists have long been focusing mainly on above-ground
processes, while a signiﬁcant part of the driving mechanisms of
ecosystem functioning is taking place below-ground (Waisel et al.,
1996). This strongly pleads for studies including biogeochemical
transformations in soils and the important interactions between
their key players: microorganisms and plants. This paper will focus
on the roles of microbial conversions of the elements nitrogen
(N), sulfur (S), and iron (Fe), with respect to their major role
in the functioning and succession of plant communities in wet-
lands. The rationale lies in the fact that all three elements can be
converted to chemical species that can serve as nutrients, as termi-
nal electron acceptors and electron donors, and can also be toxic.
We hope in this review to show the fascinating biogeochemical
interactions between plant communities and microbial communi-
ties, and encourage microbiologist and plant ecologists to further
integrate their disciplines in the hidden half of the ecosystem

−4 m or less to 10

(Figure 1). Wetland overall communities (i.e., the integration of
micro- and macro-communities) provide excellent examples for
this complex interaction playground, the rhizosphere. We deﬁne
the rhizosphere as that part of the soil where plant roots signiﬁ-
cantly interact with soil biological and chemical processes, at the
−1 m. One should realize that the
scale of 10
−2 of soil
root systems of plants can be very large, up to 112 km m
−3 and
(Robinson et al., 2003) and reaching a depth between 10
10 m (or even deeper for trees; Canadell et al., 1996). Therefore,
a major part of the upper soil of all vegetated wetlands can be
deﬁned more or less as a potential rhizosphere. This urges the use
of an integrated approach of microbiologists and plant ecologists,
in order to understand wetland biogeochemistry, biodiversity, and
resilience with respect to ecosystem changes. The purpose of this
paper is to show how microbial activity related to the biogeo-
chemical transformation of N, S, and Fe also has profound effects
on the activity and competitive strength of plants in wetlands. In

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 156 | 1

Lamers et al.

N–S–Fe microbiology and plant ecology

are related to root exudate concentrations, oxygen availability,
nutrient availability, and pH (Brune et al., 2000; Bodelier, 2003;
Bodelier et al., 2006). Plant roots even inﬂuence soil tempera-
ture, with signiﬁcant effects on microbial activity (Boone et al.,
1998). Rhizospheric interactions between microbes and plants
have been studied to a large extent with respect to pathogens, myc-
orrhizal symbiosis, and carbon transformations (e.g., Callaway,
1995; Smith and Smith, 1997; Jones, 1998; Hanson et al., 2000;
Whipps, 2001; Gilbert, 2002; Read and Perez-Moreno, 2003).

, SO2−

−
3 , Fe3+

As a result of heterogeneity, the concentrations of terminal elec-
tron acceptors, nutrients, and toxins can differ greatly at even the
micro-scale (Bodelier et al., 2006). In redox reactions, the oxida-
tion of organic and inorganic compounds (electron donors) to
generate energy has to be coupled to the reduction of electron
acceptors, e.g., O2, NO
4 . As a result of differences
in energy generation, textbooks show a sequential “preference”
for the use of electron acceptors, starting with O2. This implies
that microorganisms able to use a particular electron accep-
tor are expected to outcompete organisms using alternative, less
favorable electron acceptors. However, small-scale differences in
electron acceptor availability in heterogeneous soils explain the
co-existence of different microbial groups, without outcompet-
ing one another due to thermodynamic competitive advantage. In
addition, the rapid transformation of reduced products by micro-
bial re-oxidation, loss to the atmosphere (e.g., N2), or chemical
sequestration (e.g., FeSx) may lead to favorable thermodynamic
conditions that are incomparable to those in closed batch systems.
Changes in plant species composition will strongly affect
microbial communities in the rhizosphere. Especially in wetlands,
where soils are periodically or constantly ﬂooded or waterlogged,
radial oxygen loss (ROL) from plant roots has an extreme impact
on rhizospheric microbial communities, locally converting condi-
tions in the wetland soil to those normally found in oxygenated
upland soil. Using microelectrodes, Frenzel et al. (1992) showed
that rice plants were well able to oxygenate the soil. Oxygen is trans-
ported through aerenchyma in the stolons and roots by diffusion
or mass ﬂow, and the extent and type of aerenchyma formation dif-
fers to a large extent among species (Jackson and Armstrong, 1999;
Visser et al., 2000a,b; Voesenek et al., 2006). As a consequence, the
spatial pattern of ROL, also strongly varies among wetland species,
due to differences in lignin and/or suberin deposits in the exoder-
mis of roots. These deposits act as a barrier to prevent loss of O2
in the upper soil layer and ensure O2 supply to the active root tips
(Armstrong, 1978; Laan et al., 1989; Colmer, 2003), and thereby
prevent root anaerobiosis (Lambers, 1976; Vartapetian and Jack-
son, 1997; Jackson and Armstrong, 1999). This means that steep
changes in oxygen availability, and hence in microbial commu-
nities, will prevail in the rhizosphere, in contrast to anaerobic
bulk soil, depending on plant species composition. For this rea-
son, microbial communities in wetland soils may be more diverse
than in upland soils. The physiological ability to oxidize rhizos-
pheres differs among plant species, which may not only facilitate
conspeciﬁcs but also heterospeciﬁcs (Callaway, 1995). Next to this
spatial heterogeneity, there will also be a strong temporal hetero-
geneity in the rhizosphere due to changes in temperature, plant
presence, plant activity, and water table. Particularly in riparian
wetlands, where water tables ﬂuctuate frequently, both resource

FIGURE 1 | Below-ground scientiﬁc collaboration in wetlands:
microbiology meets plant ecology. Cartoon by Auke Herrema.

this way, they shape the structure, succession, and biodiversity of
vegetation.

HETEROGENEITY IN SOILS DRIVES BIODIVERSITY AND
FUNCTIONING
Unvegetated wetland soils, such as deeper parts of lake sedi-
ments or sediments of turbid shallow lakes (with insufﬁcient
light for underwater plant photosynthesis) are relatively homoge-
neous, except for the sediment-water boundary layer that generally
shows a steep redox proﬁle related to the successive depletion of
terminal electron acceptors (Wetzel, 2001). One of the interest-
ing characteristics of vegetated soils, and particularly of wetland
soils, is their heterogeneity in space and time (Paul and Clark,
1989; Conrad and Frenzel, 2002; Bodelier, 2011). Microbiologi-
cal batch experiments, even those containing multiple organisms,
hardly resemble these soils. One of the challenges in microbial
ecology is therefore to include this heterogeneity in resources
(nutrients, substrates, electron acceptors) and conditions (e.g.,
oxygenation level, pH) under experimentally controlled condi-
tions. Even under apparently stable conditions, the outcome of
competition for one or several nutrients may be chaotic (Huis-
man and Weissing, 1999), but heterogeneity is even more relevant,
ecologically speaking, because it facilitates the formation of mul-
tiple niches and generates larger ﬂuctuations in conditions over
time. As such, heterogeneity strongly affects competition between
species (or operational taxonomic units at around species level),
and diversity will differ from that under homogeneous conditions.
Competitive exclusion, occurring under homogeneous, stable con-
ditions, can be prevented by spatial and temporal heterogeneity,
both for microorganisms and for macroorganisms.

In soils with plants (almost all soils in the world), heterogeneity
increases as a result of rhizospheric effects (Marschner, 1995) and
three-dimensional gradients (changes in concentrations with dis-
tance) at the micron-millimeter scale can be very steep. Different
consortia of microbial species are present inside roots, on the root
surface, and occur at different distances from roots, all of which

Frontiers in Microbiology | Terrestrial Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 156 | 2

Lamers et al.

N–S–Fe microbiology and plant ecology

availability and conditions can vary widely, providing challenges
and opportunities for microbes.

NUTRIENT CYCLING AND UPTAKE IN THE RHIZOSPHERE
For both heterotrophic and autotrophic organisms including
plants, sufﬁcient nutrient acquisition is essential to transform the
carbon acquired into growth and reproduction and to safeguard
the ﬁtness of their populations. The rates of transformation of
dead organic material into simple organic compounds and miner-
als, carried out by fauna and microorganisms, strongly determine
the growth rates of plants. At high nutrient availability, fast-
growing and highly competitive species will generally dominate
at the expense of slow-growing species and monopolize light and
space. As the quality of the dead organic matter strongly differs
between plant species, decomposition (carbon mineralization)
and the mineralization of the macronutrients N, P, potassium (K),
and S, and of micronutrients including Fe and manganese (Mn),
will depend on the species composition. Higher nutrient concen-
trations in dead material may stimulate mineralization rates, in
this way providing a positive feed-back (Hobbie, 1992; Aerts and
Chapin, 2000). This will, however, depend on the nature of nutri-
ent limitation of the decomposition rate, which can be limited
either by N, P, or both. Although the C:N ratio of organic matter
has traditionally been used as a quantitative indication of (poten-
tial) decomposition rates, the C:P ratio may be a better indicator
for locations that show a high availability of N, e.g., as a result
of high atmospheric N input. However, studies on the effect of
organic matter quality on decomposition and nutrient mineraliza-
tion rates still show much inconsistency (Kalbitz et al., 2000). Note
that rates of vegetation growth and microbial decomposition do
not necessarily have to be limited by the same element. Plants are
able to actively forage for nutrients, leading to selective root place-
ment at spots enriched with nutrients (Hutchings and De Kroon,
1994; Hodge, 2004). In this way, not only nutrient availability and
its heterogeneity, but also traits and plasticity of plants with respect
to root foraging strategies will drive below-ground competition,
vegetation diversity, and biomass production (De Kroon et al.,
2012). This means that there is a complex interaction between
plant species composition and microbial communities including
fungi, bacteria, and archaea. For technical reasons related to root
sampling, many interesting characteristics of this hidden, but very
important aspect of plant communities (Waisel et al., 1996) are yet
to be discovered. New techniques including soil scanning in large-
scale rhizotrons (Figure 2) enable an underground view on plant
communities, which can be coupled to, e.g., ﬂuorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) techniques visualizing the locations of dif-
ferent microbial groups or species, microarrays to rapidly check for
known sequences, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) based com-
munity analyses and metagenomics (full community genomics),
to gain insight into rhizospheric microbe–plant communities and
interactions. Next generation DNA sequencing technologies can
be expected to make rhizosphere community analyses much faster,
cheaper, and easier, enabling for instance multiple comparisons
between different plant species in one vegetation type, and between
conspeciﬁcs under different environmental conditions.

The three elements that we focus on here, N, S, and Fe, all are
essential nutrients for the metabolism and growth of both plants

FIGURE 2 | The Nijmegen Phytotron facility, and a scan image of the
root scanner in transparent tubes in the soil (inlay).

and microorganisms. These elements are predominantly taken up
by plants from the soil via the roots, as only few plant species may
take up high amounts of nutrients via the leaves. An exception are
aquatic macrophytes that take up nutrients from the surface water,
especially when soil concentrations are low or when the plants lack
roots. On a quantitative base, N is the most important macronu-
trient (Marschner, 1995; Larcher, 2003), essential for the synthesis
of amino acids, amines, and peptides (including proteins). As the
availability and uptake of this element is a major factor limiting
biomass production in many ecosystems (Vitousek and Howarth,
1991; Larcher, 2003), its availability and mobility are important
drivers of species composition and biodiversity. Enhanced N avail-
ability changes biodiversity and heterogeneity, both above-ground
and below-ground. Due to selective root placement, spots enriched
in N contain more roots. For plants including Fabaceae (formerly
called Leguminosae), the symbiotic relation with rhizobial strains
of a variety of genera of Proteobacteria including Rhizobium, is
of vital importance for atmospheric dinitrogen (N2) ﬁxation in
soils that are low in N (Dakora and Phillips, 2002). The symbionts
are attracted by the exudation of phenolics and aldonic acids from
roots. For non-Fabaceous plants including the tree and shrub gen-
era Alnus, Casuarina, Ceanothus, and Myrica, atmospheric N2 is
supplied by Frankia Actinobacteria. The cyanobacterial symbiont
Anabaena provides atmospheric N to waterferns (Azolla spp.). The
yearly amounts of nitrogen provided by these symbionts can be
−1 or more, which is similar to the highest
as high as 100 kg N ha
anthropogenic airborne N ﬂuxes reported. As a result, these plant
species have a strong competitive advantage over other species
under N limitation, especially under riparian conditions with cou-
pled nitriﬁcation (during dry episodes) and denitriﬁcation (of
generated nitrate, during wet episodes). Note that N limitation
will also occur when P levels are high and P is no longer limiting
biomass production, which explains the dominance of the Azolla–
Anabaena complex and free-living N-ﬁxing aquatic cyanobacteria
under high P loads (Lamers et al., 2002b). In addition to the
above-mentioned “usual suspects,” a large phylogenetic variety of

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 156 | 3

Lamers et al.

N–S–Fe microbiology and plant ecology

free-living and symbiotic microorganisms including other Pro-
teobacteria, Archaea, and Verrucomicrobia is now known to be
able to ﬁx atmospheric dinitrogen gas (Kneip et al., 2007; Khadem
et al., 2010; Reed et al., 2011).

Although less frequently, low availability of S may also hamper
plant growth (Dijkshoorn and van Wijk, 1967; Marschner, 1995).
Like N, S is a vital constituent for protein structuring. While N
and S are macronutrients, Fe is considered a micronutrient (aver-
age N:S:Fe in plant shoots is 500:15:1 on a molar basis; Marschner,
1995). The availability of Fe is essential for photosynthesis, as it
is a cofactor for chlorophyll synthesis. During anaerobic soil con-
ditions in wetlands, Fe is mainly present as Fe2+
as a result of
microbial Fe reduction, and its mobility and availability are rela-
tively high. This may even lead to Fe toxicity (see below). During
aerobic conditions, Fe is oxidized to Fe3+
and a large part precipi-
tates as hydroxides and oxyhydroxides, and Fe acquisition becomes
hampered. To acquire Fe from Fe(III) compounds, plants have
developed different mechanisms through evolution that facilitate
uptake (Jones, 1998; Dakora and Phillips, 2002; Hell and Stephan,
2003). Graminaceous plants exude metal chelating amino acids
called phytosiderophores, which are also important for the uptake
of other micronutrient metals such as Mn, zinc (Zn), and copper
(Cu). Non-graminaceous monocots, dicots, and bacteria release
protons in the rhizosphere, or exude reducing and chelating com-
pounds such as phenolics (Marschner, 1995; Schmidt, 1999). Soil
Fe is, however, also strongly linked to phosphorus (P) availability,
as both elements form a variety of chemical complexes, making
P less available. Therefore, mechanisms to increase Fe availability
may also be regarded as P mobilizing mechanisms (Bolan, 1991),
next to the infection with mycorrhizal fungi.

Plants and microbes may compete for N, S, and P, depending on
their relative availabilities (Hobbie, 1992), and competition mod-
els should therefore include this competition, yet few studies have.
Especially at low nutrient levels, microbial uptake may signiﬁcantly
hamper nutrient uptake by plants, and hence reduce growth rates.
As a result, they may even be able to increase the competitive
advantage of slow-growing plant species and inﬂuence biodiver-
sity. Not only competition at short-term, but also release rates
from the microbial pool should be accounted for. As an example,
selective root placement may be much slower than microbial colo-
nization of a nutrient-rich patch, but subsequent release of N and
P from the microbial pool can be effectively intercepted by these
roots (Hodge et al., 2000).

BELOW-GROUND CARBON TURNOVER
The die-off of plant rhizomes, roots and above-ground litter,
and their shredding by macro-, meio-, and microfauna strongly
determines the availability of organic substrates for fermenta-
tion and the availability of organic electron donors (e.g., lactate,
acetate, succinate, propionate) for a variety of microbial anaer-
obic and aerobic redox processes. The decomposability of dead
plant material greatly varies between species, not only due to
varying N and P concentrations and pH, but also as a result of
varying concentrations of recalcitrant compounds such as lignin,
and of potentially toxic secondary metabolites including other
phenolic compounds and alkaloids. Consequently, plant species

composition of a vegetation type has a great impact on decom-
position rates and nutrient cycling (Hobbie, 1992). Decompo-
sition rates of graminoid species such as grasses (Gramineae)
and sedges (Cyperaceae) are, for instance, much faster than those
of peat mosses (Sphagnum), which contain high concentrations
of polyphenolics and pectin-like polysaccharides (Verhoeven and
Toth, 1995; Hajek et al., 2011). Even though net primary produc-
tion of Sphagnum can, for instance, not compete with the highest
production rates of vascular plants, low decomposition rates may
still lead to fast peat accumulation. Long term accumulation rates
may, however, differ from present-day rates depending on chang-
ing balances between production and decay rates (Clymo et al.,
1998; Wieder et al., 2009). Next to species effects on dead organic
matter (OM), microbial breakdown can also vary within one par-
ticular species. High atmospheric deposition rates of N may, for
instance, decrease the concentration of polyphenols in Sphagnum
peat and concomitantly increase decomposition rates, with con-
sequences for net C sequestration (Bragazza and Freeman, 2007).
The actual decomposition rates are regulated by the interaction
between the nutrient (N, P) concentrations in the OM, recalci-
trant or toxic compounds, and soil conditions. Peat accumulation
(i.e., sequestration of atmospheric C) depends on the precarious
balance between production and decomposition, and high pro-
duction rates are generally coupled to higher decomposition rates
as a result of organic matter quality.

Phenolic compounds have been shown to block the decom-
position in peatlands to a large extent by inhibiting the activ-
ity of various crucial microbial enzymes in carbon transforma-
tion (Freeman et al., 2001). Oxygen intrusion during low water
tables activates phenol oxidase activity, lowering phenol con-
centrations, and thereby stimulating overall decomposition. In
addition, oxygen acts as the most favorable electron acceptor, stim-
ulating decomposition rates by a factor of two or more. ROL
from roots can be expected to have the same impact. A spec-
tacular example is the large-scale rhizosphere oxidation by the
vascular peatland plant species Astelia pumila and Donatia fasci-
cularis, that may appear miniscule in stature above-ground, but
possess extensive root systems that strongly stimulate decompo-
sition rates to a depth of more than 1 m (Fritz et al., 2011). As
a result of low nutrient levels in the pristine Patagonian peat-
lands where these species occur, carbon is preferentially allocated
to root production. The strong soil oxygenation also nulliﬁes
methane emission by the inhibition of methanogenic commu-
nities and/or the stimulation of methanotrophic communities. In
oligotrophic lakes, small-leaved (so-called isoetid) species with rel-
atively large root systems have a similar effect on decomposition
rates (Smolders et al., 2002). The growth rates of facultatively aer-
obic, heterotrophic bacteria including Pseudomonas chlororaphis
are signiﬁcantly enhanced under ﬂooded conditions by ROL of
emergent macrophytes such as Glyceria maxima and Oryza sativa
(Bodelier et al., 1997, 1998), demonstrating the strong effect root
systems may have on microbial composition and processes.

MICROBIAL SOIL ACIDIFICATION AFFECTS PLANTS
The cycling of N, Fe, and S in the soil is not only determined to a
large extent by microbial activity, but also by uptake, release, and
transformations of species of these elements due to root activity.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Terrestrial Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 156 | 4

Lamers et al.

N–S–Fe microbiology and plant ecology

−
−
3 , and OH

Plants can change the pH of the rhizosphere by the exudation of
protons, organic acids, HCO
(Dakora and Phillips,
2002). By the excretion of root exudates, acids, and oxygen, plants
control microbial resource availability, concentrations of oxygen as
a potential toxin and electron acceptor, and pH in the rhizosphere.
As a result of ROL or temporary water table draw-down (e.g., in
riparian wetlands), pH can be strongly lowered due to microbial
and chemical oxidation of N, S, Fe, generating acid (oxygen liter-
ally means acid generator). This may even lower the availability
and uptake of redox-sensitive metals (e.g., Fe, Mn) or increase
the availability and uptake of pH-sensitive metals that are not
redox-sensitive (e.g., aluminum, Al). The pH change by the oxida-
tion of ammonium and nitrite by nitrifying proteobacteria (e.g.,
the genera Nitrosomonas, Nitrosospira, Nitrobacter, Nitrospira) or
crenarchaea, reduced S including sulﬁdes to S and SO2−
4 by S oxi-
dizing proteobacteria (e.g., Beggiatoa, Thiobacillus), and ferrous
iron to ferric iron (e.g., Gallionella ferruginea) not only inﬂuences
microbial communities, but also plant communities. Most plant
species are sensitive to low soil pH values (pH <5), not only by
direct effects on membrane physiology, but also indirectly, by Al
toxicity and by the impairment of the uptake of potassium (K),
calcium (Ca), and magnesium (Mg; Marschner, 1995). Although
Al is one of the most common metals in soils, its toxicity is com-
pletely dependent on its mobility, which is strongly regulated by
pH. The pH in the rhizosphere may be much lower than that of the
bulk soil. The regulation of pH is a combined effect of ROL activ-
ity, rhizospheric oxygen consumption, proton loss by roots (e.g.,
+
for NH
4 uptake), availability of electron donors like N, Fe, and
S, and the acid neutralizing capacity (ANC) of the soil. Depend-
ing on the pH range (from 8 down to 3), ANC is provided by
bicarbonate and carbonate, exchange of base cations such as Ca
and Mg at soil cation exchange sites, and the dissolution of Fe-
and Al-oxides and hydroxides and silicates. Where bulk soil will be
buffered under anaerobic conditions by the microbial reduction
of N, manganese (Mn), Fe, and S (all generating alkalinity, i.e.,
consuming H
), local oxidation by ROL will reverse this process.
As such, high ROL activity can mimic the lowering of the water
table in wetlands at a very local, but crucial scale. Under ﬂooded
or waterlogged conditions, most bulk soils are buffered around
−
pH 6–6.5 by the CO2 - HCO
3 buffering mechanism. As microbial
decomposition (generating inorganic carbon) is generally coupled
−
to microbial mineralization of P and N, microbially derived HCO
3
concentrations can even be used as a proxy for nutrient availability
in freshwater and marine soils (Van der Heide et al., 2010).

+

NITROGEN: A MOBILE NUTRIENT THAT MAY BECOME TOXIC
Either the availability of electron donors or the availability of elec-
tron acceptors determines the nature and rates of microbial redox
reactions in wetland soils. In the rhizosphere of plants showing
high rates of ROL, oxidation of N, S, and Fe takes place (Bode-
lier, 2003). This implies that there will be a strong gradient in
microbial communities at the micro-scale, from close to the roots
+
toward the bulk soil. Ammonium (NH
4 ) produced in the bulk soil
−
−
is oxidized to nitrate/nitrite (NO
2 ) by N oxidizing com-
3
munities, including Crenarchaeota (Leininger et al., 2006; Jetten,
2008). Such local redox processes create a variety of N species,
which have effect on plant performance. Although plants can use

/NO

+
4 : NO

+
4 uptake, although NH

+
−
oxidized inorganic N (NO
3 ), reduced inorganic N (NH
4 ), and
organic N (amino acids) as N source, plants adapted to soils with
+
low pH and low redox potential prefer NH
4 (Marschner, 1995).
For plants adapted to soils with higher pH, it has been shown that
+
NH
4 can be toxic to a variety of plant species, mainly by leading to
nutrient imbalances (K, Mg deﬁciency) or internal acidiﬁcation in
−
+
roots. Aquatic macrophytes prefer either NH
3 , depend-
4 or NO
ing on the pH of the surface water where the species mainly occurs
(Roelofs et al., 1984). Most rooting wetland plants are evolution-
+
ary adapted to NH
4 may also be taken up
−
after rhizospheric oxidation to NO
3 . Plants of riparian wetlands,
+
−
however, are known to face problems at a high NH
3 ratio
4 : NO
in acidiﬁed soil during lower water tables in the growing season
(Lucassen et al., 2003; Van den Berg et al., 2005). Increased anthro-
+
pogenic NH
4 inputs, as a result of ammonia (NH3) emissions in
regions with intensive cattle breeding, have for this reason led to
the decrease of sensitive species and loss of biodiversity (Stevens
et al., 2011). In riparian wetlands with a low soil ANC, acidiﬁcation
−
due to high N and S inputs increases the NH
3 ratio due to a
decrease of the activity of N oxidizers. In soils that have been acidic
for longer time, nitriﬁcation rates may be higher due to the devel-
opment of acid-resistant N reducers (De Boer and Kowalchuk,
2001). In soils with a high pH (>8.5), a signiﬁcant proportion
4 (ammonium) is present as ammonia (NH3; pK= 9.25),
+
of NH
which is highly toxic to plant roots (Schenk and Wehrmann, 1979).
Similarly, high pH values of surface water, e.g., as a result of aquatic
photosynthesis (pH >10), can lead to NH3 toxicity to submerged
vegetation and fauna in N loaded aquatic systems (Thurston et al.,
1981). The actual toxicity of N depends on its accumulation in
plant tissues and becomes higher under P-limited conditions due
to extra accumulation. By the production of N-rich free amino
acids, plants are able to detoxify excess internal N, but only to a
certain level (Tomassen et al., 2003).

−
2 by
increased nitriﬁcation rates in the rhizosphere may raise denitri-
ﬁcation in the anaerobic bulk soil the root zone with sufﬁcient
oxygen supply (Reddy et al., 1989; Arth et al., 1998). In addi-
tion, higher rates of anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox)
or dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium (DNRA) can be
expected to increase at the oxic/anoxic interface (Jetten et al., 1998;
+
Burgin and Hamilton, 2007; Hu et al., 2011). The uptake of NH
4 or
−
NO
3 by plant roots may, however, lower denitriﬁcation rates in
freshwater and marine wetlands by reducing the N pool (Bodelier
et al., 1996; Welsh et al., 2000). For vegetation, the rates of these N
conversions are important, as most of the gaseous reaction prod-
ucts (N2 and N2O) leave the soil compartment and are no longer
available (except through microbial N2 reﬁxation). N2 produc-
tion by N reduction is strongly reduced by lowering of pH from
7 to 4, but the (net) N2O:N2 production ratio shows an exponen-
tial increase in this transect as a result of the inhibition of N2O
reduction at low pH (Van den Heuvel et al., 2011). The heterogene-
ity with respect to N2O emission rates seems to be explained by
differences in soil structure affecting gas transport rather than by
microbial composition (Van den Heuvel et al., 2009), and probably
also by vegetation composition. As such, N biogeochemistry is far
more complex and variable than that of P, which is only released
to the atmosphere in very small quantities as phosphine (Wetzel,

It has been shown that increased availability of NO

/NO

−
3

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 156 | 5

Lamers et al.

N–S–Fe microbiology and plant ecology

High inputs of NO

2001). In riparian wetlands, the water table strongly dominates N
cycling and availability. N dynamics are inﬂuenced by microbial
activity at all spatial scales, from the rhizosphere (plant N availabil-
ity) through the community level (competition between species
under N limitation) to the ecosystem level (N exchange with the
surroundings, including the atmosphere). In addition, there is high
variability at the temporal scale, mostly coupled to seasonal change
and water table ﬂuctuations (Neubauer et al., 2005).

−
3 in wetland soils are known to inhibit
microbial Fe reduction for thermodynamical reasons (hence N
reducers outcompete Fe reducers). This may not only lead to Fe
deﬁciency in vegetation (Smolders and Roelofs, 1993), but also
to reduced mobilization and availability of P in the rhizosphere
(Lucassen et al., 2004). A signiﬁcant part of soil P is sequestered by
Fe, and ferrous (Fe2+
) iron phosphate complexes are more soluble
than ferric (Fe3+
) iron phosphate compounds (Richardson, 1985;
Scheffer and Schachtschabel, 2002). For the vegetation involved,
increased N inputs may have contrasting effects, depending on
the actual nutrient limiting the rate of biomass production. For
N-limited systems, biomass production will increase and plant
biodiversity will generally decrease by out-competition of slow-
growing species. For P-limited systems, productivity may become
lower and biodiversity become increased as a result of lower Fe
reduction rates, leading to lower P availability. The latter is the
−
reason why P-loaded lakes have even been treated with NO
3 in
order to change the eutrophic state, dominated by algae, to a less
eutrophic state in which underwater vegetation receives more light
(Ripl, 2010).

TOXICITY OF S AND Fe, AND THEIR INTERACTIONS WITH P
AVAILABILITY
Fe reduction by bacteria, including sulfate reducing bacteria (e.g.,
Geobacter sulfurreducens), and archaea converts ferric compounds
into ferrous iron (Lovley and Phillips, 1988; Coleman et al., 1993;
Lovley et al., 2004; Weiss et al., 2004), which is much more mobile
and is preferentially taken up by plants. The reduction of ferric
iron, produced as a result of ROL, may suppress other anaer-
obic processes including methanogenesis (Frenzel et al., 1999).
Although Fe is an essential micronutrient, high levels of Fe may
become phytotoxic. This toxicity may even become visible above-
ground as necrotic spots on the leaves of wetland plants (Lucassen
et al., 2000). The oxidation of Fe by ROL may detoxify Fe due to
the microbial or chemical precipitation of Fe hydroxides in the soil
(Armstrong, 1978; Bienfait, 1989). However, excess Fe in combina-
tion with relatively low ROL can generate problems for plants due
to Fe plaque formation on the root surface or by Fe deposition in
the root apoplast (Taylor et al., 1984; Smolders and Roelofs, 1996;
Emerson et al., 1999). These incrustations include Fe oxides (e.g.,
ferrihydrite), Fe oxyhydroxides (e.g., goethite), Fe carbonates (e.g.,
siderite), and Fe phosphates (e.g., vivianite), microbially derived
organic-metal complexes, bacterial bioﬁlms, and co-deposition of
other metals such as manganese, copper, zinc, and lead (Batty
et al., 2000; Hansel et al., 2001). Root physiology can be negatively
affected by this plaque that acts as a physical barrier and interferes
with P metabolism (Snowden and Wheeler, 1995). An interesting
aspect of Fe hydroxide precipitation on microbes is the fact that
they act as nanowires shuttling electrons in microbial communities

(Lovley, 2006; Rabaey et al., 2007), and also electrically connect
them to plant roots.

The activity of sulfate reducing prokaryotes (SRP) is also of high
relevance to vegetation development. Dissimilatory sulfate reduc-
ers include both Bacteria (e.g., Desulfovibrio, Desulfobacter) and
Archaea (e.g., Archaeoglobus) producing sulﬁde (H2S). Whereas
oxidized states of S (SO2−
4 , S) are hardly toxic to plants, H2S is
highly toxic by inhibiting the activity of cytochrome c oxidase in
mitochondria, leading to a subsequent blocking of energy produc-
tion in roots, and by inhibiting other metal containing enzymes
(Koch et al., 1990; Raven and Scrimgeour, 1997). The rhizospheric
oxidation of S (Figure 3) by microbial activity of S oxidizers
including Beggiatoa detoxiﬁes H2S, and ROL activity of plants
will therefore moderate the sensitivity of plants to sulﬁde. All three
, pK1 = 7.2;
pH-dependent species of sulﬁde (H2S, HS
pK2 = 13.7) seem to be equally toxic to plants, but for most anaer-
−
obic soils the gaseous H2S will be prevailing due to HCO
3 - CO2
buffering around pH 6–6.5. For marine wetlands receiving sufﬁ-
cient organic matter to keep electron donor concentrations high,
H2S production affects the growth of marine and brackish water
macrophytes in the millimolar range. The phytotoxin is known
to hamper the establishment and growth of the two main man-
grove genera Avicennia and Rhizophora (McKee et al., 1988) and
of seagrasses including Thalassia testudinum and Zostera marina
(Frederiksen et al., 2006; Koch et al., 2007; Holmer et al., 2009).
Fluctuations in ROL of seagrass plants lead to low H2S concentra-
tions during daytime and increased concentrations during night-
time. At the end of the growing season decreasing ROL, higher
microbial O2 consumption and H2S toxicity in concert induce the
die-off of vegetation in brackish wetlands (Azzoni et al., 2001).

, and S2−

−

4

4

4

Although S concentrations are generally lower in freshwater
wetlands, high input rates due to volcanic activity or other geolog-
ical conditions, and as a result of S pollution of the atmosphere,
groundwater, and surface water have raised SO2−
concentrations
at a global scale. In anaerobic freshwater wetland soils, SO2−
reduction may therefore become a dominant process next to Fe
reduction (Lamers et al., 1998), while its rate can be determined
by the availability of either electron donors or SO2−
(Lamers et al.,
2002a). A recent review showed that up to 50% of the anaerobic
decomposition in freshwater wetlands can be attributed to SO2−
reduction (Pester et al., 2012). Sulﬁde concentrations in the range
−1 are known to be toxic to the roots of fresh-
of 10–100 μmol L
water plants (Tanaka et al., 1968; Armstrong et al., 1996; Smolders
and Roelofs, 1996; Lamers et al., 1998; Geurts et al., 2009). Like for
marine plants, H2S toxicity to roots can be prevented by the activ-
ity of sulfur bacteria using O2 from the roots (Joshi and Hollis,
1977). In addition, volatile S compounds including H2S and, after
its methylation, dimethylsulﬁde, and methanethiol are released to
the atmosphere (Lomans et al., 2002). As the thermodynamical
characteristics of Fe reduction and S reduction do not differ very
much, these conversions take place in the same soils, and FeSx
precipitation occurs (Lamers et al., 2002a). By this sequestration
the concentration of both potential phytotoxins is reduced (Van
der Welle et al., 2006), and plants may even become Fe deﬁcient
(Smolders and Roelofs, 1993).

4

Already in the 1950s of the former century, the prominent role
of S in aquatic nutrient biogeochemistry was described (Ohle,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Terrestrial Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 156 | 6

Lamers et al.

N–S–Fe microbiology and plant ecology

1954). As SO2−
4 will serve as a terminal electron acceptor, it will
speed up overall anaerobic decomposition. Increased inputs of
SO2−
4 may additionally mobilize Fe bound P in the soil, due to its
reduction to H2S competing for Fe binding sites (Sperber, 1958;
Caraco et al., 1989; Roden and Edmonds, 1997; Lamers et al., 1998;
Smolders et al., 2006) or mobilization of P from polyphosphates by
sulfur bacteria (Golterman, 2001). Whether or not sulfate-induced
eutrophication occurs, depends on the levels of P in the sediment
and its type of binding (Lamers et al., 2002a; Geurts et al., 2008;
Loeb et al., 2008).

The large spatial and temporal heterogeneity in O2 supply (as
determined by the balance between local ROL and local oxygen
consumption) enables the coupling of oxidation and reduction of
the same element (S, Fe, N) at a small-scale in the rhizosphere. In
this way, consortia of microorganisms using the same element can
coexist in wetland soils, but the directions of the transformations
are governed by plant physiology and soil characteristics.

In addition to the use of organic electron donors, the reduc-
tion of one of the three elements can be coupled to the oxidation
of the other (chemolithotrophy). Sulﬁde, both dissolved and as
FeSx deposits in the soil can be used as an electron donor by pro-
teobacteria such as Thiobacillus denitriﬁcans coupled to the use
−
of NO
3 (Haaijer et al., 2006, 2007; Burgin and Hamilton, 2008).
−
Even in peat soils rich in organic compounds, NO
3 pulses are still
able to stimulate to chemolithotrophic denitriﬁcation while organ-
otrophic denitriﬁcation rates were very high (Lamers, unpublished
results). For plants, this means that the detoxiﬁcation of sulﬁde
extends beyond the direct inﬂuence of ROL, and that S-rich sit-
uations may show lower N-availability. At the landscape scale,
N pollution of the catchment will mobilize S from subsoil FeSx
deposits, and the resulting S pollution of groundwater will lead to
P pollution in wetlands where this polluted water is discharged.
In this way, there is a microbial “S bridge” between N and P at
this hydrological scale (Smolders et al., 2010). In wetland soils,
partial H2S oxidation to S0 and pyrite (FeS2) can also be coupled
to Fe reduction (Thamdrup et al., 1994), with consequences for
the availability and toxicity of both elements to plants, and for the
availability of P.

GLOBAL CHANGES OF N, S, AND Fe BIOGEOCHEMISTRY
As a result of anthropogenic forcing, the input of all three elements,
N, S, and P, into wetlands has strongly changed at a global scale
(Schlesinger, 1997; Vitousek et al., 1997). As a result of urban-
ization, industrialization, and intensive farming, surface waters
of many wetlands have become polluted by N and P (Carpenter
et al., 1998). In contrast to P, increased N inputs (NOx and NHy)
are also the result of atmospheric deposition, which has strongly
increased in industrialized regions and in regions with intensive
farming (Vitousek et al., 1997; Bobbink et al., 1998). Whereas S
deposition rates in Europe have been reduced by 80–90% as a
result of legislation, they are strongly increasing in other parts of
the world. In fast-developing regions such as Asia (particularly
China), SOx emissions may soon equal the combined emissions of
North America and Europe as a result of the large-scale use of coal
as a fuel (Shah et al., 2000). In addition to N and S pollution, many
wetlands have been drained for land use change (Lamers et al., in
press), which has not only resulted in the loss of wetlands, but also

FIGURE 3 | Radial oxygen loss (ROL) of Juncus acutiﬂorus is shown by
the oxidation of added H2S in an anaerobic rhizotron with living plants
and natural organic wetland soil. This was conﬁrmed by the use of
oxygen microelectrodes. Yellow-whitish haloes of S0 and S precipitates have
been formed by microbial S oxidation (Lamers and Janssen, unpublished
results).

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 156 | 7

Lamers et al.

N–S–Fe microbiology and plant ecology

in signiﬁcant changes in the hydrochemistry of wetlands that have
not suffered from complete dehydration. Lowering of ground-
water tables, also due to the extraction of drinking water and

industrial process water, has decreased the inﬂuence of ground-
water in wetlands to a large extent. As a result, the discharge of
anaerobic, Fe-rich groundwater has decreased. This means that

FIGURE 4 | Microbe–plant interactions in the biogeochemistry of N, S,
and Fe in wetland soils. Losses of volatile N and S compounds to the
atmosphere also occur through plant tissues, which has not been depicted
here. See text for further explanation. DNRA, dissimilatory nitrate reduction to

ammonium; SR, sulfate reduction; FeR, iron reduction, NOX, N oxidation to
NOx, SOX, S oxidation; FeOX, Fe oxidation; DN, denitriﬁcation; Nﬁx, N2
ﬁxation; Anammox, anaerobic ammonium oxidation; ROL, radial oxygen loss
(by roots).

FIGURE 5 | Four ﬁlters created bymicrobial activities related to N, S, and
Fe biogeochemistry inﬂuence the occurrence and functioning of wetland

plant species, and their interspeciﬁc competition. A positive inﬂuence on
the parameter mentioned on the ﬁlter frame is denoted by +, a negative by −.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Terrestrial Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 156 | 8

Lamers et al.

N–S–Fe microbiology and plant ecology

the role of Fe in regulating vegetation composition, P availability,
and sulﬁde detoxiﬁcation in wetlands has been changed (Lamers
et al., in press). In combination with increased inputs of N, S, and
P, large-scale changes of wetland communities (microbial commu-
nities and their vegetation) have resulted, and ecosystem services
such as C sequestration, ﬂood protection, water storage, and bio-
diversity have been altered. The resilience of ecosystems to global
change depends to a large extent on the responses microbial com-
munities and their positive and negative feed-backs with respect
to these changes. For this reason, changes in microbial compo-
sition and activity should be incorporated in ecosystem models
(Treseder et al., 2011).

GENERAL CONCLUSION
The biogeochemical cycling of N, S, and Fe shows strong inter-
actions in microbe–plant communities at various levels, from
rhizosphere to landscape (Figure 4). The composition and activ-
ity of microbial communities dictate vegetation composition to

a large extent by their strong effects on four important drivers
(below-ground environmental ﬁlters) of the growth, composi-
tion, and biodiversity of wetland vegetation, namely root oxygen
availability, phytotoxicity, pH, and nutrient availability (Figure 5).
Microbe–plant interactions provide challenging and complex new
topics for highly interesting ecological research carried out by
a consortium of specialists. In addition to correlative research,
experimental research in the ﬁeld and lab is essential to deter-
mine causal relationships. The fast development of new and much
cheaper molecular techniques opens up a whole new world of
rhizosphere research, in which basic and applied ecological issues
on plant–microbe communities (Table 1) can be addressed that
were impossible or much more difﬁcult in the recent past. In addi-
tion, new students should be challenged and trained to address
ecological topics in this multi-disciplinary way. Especially on a
rapidly changing globe, it is vital that both microbiologists and
plant ecologists meet in the hidden half of plant communities to
better understand ecosystem changes at multiple levels.

Table 1 | Examples of fundamental and applied ecological challenges regarding plant–microbe communities in wetlands (and other ecosystem
types).

LANDSCAPE/ECOSYSTEM
Interrelations among geohydrology, microbial communities, and vegetation development
Biogeochemical controls of carbon dynamics (primary production–decomposition feed-backs)
Impacts of anthropogenic hydrological changes (e.g., change from discharge of Fe-rich groundwater to recharge) on the interactions between microbial
communities and vegetation
Pollution effects (e.g., N and S pollution groundwater, P pollution surface water, increased airborne N and S) on plant–microbe interactions
Climate change (e.g., changes in precipitation and temperature patterns), effects on landscape biogeochemistry
Microbial ecology in conservation biology
Microbial ecology in restoration ecology
ECOSYSTEM
Role of microorganisms in vegetation succession and development
Role of vegetation in the succession and dynamics of microbial communities
Role of soil heterogeneity (e.g., nutrients, organic substrates, toxins, temperature, electron acceptors) in the functioning of plant–microbe communities,
including the competition among microorganisms
Biodiversity in plant–microbe communities: niche differentiation, disturbance, ﬂuctuation, neutral theory
Biodiversity of plant–microbe communities and ecosystem functioning and resilience
Microbial consortia in three-dimensional rhizosphere gradients
Rhizosphere community dynamics (e.g., diurnal, seasonal)
Plant host speciﬁcity of microbial communities and symbionts (e.g., comparison of species, same species under different environmental conditions)
Competition among plants based on their microbial communities (e.g., rhizosphere community as a plant trait)
Competition among microbes as a result of plant community changes
Competition for nutrients between microbes and plants, community effects
Dispersal of microbes and plants
Climate change effects (temperature, rainfall, CO2) on plant–microbe interactions
Optimization of water puriﬁcation in constructed wetlands based on the manipulation of soil–plant–microbe interactions
ECOPHYSIOLOGY
Microbial controls on nutrient and water uptake by plants (including costs and beneﬁts of mycorrhiza)
Gas (e.g., CO2, CH4, N2, N2O) exchange in the plant–microbe continuum; effects of methane oxidizing symbionts on photosynthesis (e.g., Sphagnum
mosses)
Selective root placement and microbial communities
Dynamics in anaerobiosis and microbe–plant interactions
Microbial manipulation of phytotoxic compounds (including agricultural crops, e.g., H2S oxidation by symbiotic S oxidizers)
Generation of electricity in constructed wetlands

In addition to correlative research, experimental research in the ﬁeld and lab is essential to determine causal relationships. The fast development of powerful and less
expensive molecular techniques will strongly facilitate comparative and experimental community studies.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 156 | 9

Lamers et al.

N–S–Fe microbiology and plant ecology

REFERENCES
Aerts, R., and Chapin, F. S. (2000).
The mineral nutrition of wild
plants revisited: a re-evaluation of
processes and patterns. Adv. Ecol.
Res. 30, 1–67.

Armstrong, J., Afreen-Zobayed, F., and
Armstrong, W. (1996). Phragmites
die-back: sulphide- and acetic acid-
induced bud and root death, ligniﬁ-
cations, and blockages within aera-
tion and vascular systems. New Phy-
tol. 134, 601–614.

Armstrong, W. (1978). “Root aeration
in the wetland condition,” in Plant
Life in Anaerobic Environments, eds
D. D. Hook and R. M. M. Crawford
(Ann Arbor, MI: Ann Arbor Science
Publishers), 269–297.

Arth, I., Frenzel, P., and Conrad, R.
(1998). Denitriﬁcation coupled to
nitriﬁcation in the rhizosphere of
rice. Soil Biol. Biochem. 30, 509–515.
Azzoni, R., Giordani, C., Bartoli,
M., Welsh, D. T., and Viaroli, P.
(2001). Iron, sulphur and phospho-
rus cycling in the rhizosphere sedi-
ments of a eutrophic Ruppia cirrhosa
meadow (Valle Smarlacca, Italy). J.
Sea Res. 45, 15–26.

Batty, L. C., Baker, A. J. M., Wheeler,
B. D., and Curtis, C. D. (2000).
The effect of pH and plaque on the
uptake of Cu and Mn in Phragmites
australis (Cav.) Trin ex. Steudel. Ann.
Bot. 86, 647–653.

Bienfait, H. F. (1989). Prevention of
stress in iron-metabolism of plants.
Acta Bot. 38, 105–129.

Bobbink, R., Hornung, M., and Roelofs,
J. G. M. (1998). The effects of air-
borne nitrogen pollutants on species
diversity in natural and semi-natural
European vegetation. J. Ecol. 86,
717–738.

Bodelier, P. L. E. (2003). “Interactions
between oxygen-releasing roots and
microbial processes in ﬂooded soils
and sediments,” in Root Ecology, eds
H. De Kroon and E. J. W. Visser
(Berlin: Springer-Verlag), 331–362.
(2011). Toward
and
ecosys-
2:80.

understanding, managing,
protecting
tems.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2011.00080

Bodelier, P. L. E.

Front. Microbiol.

microbial

Bodelier, P. L. E., Duyts, H., Blom, C. W.
P. M., and Laanbroek, H. J. (1998).
Interactions between nitrifying and
denitrifying bacteria in gnotobiotic
microcosms planted with the emer-
gent macrophyte Glyceria maxima.
FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 25, 63–78.

Bodelier, P. L. E., Libochant, J. A.,
Blom, C. W. P. M., and Laan-
broek, H.
(1996). Dynamics
of nitriﬁcation and denitriﬁcation
in root-oxygenated sediments and

J.

adaptation of ammonia-oxidizing
bacteria to low-oxygen or anoxic
habitats. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
62, 4100–4107.

Bodelier, P. L. E., Sorrell, B., Drake, H.
L., Küsel, K., Hurek, T. P., Reinhold-
Hurek, B., Lovell, C., Megonigal, P.,
and Frenzel, P. (2006). “Ecological
aspects of microbes and microbial
communities inhabiting the rhizos-
phere of wetland plants,” in Wet-
lands as a Natural Resource, Vol.
2, eds R. Bobbink, B. Beltman, J.
T. A. Verhoeven, and D. F Whig-
man (New York: Springer Verlag),
205–238.

Bodelier, P. L. E., Wijlhuizen, A. G.,
Blom, C. W. P. M., and Laanbroek,
H. J. (1997). Effects of photope-
riod on growth of and denitriﬁca-
tion by Pseudomonas chlororaphis in
the root zone of Glyceria maxima,
studied in a gnotobiotic microcosm.
Plant Soil 190, 91–103.

Bolan, N. S. (1991). A critical review
on the role of mycorrhizal fungi in
the uptake of phosphorus by plants.
Plant Soil 134, 189–207.

Boone, R. D., Nadelhoffer, K. J., Canary,
J. D., and Kayeet, J. P. (1998). Roots
exert a strong inﬂuence on the tem-
perature sensitivity of soil respira-
tion. Nature 396, 570–572.

Bragazza, L., and Freeman, C. (2007).
High nitrogen availability reduces
polyphenol
Sphag-
num peat. Sci. Total Environ. 377,
439–443.

content

in

Brune, A., Frenzel, P., and Cypionka, H.
(2000). Life at the oxic-anoxic inter-
face: microbial activities and adap-
tations. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 24,
691–710.

Burgin,A. J., and Hamilton, S. K. (2008).
- production in
NO3 – driven SO42
freshwater ecosystems: implications
for N and S cycling. Ecosystems 11,
908–922.

Burgin,A. J., and Hamilton, S. K. (2007).
Have we overemphasized the role
of denitriﬁcation in aquatic ecosys-
tems? A review of nitrate removal
pathways. Front. Ecol. Environ. 5,
89–96.

Callaway, R. M. (1995). Positive inter-
actions among plants. Bot. Rev. 61,
306–349.

Canadell, J., Jackson, R. B., Ehleringer,
J. R., Mooney, H. A., Sala, O. E.,
and Schulze, E.-D. (1996). Maxi-
mum rooting depth of vegetation
types at the global scale. Oecologia
108, 583–595.

Caraco, N. F., Cole, J. J., and Likens,
G. E. (1989). Evidence for sulphate-
controlled phosphorus release from
sediments of aquatic systems. Nature
341, 316–318.

Carpenter, S. R., Caraco, N. F., Correll,
D. L., Howarth, R. W., Sharpley, A.
N., and Smith, V. H. (1998). Non-
point pollution of surface waters
with phosphorus and nitrogen. Ecol.
Appl. 8, 559–568.

Clymo, R. S., Turunen, J., and Tolonen,
K. (1998). Carbon accumulation in
peatland. Oikos 81, 368–388.

Coleman, M. L., Hedrick, D. B., Lov-
ley, D. R., White, D. C., and Pye, K.
(1993). Reduction of Fe(III) in sed-
iments by sulfate-reducing bacteria.
Nature 361, 436–438.

Colmer, T. D. (2003). Long-distance
transport of gases in plants: a per-
spective on internal aeration and
radial oxygen loss from roots. Plant
Cell Environ. 26, 17–36.

Conrad, R., and Frenzel, P. (2002).
“Flooded soils,” in Encyclopedia
of Environmental Microbiology, ed.
G. Bitton (New York: Wiley),
1316–1333.

Dakora, F. D., and Phillips, D. A.
(2002). Root exudates as media-
tors of mineral acquisition in low-
nutrient environments. Plant Soil
245, 35–47.

De Boer, W., and Kowalchuk, G. A.
(2001). Nitriﬁcation in acid soils:
micro-organisms and mechanisms.
Soil Biol. Biochem. 33, 853–866.

De Kroon, H., Hendriks, M., Van Rui-
jven, J., Ravenek, J., Padilla, F. M.,
Jongejans, E., Visser, E. J. W., and
Mommer, L. (2012). Root responses
to nutrients and soil biota: drivers
of species coexistence and ecosystem
productivity. J. Ecol. 100, 6–15.

Dijkshoorn, W., and van Wijk, A. L.
(1967). Sulphur requirements of
plants as evidenced by sulphur-
nitrogen ratio in organic matter. A
review of published data. Plant Soil
26, 129–157.

Emerson, D., Weiss, J. V., and Mego-
nigal, J. P. (1999). Iron-oxidizing
bacteria are associated with ferric
hydroxide precipitates (Fe-plaque)
on the roots of wetland plants.
Appl.
65,
2758–2761.

Environ. Microbiol.

Frederiksen, M. S., Holmer, M., Borum,
J., and Kennedy, H. (2006). Tempo-
ral and spatial variation of sulﬁde
invasion in eelgrass (Zostera marina)
as reﬂected by its sulfur isotopic
composition. Limnol. Oceanogr. 51,
2308–2318.

Freeman, C., Ostle, N., and Kang, H.
(2001). An enzymic “latch” on a
global carbon store – a shortage of
oxygen locks up carbon in peat-
lands by restraining a single enzyme.
Nature 409, 149–149.

Frenzel, P., Rothfuss, F., and Con-
rad, R. (1992). Oxygen proﬁles and

methane turnover in a ﬂooded rice
mesocosm. Biol. Fert. Soils 14, 84–89.
Frenzel, P., Bosse, U., and Janssen, P. H.
(1999). Rice roots and methanogen-
esis in a paddy soil: ferric iron as an
alternative electron acceptor in the
rooted soil. Soil Biol. Biochem. 31,
421–430.

Fritz, C., Pancotto, V. A., Elzenga, J.
T. M., Visser, E.
J. W., Groot-
jans, A. P., Pol, A., Iturraspe, R.,
Roelofs, J. G. M., and Smolders, A.
J. P. (2011). Zero methane emission
bogs: extreme rhizosphere oxygena-
tion by cushion plants in Patagonia.
New Phytol. 190, 398–408.

Geurts, J. J. M., Sarneel, J. M., Willers,
B. J. C., Roelofs, J. G. M., Ver-
hoeven, J. T. A., and Lamers, L.
P. M. (2009). Interacting effects of
sulphate pollution, sulphide toxic-
ity and eutrophication on vegetation
development in fens: a mesocosm
experiment. Environ. Pollut. 157,
2072–2081.

Geurts, J. J. M., Smolders, A. J. P., Verho-
even, J. T. A., Roelofs, J. G. M., and
Lamers, L. P. M. (2008). Sediment
Fe:PO(4) ratio as a diagnostic and
prognostic tool for the restoration
of macrophyte biodiversity in fen
waters. Freshw. Biol. 53, 2101–2116.
Gilbert, G. S. (2002). Evolutionary ecol-
ogy of plant diseases in natural
ecosystems. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol.
40, 13–43.

Golterman, H. L. (2001). Phosphate
release from anoxic sediments or
“What did Mortimer really write?”
Hydrobiologia 450, 99–106.

Haaijer, S. C. M., Lamers, L. P. M.,
Smolders, A. J. P., Jetten, M. S. M.,
and Op den Camp, H. J. M. (2007).
Iron sulﬁde and pyrite as potential
electron donors for microbial nitrate
reduction in freshwater wetlands.
Geomicrobiol. J. 24, 391–401.

Haaijer, S. C. M., Van der Welle, M. E.
W., Schmid, M. C., Lamers, L. P. M.,
Jetten, M. S. M., and Op den Camp,
H. J. M. (2006). Evidence for the
involvement of betaproteobacterial
Thiobacilli in the nitrate-dependent
oxidation of iron sulﬁde minerals.
FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 58, 439–448.
Hajek, T., Ballance, S., Limpens, J.,
Zijlstra, M., and Verhoeven, J. T.
A. (2011). Cell-wall polysaccharides
play an important role in decay
resistance of Sphagnum and actively
depressed decomposition in vitro.
Biogeochemistry 103, 45–57.

Hansel, C. M., Fendorf, S., Sutton, S.,
and Newville, M. (2001). Character-
ization of Fe plaque and associated
metals on the roots of mine-waste
impacted aquatic plants. Environ.
Sci. Technol. 35, 3863–3868.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Terrestrial Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 156 | 10

Lamers et al.

N–S–Fe microbiology and plant ecology

Hanson, P. J., Edwards, N. T., Garten,
C. T., and Andrews, J. A. (2000).
Separating root and soil microbial
contributions to soil respiration: a
review of methods and observations.
Biogeochemistry 48, 115–146.

Hell, R., and Stephan, U. W. (2003).
Iron uptake, trafﬁcking and home-
ostasis
216,
541–551.

in plants. Planta

Hobbie, S. E. (1992). Effects of plant-
species on nutrient cycling. Trends
Ecol. Evol. (Amst.) 7, 336–339.

Hodge, A. (2004). The plastic plant: root
responses
sup-
plies of nutrients. New Phytol. 162,
9–24.

to heterogeneous

Hodge, A., Robinson, D., and Fitter, A.
(2000). Are microorganisms more
effective than plants at competing
for nitrogen? Trends Plant Sci. 5,
304–308.

Holmer, M., Pedersen, O., Krause-
Jensen, D., Olesen, B., Petersen, M.
H., Schopmeyer, S., Koch, M., Lom-
stein, B. A., and Jensen, H. S. (2009).
Sulﬁde intrusion in the tropical sea-
grasses Thalassia testudinum and
Syringodium ﬁliforme. Estuar. Coast.
Shelf Sci. 85, 319–326.

Hu, B.-I., Rush, D., van der Biezen,
E., Zheng, P., Van Mullekom, M.,
Schouten, S., Damste, J. S. S., Smol-
ders, A. J. P., Jetten, M. S. M.,
and Kartal, B. (2011). New anaero-
bic, ammonium-oxidizing commu-
nity enriched from peat soil. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 77, 966–971.

Huisman, J., and Weissing, F. J. (1999).
Biodiversity of plankton by species
oscillations and chaos. Nature 402,
407–410.

Hutchings, M. J., and De Kroon, H.
(1994). Foraging in plants – the
role of morphological plasticity in
resource acquisition. Adv. Ecol. Res.
25, 159–238.

Jackson, M. B., and Armstrong, W.
(1999). Formation of aerenchyma
and the processes of plant ventila-
tion in relation to soil ﬂooding and
submergence. Plant Biol. 1, 274–287.
Jetten, M. S. M. (2008). The microbial
nitrogen cycle. Environ. Microbiol.
10, 2903–2909.

Jetten, M. S. M., Strous, M., Van de
Pas-Schoonen, K. T., Schalk, J., Van
Dongen, U., Van de Graaf, A. A.,
Logemann, S., Muyzer, G., Van Loos-
drecht, M. C. M., and Kuenen, J. G.
(1998). The anaerobic oxidation of
ammonium. FEMS Microbiol. Rev.
22, 421–437.

Jones, D. L. (1998). Organic acids in the
rhizosphere – a critical review. Plant
Soil 205, 25–44.

Joshi, M. M., and Hollis, J. P. (1977).
Interaction of Beggiatoa and rice

plant – detoxiﬁcation of hydrogen-
sulﬁde in rice rhizosphere. Science
195, 179–180.

Kalbitz, K., Solinger, S., Park, J. H.,
Michalzik, B., and Matzner, E.
(2000). Controls on the dynamics of
dissolved organic matter in soils: a
review. Soil Sci. 165, 277–304.

Khadem, A. F., Pol, A., Jetten, M. S. M.,
and Opden Camp, H. J. M. (2010).
Nitrogen ﬁxation by the verru-
comicrobial methanotroph “Methy-
lacidiphilum fumariolicum” SolV.
Microbiology 156, 1052–1059.

Kneip, C., Lockhart, P., Voß, C., and
Maier, U.-G. (2007). Nitrogen ﬁx-
ation in eukaryotes – new models
for symbiosis. BMC Evol. Biol. 7, 55.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-7-55

Koch, M. S., Mendelssohn, I. A., and
McKee, K. L. (1990). Mechanism
for the hydrogen sulﬁde-induced
growth
in wetland
macrophytes. Limnol. Oceanogr. 35,
399–408.

limitation

Koch, M. S., Schopmeyer, S. A., Kyhn-
Hansen, C., and Madden, C.
J.
(2007). Synergistic effects of high
temperature and sulﬁde on tropi-
cal seagrasses. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol.
341, 91–101.

Laan, P., Berrevoets, M. J., Lythe, S.,
Armstrong, W., and Blom, C. W. P.
M. (1989). Root morphology and
aerenchyma formation as indica-
tors of the ﬂood-tolerance of Rumex
species. J. Ecol. 77, 693–703.

Lambers, H. (1976). Respiration and
NADH-oxidation of
the roots of
ﬂood-tolerant and ﬂood-intolerant
Senecio species as affected by anaer-
obiosis. Physiol. Plant. 37, 117–122.
Lamers, L. P. M., Falla, S. J., Sam-
borska, E. M., Van Dulken, L. A.
R., Van Hengstum, G., and Roelofs,
J. G. M. (2002a). Factors control-
ling the extent of eutrophication and
toxicity in sulfate-polluted freshwa-
ter wetlands. Limnol. Oceanogr. 47,
585–593.

Lamers, L. P. M., Smolders, A. J. P.,
and Roelofs, J. G. M. (2002b). The
restoration of fens in the Nether-
lands. Hydrobiologia 478, 107–130.

Lamers, L. P. M., Tomassen, H. B. M.,
and Roelofs, J. G. M. (1998). Sulfate-
induced eutrophication and phyto-
toxicity in freshwater wetlands. Env-
iron. Sci. Technol. 32, 199–205.

Lamers, L. P. M., Vile, M. A., Grootjans,
A. P., Acreman, M. C., Van Diggelen,
R., Evans, M. G., Richardson, C. J.,
Rochefort, L., Roelofs, J. G. M., and
Smolders, A. J. P. (in press). “The
restoration of fens and fen waters
in agricultural areas: from trial and
error to predictability,” in Restor-
ing Peatlands – Delivering Multiple

Beneﬁts, eds A. Bonn, T. Allott, M.
Evans, H. Joosten, and R. Stoneman
(Cambridge University Press).

Larcher, W. (2003). Physiological Plant

Ecology, 4th Edn. Berlin: Springer.

Leininger,

S., Urich, T.,

Schloter,
M., Schwark, L., Qi, J., Nicol, G.
W., Prosser, J. I., Schuster, S. C.,
and Schleper, C. (2006). Archaea
ammonia-
predominate
among
oxidizing prokaryotes
in soils.
Nature 442, 806–809.

Loeb, R., Lamers, L. P. M., and Roelofs,
J. G. M. (2008). Prediction of phos-
phorus mobilisation in inundated
ﬂoodplain soils. Environ. Pollut. 156,
325–331.

Lomans, B. P., Van der Drift, C., Pol, A.,
and Op den Camp, H. J. M. (2002).
Microbial cycling of volatile organic
sulfur compounds. Cell. Mol. Life Sci.
59, 575–588.

Lovley, D. R. (2006). Bug juice: harvest-
ing electricity with microorganisms.
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 4, 497–508.

Lovley, D. R., Holmes, D. E., and Nevin,
K. P. (2004). Dissimilatory Fe(III)
and Mn(IV) reduction. Adv. Microb.
Physiol. 49, 219–286.

Lovley, D. R., and Phillips, E.

J.
P. (1988). Novel mode of micro-
bial energy-metabolism – organic-
carbon oxidation coupled to dissim-
ilatory reduction of iron and man-
ganese. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 54,
1472–1480.

Lucassen, E. C. H. E. T., Bobbink, R.,
Smolders, A. J. P., Van der Ven, P. J.
M., Lamers, L. P. M., and Roelofs, J.
G. M. (2003). Interactive effects of
low pH and high ammonium levels
responsible for the decline of Cir-
sium dissectum (L.) Hill. Plant Ecol.
165, 45–52.

Lucassen, E. C. H. E. T., Smolders, A.
J. P., and Roelofs, J. G. M. (2000).
Increased groundwater levels cause
iron toxicity in Glyceria ﬂuitans (L.).
Aquat. Bot. 66, 321–327.

Lucassen, E. C. H. E. T., Smolders,
A. J. P., Van der Salm, A. L., and
Roelofs,
J. G. M. (2004). High
groundwater nitrate concentrations
inhibit eutrophication of sulphate-
rich freshwater wetlands. Biogeo-
chemistry 67, 249–267.

Marschner, H. (1995). Mineral Nutri-
tion of Higher Plants, 2nd Edn. Lon-
don: Academic Press.

McKee, K. L., Mendelssohn, I. A., and
Hester, M. W. (1988). Reexamina-
tion of pore water sulﬁde concen-
trations and redox potentials near
the aerial roots of Rhizophora man-
gle and Avicennia germinans. Am. J.
Bot. 75, 1352–1359.

Neubauer, S. C., Givler, K., Valen-
tine, S. K., and Megonigal, J. P.

(2005). Seasonal patterns and plant-
mediated controls of subsurface wet-
land biogeochemistry. Ecology 86,
3334–3344.

Ohle, W. (1954). Sulfat als “Katalysator”
des limbischen Stoffkreislaufes. Vom
Wasser 21, 13–32.

Paul, E. A., and Clark, F. E. (1989). Soil
Microbiology and Biochemistry. San
Diego: Academic Press Inc.

Pester, M., Knorr, K.-H., Friedrich,
M. W., Wagner, M., and Loy, A.
(2012). Sulfate-reducing microor-
ganisms
in wetlands – fameless
actors in carbon cycling and cli-
mate change. Front. Microbiol. 3:1.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2012.00072

Rabaey, K., Rodriguez, J., Blackall, L.
L., Keller, J., Gross, P., Batstone,
D., Verstraete, W., and Nealson, K.
H. (2007). Microbial ecology meets
electrochemistry: electricity-driven
and driving communities. ISME J. 1,
9–18.

Raven, J. A., and Scrimgeour, C. M.
(1997). The inﬂuence of anoxia on
plants of saline habitats with special
reference to the sulphur cycle. Ann.
Bot. 79, 79–86.

Read, D. J., and Perez-Moreno, J. (2003).
Mycorrhizas and nutrient cycling
in ecosystems – a journey towards
relevance? New Phytol. 157, 475–492.
Reddy, K. R., Patrick, W. H., and Lin-
dau, C. W. (1989). Nitriﬁcation-
denitriﬁcation at
the plant root-
sediment interface in wetlands. Lim-
nol. Oceanogr. 34, 1004–1013.

Reed, S. C., Cleveland, C. C., and
Townsend, A. R. (2011). Functional
ecology of free-living nitrogen ﬁx-
ation: a contemporary perspective.
Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Syst.42,
489–512.

Richardson, C. J. (1985). Mechanisms
controlling phosphorus
retention
capacity in freshwater wetlands. Sci-
ence 228, 1424–1427.

Ripl, W.

(2010).

“Restoration of
eutrophic lakes by sediment treat-
ment,” in Restoration of Lakes,
Streams, Floodplains, and Bogs in
Europe, ed. M. Eiseltová (Amster-
dam: Springer), 77–84.

Robinson, D., Hodge, A., and Fitter, A.
(2003). “Constraints on the form
and function of root systems,” in
Root Ecology, eds H. De Kroon and
E. J. W. Visser (Berlin: Springer-
Verlag), 1–32.

Roden, E. E., and Edmonds, J. W. (1997).
Phosphate mobilization in iron-
rich anaerobic sediments: microbial
Fe(III) oxide reduction versus iron-
sulﬁde formation. Arch. Hydrobiol.
139, 347–378.

Roelofs, J. G. M., Schuurkes, J., and
Impact

J. M. (1984).

Smits, A.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 156 | 11

Lamers et al.

N–S–Fe microbiology and plant ecology

of acidiﬁcation and eutrophication
on macrophytes communities
in
soft waters. 2. Experimental studies.
Aquat. Bot. 18, 389–411.

Scheffer, F., and Schachtschabel, P.
(2002). Lehrbuch der Bodenkunde.
Heidelberg: Spektrum Akademis-
cher Verlag.

Schenk, M., and Wehrmann, J. (1979).
Inﬂuence of ammonia in nutrient
solution on growth and metabolism
of cucumber plants. Plant Soil 52,
403–414.

Schlesinger, W. H. (1997). Biogeochem-
istry: An Analysis of Global Change.
San Diego: Academic Press.

Schmidt, W. (1999). Mechanisms and
regulation of reduction-based iron
uptake in plants. New Phytol. 141,
1–26.

Shah, J., Nagpal, T., Johnson, T., Amann,
M., Carmichael, G., Foell, W., Green,
C., Hettelingh, L. P., Hordijk, L., Li,
J., Peng, C., Pu, Y. F., Ramankutty,
R., and Streets, D. (2000). Integrated
analysis for acid rain in Asia: policy
implications and results of RAINS-
ASIA model. Annu. Rev. Environ.
Resour. 25, 339–375.

Smith, F. A., and Smith, S. E. (1997).
Tansley review no. 96 structural
diversity in (vesicular)-arbuscular
mycorrhizal symbioses. New Phytol.
137, 373–388.

Smolders, A. J. P., Lamers, L. P. M.,
Lucassen, E. C. H. E. T., Van
der Velde, G., and Roelofs, J. G.
M. (2006). Internal eutrophication:
how it works and what to do about
it – a review.Chem. Ecol. 22, 93–111.
Smolders, A. J. P., Lucassen, E. C. H.
E. T., Bobbink, R., Roelofs, J. G. M.,
and Lamers, L. P. M. (2010). How
nitrate leaching from agricultural
lands provokes phosphate eutrophi-
cation in groundwater fed wetlands:
the sulphur bridge. Biogeochemistry
98, 1–7.

Smolders, A. J. P., Lucassen, E. C. H.
E. T., and Roelofs, J. G. M. (2002).
The isoetid environment: biogeo-
chemistry and threats. Aquat. Bot.
73, 325–350.

Smolders, A. J. P., and Roelofs, J. G. M.
(1993). Sulfate-mediated iron limi-
tation and eutrophication in aquatic
systems. Aquat. Bot. 46, 247–253.

Smolders, A. J. P., and Roelofs, J. G.
M. (1996). The roles of
internal
iron hydroxide precipitation, sul-
phide toxicity and oxidizing ability
in the survival of Stratiotes aloides
roots at different iron concentra-
tions in sediment pore water. New
Phytol. 133, 253–260.

Snowden, R. E. D., and Wheeler, B.
D. (1995). Chemical changes in

selected wetland plant species with
increasing Fe supply, with spe-
ciﬁc reference to root precipitates
and Fe tolerance. New Phytol. 131,
503–520.

Sperber, J. I. (1958). Release of phos-
phate from soil minerals by hydro-
gen sulphide. Nature 181, 934.

Stevens, C. J., Manning, P., Van den
Berg, L. J. L., De Graaf, M. C.
C., Wamelink, G. W. W., Box-
man, A. W., Bleeker, A., Vergeer,
P., Arroniz-Crespo, M., Limpens,
J., Lamers, L. P. M., Bobbink, R.,
and Dorland, E. (2011). Ecosystem
responses to reduced and oxidised
nitrogen inputs in European terres-
trial habitats. Environ. Pollut. 159,
665–676.

Tanaka, A., Ranjit, P., Mulleriyawa, R.
P., and Yasu, T. (1968). Possibility of
hydrogen sulﬁde induced iron toxi-
city of the rice plant. Soil Sci. Plant
Nutr. 14, 1–6.

Taylor, G. J., Crowder, A. A., and Rod-
den, R. (1984). Formation and mor-
phology of an iron plaque on the
roots of Typha latifolia L. grown
in solution culture. Am. J. Bot.71,
666–675.

Thamdrup, B., Fossing, H., and Jor-
gensen, B. B. (1994). Manganese,
iron, and sulfur cycling in a coastal
marine sediment, Aarhus Bay, Den-
mark. Geochim. Cosmochim. Ac. 58,
5115–5129.

Thurston, R. V., Russo, R. C., and Vino-
gradov, G. A. (1981). Ammonia tox-
icity to ﬁshes – effect of pH on the
toxicity of the un-ionized ammo-
nia species. Environ. Sci. Technol. 15,
837–840.

Tomassen, H. B. M., Smolders, A. J. P.,
Lamers, L. P. M., and Roelofs, J. G. M.
(2003). Stimulated growth of Betula
pubescens and Molinia caerulea on
ombrotrophic bogs: role of high lev-
els of atmospheric nitrogen deposi-
tion. J. Ecol. 91, 357–370.

Treseder, K. K., Balser, T. C., Bradford,
M. A., Brodie, E. L., Dubinsky, E.
A., Eviner, V. T., Hofmockel, K. S.,
Lennon, J. T., Uri, Y., Levine, U.
J., Pett-Ridge,
Y., MacGregor, B.
J., and Waldrop, M. P.
(2011).
Integrating microbial
ecology
into ecosystem models: challenges
and
Biogeochemistry.
doi:10.1007/s10533-011-9636–9635
Van den Berg, L. J. L., Dorland, E.,
Vergeer, P., Hart, M. A. C., Bob-
bink, R., and Roelofs, J. G. M.
(2005). Decline of acid-sensitive
plant species in heathland can be
attributed to ammonium toxicity
in combination with low pH. New
Phytol. 166, 551–564.

priorities.

Van den Heuvel, R. N., Bakker, S. E.,
Jetten, M. S. M., and Hefting, M.
M. (2011). Decreased N2O reduc-
tion by low soil pH causes high N2O
emissions in a riparian ecosystem.
Geobiology 9, 294–300.

Van den Heuvel, R. N., Hefting, M.
M., Tan, N. C. G., Jetten, M. S.
M., and Verhoeven, J. T. A. (2009).
N2O emission hotspots at different
spatial scales and governing factors
for small scale hotspots. Sci. Total
Environ. 407, 2325–2332.

availability

Van der Heide, T., Smolders, A. J. P.,
Lamers, L. P. M., Van Katwijk, M.
M., and Roelofs, J. G. M. (2010).
Nutrient
correlates
with bicarbonate accumulation in
marine and freshwater sediments –
empirical
from pore
water analyses. Appl. Geochem. 25,
1825–1829.

evidence

Van der Welle, M. E. W., Cuppens, M.,
Lamers, L. P. M., and Roelofs, J. G. M.
(2006). Detoxifying toxicants: inter-
actions between sulﬁde and iron tox-
icity in freshwater wetlands. Environ.
Toxicol. Chem. 25, 1592–1597.

Vartapetian, B. B., and Jackson, M. B.
(1997). Plant adaptations to anaero-
bic stress. Ann. Bot. 79, 3–20.

Verhoeven, J. T. A., and Toth, E. (1995).
Decomposition of Carex and Sphag-
num litter in fens – effect of lit-
ter quality and inhibition by liv-
ing tissue-homegenates. Soil Biol.
Biochem. 27, 271–275.

Visser, E. J. W., Bögemann, G. M., Van
de Steeg, H. M., Pierik, R., and Blom,
C. W. P. M. (2000a). Flooding toler-
ance of Carex species in relation to
ﬁeld distribution and aerenchyma
formation. New
148,
93–103.

Phytol.

Visser, E. J. W., Colmer, T. D., Blom,
C. W. P. M., and Voesenek, L. A.
C. J. (2000b). Changes in growth,
porosity, and radial oxygen loss
from adventitious roots of selected
mono- and dicotyledonous wetland
species with contrasting types of
aerenchyma. Plant Cell Environ. 23,
1237–1245.

Vitousek, P. M., Aber, J. D., Howarth,
R. W., Likens, G. E., Matson, P. A.,
Schindler, D. W., Schlesinger, W. H.,
and Tilman, D. G. (1997). Human
alteration of
the global nitrogen
cycle: sources and consequences.
Ecol. Appl. 7, 737–750.

Vitousek, P. M., and Howarth, R. W.
(1991). Nitrogen limitation on land
and in the sea. Biogeochemistry 13,
87–115.

Voesenek, L. A. C. J., Colmer, T. D.,
Pierik, R., Millenaar, F. F., and
Peeters, A. J. M. (2006). How plants

cope with complete submergence.
New Phytol. 170, 213–226.

Waisel, Y., Eshel, A., and Kafkaﬁ, U.
(1996). Plant Roots. The Hidden
Half, 2nd Edn. New York: Marcel
Dekker.

Weiss, J. V., Emerson, D., and Megoni-
gal, J. P. (2004). Geochemical con-
trol of microbial Fe(III) reduction
potential in wetlands: comparison of
the rhizosphere to non-rhizosphere
soil. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 48,
89–100.

Welsh, D. T., Bartoli, M., Nizzoli, D.,
Castaldelli, G., Riou, S. A., and
Viaroli, P. (2000). Denitriﬁcation,
nitrogen ﬁxation, community pri-
mary productivity and inorganic-N
and oxygen ﬂuxes in an intertidal
Zostera noltii meadow. Mar. Ecol.
Prog. Ser. 208, 65–77.

Wetzel, R. G. (2001). Limnology: Rivers
and Lakes. San Diego, CA: Academic
Press.

Whipps, J. M. (2001). Microbial inter-
actions and biocontrol in the rhizos-
phere. J. Exp. Bot. 52, 487–511.

Wieder, R. K., Scott, K. D., Kam-
minga, K., Vile, M. A., Vitt, D. H.,
Bone, T., Benscoter, B., and Bhatti,
J. (2009). Carbon balance recovery
in boreal bogs of Continental West-
ern Canada. Glob. Change Biol. 15,
63–81.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 10 January 2012; accepted: 04
April 2012; published online: 25 April
2012.
Citation: Lamers LPM, van Digge-
len JMH, Op den Camp HJM, Visser
EJW, Lucassen ECHET, Vile MA, Jet-
ten MSM, Smolders AJP and Roelofs
JGM (2012) Microbial transformations
of nitrogen,
sulfur, and iron dictate
vegetation composition in wetlands: a
review. Front. Microbio. 3:156. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00156
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Terrestrial Microbiology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Lamers, van Digge-
len, Op den Camp, Visser, Lucassen, Vile,
Jetten, Smolders and Roelofs. This is an
open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Terrestrial Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 156 | 12

