MINI REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 18 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00147

Poliovirus trafﬁcking toward central nervous system via
human poliovirus receptor-dependent and -independent
pathway

Seii Ohka1,2*, Coh-ichi Nihei 3, Manabu Yamazaki 3 and Akio Nomoto3
1 Division of Cancer Stem Cell, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan
2 Neurovirology Project, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo, Japan
3 Institute of Microbial Chemistry, Tokyo, Japan

Edited by:
Akio Adachi, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Japan
Reviewed by:
Chiaho Shih, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
Satoshi Koike, Tokyo Metropolitan
Institute of Medical Science, Japan
Minetaro Arita, National Institute of
Infectious Diseases, Japan
*Correspondence:
Seii Ohka, Neurovirology Project,
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of
Medical Science, 2-1-6 Kamikitazawa,
Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan.
e-mail: ohka-si@igakuken.or.jp

In humans, paralytic poliomyelitis results from the invasion of the central nervous system
(CNS) by circulating poliovirus (PV) via the blood–brain barrier (BBB). After the virus enters
the CNS, it replicates in neurons, especially in motor neurons, inducing the cell death that
causes paralytic poliomyelitis. Along with this route of dissemination, neural pathway has
been reported in humans, monkeys, and PV-sensitive human PV receptor (hPVR/CD155)-
transgenic (Tg) mice. We demonstrated that a fast retrograde axonal transport process is
required for PV dissemination through the sciatic nerve of hPVR-Tg mice and that intramus-
cularly inoculated PV causes paralysis in a hPVR-dependent manner. We also showed that
hPVR-independent axonal transport of PV exists in hPVR-Tg and non-Tg mice, indicating
that several different pathways for PV axonal transport exist in these mice. Circulating PV
after intravenous inoculation in mice cross the BBB at a high rate in a hPVR-independent
manner. We will implicate an involvement of a new possible receptor for PV to permeate
the BBB based on our recent ﬁndings.

Keywords: axonal transport, poliovirus, poliovirus receptor, blood–brain barrier

INTRODUCTION
Poliovirus (PV), known to be the causative agent of poliomyeli-
tis, is a human enterovirus that belongs to the Picornaviridae.
After oral ingestion of PV in humans, the virus may suffer the
low pH in stomach to decrease its viability (Ohka et al., 2007;
Figure 1). Then, the virus multiplies in the alimentary mucosa
(Bodian, 1955; Sabin, 1956), and moves into the bloodstream.
The circulating virus invades the central nervous system (CNS)
and replicates in motor neurons (MNs). Paralytic poliomyelitis
occurs as a result from destruction of MNs by PV replication. In
terms of routes for PV dissemination, there are three main routes;
transmission from the alimentary mucosa to blood (Figure 1A;
Bodian, 1955; Sabin, 1956), permeation through the blood–brain
barrier (BBB) into brain (Figure 1B; Yang et al., 1997), and trans-
mission via peripheral MNs from muscle into brain (Figure 1C;
Howe and Bodian, 1942; Nathanson and Langmuir, 1963; Ren
and Racaniello, 1992b; Ohka et al., 1998). The species speciﬁcity
of this virus is governed by a speciﬁc cell surface molecule that
serves as the PV receptor (PVR). Indeed, transgenic (Tg) mice
carrying the human PVR (hPVR/CD155) gene show susceptibil-
ity to PV, although mice are generally not susceptible to the virus
(Ren et al., 1990; Koike et al., 1991). Tg mice are susceptible to
PV when the mice are infected via intravenous and intramuscular
routes but not via oral routes (Ren et al., 1990; Koike et al., 1991,
1994a,b; Ren and Racaniello, 1992a,b; Horie et al., 1994; Zhang and
Racaniello, 1997). The Tg mice became susceptible to oral infec-
tion when interferon (IFN)-α/β receptor gene is disrupted (Ohka
et al., 2007). The two dissemination routes through BBB and MNs

are also functional in PV-sensitive Tg mice, whereas the routes
through alimentary mucosa is not functional in PV-sensitive Tg
mice with normal IFN-α/β response.

PVR-DEPENDENT AND -INDEPENDENT RETROGRADE
AXONAL TRANSPORT FROM MUSCLE TO CNS
Axonal transport is a cellular process responsible for movement of
mitochondria, lipids, synaptic vesicles, proteins, and organelles to
and from a neuron’s cell body, through the cytoplasm of its axon.
It is well known that some viruses, such as Rabies virus, hijacks
the retrograde axonal transport, i.e., from synapse to cell body, to
invade the CNS (Warrell and Warrell, 2004). Using a PV-sensitive
Tg mouse line, we have shown that intramuscularly inoculated
PV is taken up by endocytosis at synapses (Figure 1C; Ohka et al.,
2004). PV is able to invade the CNS by traveling on this cargo.
The vesicles containing intact PV particles are transported retro-
gradely along with the axon without initiating uncoating (Ohka
et al., 1998). The uncoating event takes place at the cell body of the
MN. We demonstrated that a fast retrograde axonal transport pro-
cess is required for PV dissemination through the sciatic nerve of
hPVR-Tg mice and that intramuscularly inoculated PV causes par-
alytic disease in a hPVR-dependent manner (Ohka et al., 1998). We
also showed that hPVR-independent axonal transport of PV exists
in hPVR-Tg and non-Tg mice, indicating that several different
pathways for PV axonal transport exist in these mice (Ohka et al.,
2009). The velocity of hPVR-independent axonal transport of PV
(∼0.5 μm/s) is slower than hPVR-dependent axonal transport
(>0.5 to ∼3.7 μm/s) in vivo. Using primary MNs isolated from

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 147 | 1

“fmicb-03-00147” — 2012/4/17 — 10:59 — page 1 — #1

Ohka et al.

Poliovirus trafﬁcking toward CNS

FIGURE 1 | Dissemination pathway for PV in human. Oral ingested PV invades into blood through alimentary tract (A) followed by viremia. The virus in the
blood permeates BBB into CNS (B). PV also invades into CNS directly by neural pathway through MNs from skeletal muscle to CNS (C).

these mice or rats, we demonstrated that the axonal transport of
PV requires several kinetically different motor machineries (Ohka
et al., 2009). The fast speed component was ≥1.4 μm/s, whereas
the slow component was centered between 0.4 and 1.0 μm/s. Using
a mutant hPVR, that has a lower afﬁnity to cytoplasmic dynein
than intact hPVR, we revealed that the fast transport relies on a
system involving cytoplasmic dynein (Ohka et al., 2004).

AXONAL TRANSPORT OF PV IN VIVO AND IN
CULTURED MNs
Unexpectedly, the hPVR-independent incorporation of PV fol-
lowed by the axonal transport was not observed in cultured MNs.
Thus, PV transport machineries in cultured MNs and in vivo
differ in their hPVR requirements (Ohka et al., 2009). Figure 2
summarizes the PV transports depending on the cell types. In
hPVR-Tg mice, most of the hPVR-containing vesicles are ret-
rogradely transported with fast kinetics in an hPVR-dependent
manner. PV is also transported in a hPVR-independent man-
ner with slow kinetics by an unknown mechanism. Indeed, PV
is transported with slow kinetics in non-Tg mice. In isolated MNs,
only hPVR-dependent PV endocytosis is detected. No endocytosis
of PV is detected in control cultured MNs lacking hPVR. These
results suggest that the axonal trafﬁcking of PV is carried out by

several distinct pathways, and that MNs in culture and in the sci-
atic nerve in vivo are fundamentally different in the uptake and
axonal transport of PV.

For elucidating the precise mechanisms of infection in MNs,
it is important to establish a culture system closely mimicking
in vivo. MNs in culture and in the sciatic nerve in vivo are differ-
ent in the uptake and axonal transport of PV (Ohka et al., 2009).
The differences might be due to the lack of neuromuscular junc-
tions in MNs in culture. Furthermore, MNs are infected both at
synapse side and cell body side in conventional culture system,
whereas the natural infection occurs mainly at the synapse side
in vivo. To reﬂect the conditions in vivo, we applied microﬂu-
idic culture platform made of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) that
polarizes the growth of neural axons ﬂuidically isolated environ-
ment (Taylor et al., 2005; Park et al., 2006), which enables infection
with PV only from synapse side or cell body side. Using the system,
we indicated that the infection from the synapse side intrinsically
differ from the infection from the cell body side (author’s unpub-
lished data). This system may enable co-culture of the synapse
side of MNs with muscular cells to form neuromuscular junc-
tions, which more closely mimic in vivo, and will shed light on the
precise analysis of early infection with infectious agents in MNs in
culture.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 147 | 2

“fmicb-03-00147” — 2012/4/17 — 10:59 — page 2 — #2

Ohka et al.

Poliovirus trafﬁcking toward CNS

FIGURE 2 | Mechanisms for hPVR-dependent and -independent
transport of PV in MNs. (A) In hPVR-Tg mice, PV is endocytosed after
interacting to hPVR (Aa). Most of the hPVR-containing vesicles are
retrogradely transported in an hPVR-dependent manner with fast kinetics
(Ac). hPVR-independent endocytosis (Ab) and transport (Ae) of PV also
occur. The hPVR-independent endocytosis is possibly mediated by an
unidentiﬁed PV receptor expressed at neuromuscular junctions. Alternatively,
hPVR-independent endocytosis may be promoted by synaptic activity
in vivo. PV-containing vesicles with or without hPVR can be retrogradely
transported in an hPVR-independent manner with slow kinetics

(Ad and Ae). (B) In non-Tg mice, PV is endocytosed and transported with
slow kinetics in an hPVR-independent manner (Be). The hPVR-independent
endocytosis is possibly mediated by the unidentiﬁed PV receptor expressed
at neuromuscular junctions (Bb). (C) In cultured MNs, only hPVR-dependent
PV endocytosis is detected (Ca). The hPVR-dependent transport shows
fast kinetics (Cc). It might be possible that the slow component in
cultured MNs (Cd) requires hPVR for endocytosis, whereas its transport
may be hPVR-independent. (D) No endocytosis of PV is detected in
cultured MNs lacking hPVR, possibly due to the absence of the
unidentiﬁed PV receptor.

TRANSFERRIN RECEPTOR-DEPENDENT BBB PERMEATION
Vascular endothelial cells make up the walls that are sealed together
at their edges by tight junctions. BBB does not allow the free trans-
portation of materials including pathogens between the blood-
stream and parenchyma of the CNS and blocks viral infection in
the CNS. Evidences that support PV invasion of BBB by infecting
endothelial cells in vivo have not been reported. PV is believed to
invade the CNS through the BBB. PV permeation through BBB
is hPVR-independent and fast as cationized rat serum albumin
which is known to permeate the BBB at a high rate (Yang et al.,
1997). Similarly, using transwell in vitro BBB model involving
mouse brain capillary endothelial cells (MBEC4), we demon-
strated that BBB permeation of PV is hPVR-independent and fast
as that of transferrin (Figure 3, author’s unpublished data). These
evidences strongly suggest the presence of a new PV receptor for
BBB permeation. To elucidate the new PV receptor which interacts
with PV, we analyzed the PV-interacting protein by mass spectrom-
etry. As a result, we identiﬁed mouse transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1),
a membrane bound receptor for transferrin, as a binding protein
to PV. Furthermore, peptide sequences of mouse TfR1 and PV
involved in the binding were identiﬁed (author’s unpublished data;
the data will be published on another paper). The identiﬁed pep-
tide of PV had a permeation activity in in vitro BBB model using
MBEC4 cells cultured in transwell, and the permeation was fast as

transferrin (Figure 3). Therefore, mouse TfR1 is a possible recep-
tor of PV for the BBB permeation. As for the homology of TfR1
between mouse and human, both mouse TfR1 and human TfR1
conserve function of iron delivery and the binding site of TfR1 has
higher sequence homology (89%) between human and mouse
TfR1 than the full length TfR1 molecule (77%). The homology
indicates that human TfR1 may function as a PV receptor for the
BBB permeation in natural infection in human.

Surprisingly, the majority of the PV related materials after the
BBB permeation were intact infectious particles in the brain of
hPVR-Tg mice and non-Tg mice (Yang et al., 1997). Moreover,
the permeated materials contained infectious particles in in vitro
BBB model (author’s unpublished data). These evidences indi-
cate that PV retains infectivity during the BBB permeation, the
transcytosis through capillary endothelial cell layers. At present, it
cannot be excluded that TfR1 could actually be the long sought
after molecule involved in the hPVR-independent axonal trans-
port of PV in vivo. TfR1 is expressed in MNs in mouse spinal cord
(Jeong et al., 2011), supporting the hypothesis that TfR1 exists in
MNs of sciatic nerve and serves to facilitate hPVR-independent
axonal transport. MNs extending neurite in culture express only
a small amount of TfR1 (Nakamura et al., 2011), which is consis-
tent with the lack of PV incorporation into MNs in culture (Ohka
et al., 2009).

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 147 | 3

“fmicb-03-00147” — 2012/4/17 — 10:59 — page 3 — #3

Ohka et al.

Poliovirus trafﬁcking toward CNS

FIGURE 3 | Models for BBB permeation of PV. TfR1 attaches to PV (A), transferrin (B), or PV peptide (C) and transported through brain capillary endothelial
cells into brain by a fast process. On the other hand, dextran (MW > 15 K) is not transcytosed by TfR1 and leaks between cell junctions by a slow process (D).

DISSEMINATION THROUGH ALIMENTARY MUCOSA
The mechanism of the dissemination through alimentary mucosa
is unclear (Figure 1A). The instability of the virus in the gastric
environment decreases the efﬁciency of the oral infection in mice
(Ohka et al., 2001). Furthermore, we have shown that IFN-α/β
plays an essential role in preventing PV from replicating in the
intestines using hPVR-Tg mice with or without IFN-α/β recep-
tor expression (Ohka et al., 2001). Recently, Kuss et al. (2011)
reported that intestinal bacteria promote PV replication and sys-
temic pathogenesis using hPVR-Tg mice without IFN-α/β receptor
expression, indicating that intestinal microbes may enhance PV
intestinal infection even in human. In terms of the receptor
localization in polarized epithelial cells, hPVRα, one of the two
identiﬁed membrane bound forms of hPVR, shows basolateral
localization due to its basolateral sorting signal, whereas hPVRδ,
another membrane bound form of hPVR, non-polarized localiza-
tion (Ohka et al., 2001). hPVRs mainly localizes to the basolateral
in human colon carcinoma (Caco-2) epithelia cells (Ohka et al.,
2001) and human Peyer’s patches including human microfold
cells (M cells), that are distinctive mucosal epithelial cells medi-
ating immune surveillance (Iwasaki et al., 2002). Nevertheless, PV
efﬁciently permeates alimentary mucosa from the apical side into
bloodstream, suggesting the possibility that a small amount of api-
cal hPVR or another PV receptor besides hPVR contributes to the
transport. It should be noted that PV does not replicate in the ali-
mentary tracts of hPVR-Tg mice that express high levels of hPVR
in the intestinal epithelial cells after oral administration (Zhang
and Racaniello, 1997) in contrast to its behavior in humans. Much
work should be done to elucidate mechanisms of PV infection in
and dissemination from the alimentary tract.

CONCLUSION
We demonstrated that axonal transport of PV includes hPVR-
dependent and -independent pathways, implying the involvement

of a new receptor for PV besides hPVR. We also demonstrated
that PV permeates BBB at a high rate in an hPVR-independent
manner, and we implicated a new possible receptor for PV to
permeate the BBB. Thus, PV receptors including hPVR and new
possible receptors play important roles for PV dissemination. It
is important to elucidate new possible receptors in the future to
clarify the precise mechanisms for PV dissemination pathways.
Additionally, we revealed that the discrepancy exists between in
vivo and in cultured MNs. It would be useful to establish adequate
systems in culture for elucidating the transport mechanisms of PV.
The discrepancy itself might be a clue for understanding the event
in vivo.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to M. Sakai for analyzing BBB transport of PV in
vitro, Y. Takahashi for help in mass spectrography, and Professor
T. Fujii, Dr. S. Kaneda, and Dr. K. Mogi for preparing the PDMS
device. We appreciate Professor G. Schiavo, S. Bohnert, and K.
Deinhardt teaching the techniques for MN culture and helpful
discussions. We thank A. Ohmura for breeding the mice and E.
Suzuki for help in the preparation of the manuscript. This work
was supported in part by Grants-in-Aid for Advanced Medical Sci-
ence Research by Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science
and Technology (MEXT), Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research on
Priority Areas, Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (S), Grant-in-
Aid for Young Scientists (B), Human Frontier Science Program,
Special coordination funds for promoting Science and Technol-
ogy, Contracted research allowance“Research and Development in
a New Converting Field Based on Nanotechnology and Materials
Science”by MEXT, Industrial Technology Research Grant Program
in ’02 from New Energy and Industrial Technology Development
Organization (NEDO) of Japan, The Naito Foundation, a grant
from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan, and
Cancer Research UK.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 147 | 4

“fmicb-03-00147” — 2012/4/17 — 10:59 — page 4 — #4

Ohka et al.

Poliovirus trafﬁcking toward CNS

REFERENCES
Bodian, D. (1955). Emerging concept of
poliomyelitis infection. Science 122,
105–108.

Horie, H., Koike, S., Kurata, T., Sato-
Yoshida, Y., Ise, I., Ota, Y., Abe, S.,
Hioki, K., Kato, H., Taya, C., Nomura,
T., Hashizume, S., Yonekawa, H., and
Nomoto, A. (1994). Transgenic mice
carrying the human poliovirus recep-
tor: new animal models for study of
poliovirus neurovirulence. J. Virol.
68, 681–688.

Howe, H., and Bodian, D. (1942). Neu-
ral Mechanisms in Poliomyelitis. New
York: Commonwealth Fund.

Iwasaki, A., Welker, R., Mueller, S., Line-
han, M., Nomoto, A., and Wimmer,
E. (2002). Immunoﬂuorescence anal-
ysis of poliovirus receptor expression
in Peyer’s patches of humans, pri-
mates, and CD155 transgenic mice:
implications for poliovirus infection.
J. Infect. Dis. 186, 585–592.

Jeong, S. Y., Crooks, D. R., Wilson-
Ollivierre, H., Ghosh, M. C., Sougrat,
R., Lee, J., Cooperman, S., Mitchell,
J. B., Beaumont, C., and Rouault,
T. A. (2011). Iron insufﬁciency com-
promises motor neurons and their
mitochondrial function in irp2-null
mice. PLoS ONE 6, e25404. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0025404

Koike, S., Aoki, J., and Nomoto, A.
(1994a). “Transgenic mice for the
study of poliovirus pathogenicity,” in
Cellular Receptors for Animal Viruses,
eds E. Wimmer and R. Weiss (New
York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press), 463–480.

Koike, S., Taya, C., Aoki, J., Matsuda,
Y., Ise, I., Takeda, H., Matsuzaki,
T., Amanuma, H., Yonekawa, H.,
and Nomoto, A. (1994b). Charac-
terization of three different trans-
genic mouse lines that carry human
poliovirus receptor gene – inﬂuence

the

transgene

of
pathogenesis. Arch. Virol.
351–363.

expression on
139,

Koike, S., Taya, C., Kurata, T., Abe, S.,
Ise, I., Yonekawa, H., and Nomoto, A.
(1991). Transgenic mice susceptible
to poliovirus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 88, 951–955.

Kuss, S. K., Best, G. T., Etheredge,
C. A., Pruijssers, A. J., Frierson, J.
M., Hooper, L. V., Dermody, T. S.,
and Pfeiffer, J. K. (2011).
Intesti-
nal microbiota promote enteric virus
replication and systemic pathogene-
sis. Science 334, 249–252.

and

Nathanson,

poliomyelitis

(1963). The Cutter

Nakamura, Y., Nakamichi, N., Takarada,
T., Ogita, K.,
and Yoneda, Y.
(2011). Transferrin receptor-1 sup-
presses neurite outgrowth in neurob-
lastoma Neuro2A cells. Neurochem.
Int. 60, 448–457.
N.,

Langmuir,
inci-
A. D.
dent:
following
formaldehyde-inactivated poliovirus
vaccination in the United States
during the spring of 1955. III. Com-
parison of
the clinical character
of vaccinated and contact cases
occurring after use of high rate lots
of Cutter vaccine. Am. J. Hyg. 78,
61–81.
Ohka, S.,

Igarashi, H., Nagata, N.,
Sakai, M., Koike, S., Nochi, T., Kiy-
ono, H., and Nomoto, A. (2007).
Establishment of a poliovirus oral
infection system in human poliovirus
receptor-expressing transgenic mice
that are deﬁcient in alpha/beta inter-
feron receptor. J. Virol. 81, 7902–
7912.

Ohka, S., Matsuda, N., Tohyama, K.,
Oda, T., Morikawa, M., Kuge, S.,
and Nomoto, A. (2004). Recep-
tor (CD155)-dependent endocytosis
of poliovirus and retrograde axonal
transport of the endosome. J. Virol.
78, 7186–7198.

Ohka, S., Ohno, H., Tohyama, K.,
and Nomoto, A. (2001). Basolateral
sorting of human poliovirus receptor
alpha involves an interaction with the
mu1B subunit of the clathrin adaptor
complex in polarized epithelial cells.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 287,
941–948.

Ohka, S., Sakai, M., Bohnert, S.,
Igarashi, H., Deinhardt, K., Schiavo,
G., and Nomoto, A. (2009). Receptor-
dependent and -independent axonal
retrograde transport of poliovirus in
motor neurons. J. Virol. 83, 4995–
5004.

S., Yang, W. X., Terada,
Ohka,
E.,
Iwasaki, K., and Nomoto, A.
(1998). Retrograde transport of
intact poliovirus through the axon
via the fast transport system. Virology
250, 67–75.

Park,

J. W., Vahidi, B., Taylor, A.
M., Rhee, S. W., and Jeon, N. L.
(2006). Microﬂuidic culture platform
for neuroscience research. Nat. Pro-
toc. 1, 2128–2136.

Ren, R.,

and Racaniello, V. R.
(1992a). Human poliovirus receptor
gene expression and poliovirus tissue
tropism in transgenic mice. J. Virol.
66, 296–304.

Ren, R., and Racaniello, V. R. (1992b).
Poliovirus spreads from muscle to
the central nervous system by neu-
ral pathways.
J. Infect. Dis. 166,
747–752.

Ren, R. B., Costantini, F., Gorgacz, E. J.,
Lee, J. J., and Racaniello, V. R. (1990).
Transgenic mice expressing a human
poliovirus receptor: a new model for
poliomyelitis. Cell 63, 353–362.

Sabin, A. B. (1956). Pathogenesis of
poliomyelitis: reappraisal in the light
of new data. Science 123, 1151-1157.
Taylor, A. M., Blurton-Jones, M., Rhee,
S. W., Cribbs, D. H., Cotman, C. W.,
and Jeon, N. L. (2005). A microﬂu-
idic culture platform for CNS axonal

injury, regeneration and transport.
Nat. Methods 2, 599–605.

Warrell, M. J., and Warrell, D. A. (2004).
Rabies and other lyssavirus diseases.
Lancet 363, 959–969.

Yang, W. X., Terasaki, T., Shiroki,
K., Ohka, S., Aoki, J., Tanabe, S.,
Nomura, T., Terada, E., Sugiyama,
Y., and Nomoto, A. (1997). Efﬁcient
delivery of circulating poliovirus to
the central nervous system indepen-
dently of poliovirus receptor. Virology
229, 421–428.

Zhang, S., and Racaniello, V. R. (1997).
Expression of the poliovirus recep-
tor in intestinal epithelial cells is not
sufﬁcient to permit poliovirus repli-
cation in the mouse gut. J. Virol. 71,
4915–4920.

Conflict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 15 December 2011; accepted:
27 March 2012; published online: 18
April 2012.
Citation: Ohka S, Nihei C, Yamazaki M
and Nomoto A (2012) Poliovirus traf-
ﬁcking toward central nervous system
via human poliovirus receptor-dependent
and -independent pathway.
Front.
Microbio. 3:147. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.
2012.00147
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Virology, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Ohka, Nihei, Yamazaki
and Nomoto. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 147 | 5

“fmicb-03-00147” — 2012/4/17 — 10:59 — page 5 — #5

