ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 31 January 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00011

Allele- andTir-independent functions of intimin in diverse
animal infection models

Emily M. Mallick 1, Michael J. Brady 2, Steven A. Luperchio3, Vijay K. Vanguri 4, Loranne Magoun2, Hui Liu 2,
Barbara J. Sheppard 3, Jean Mukherjee 5, Art Donohue-Rolfe 5, Saul Tzipori 5, John M. Leong 1,2* and
David B. Schauer 3,6†
1 Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA
2 Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA
3 Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
4 Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA
5 Division of Infectious Diseases, Tufts University School of Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, MA, USA
6 Division of Comparative Medicine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA

Edited by:
Elizabeth L. Hartland, The University
of Melbourne, Australia
Reviewed by:
Olivier Marchès, Queen Mary
University of London, UK
Alan Phillips, Institute of Child Health,
UK
*Correspondence:
John M. Leong, Department of
Molecular Biology and Microbiology,
Tufts University School of Medicine,
136 Harrison Avenue, Boston, MA
02111, USA.
e-mail: john.leong@tufts.edu

†Deceased

(EHEC),
Upon binding to intestinal epithelial cells, enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli
enteropathogenic E. coli
(EPEC), and Citrobacter rodentium trigger formation of actin
pedestals beneath bound bacteria. Pedestal formation has been associated with enhanced
colonization, and requires intimin, an adhesin that binds to the bacterial effector translo-
cated intimin receptor (Tir), which is translocated to the host cell membrane and promotes
bacterial adherence and pedestal formation. Intimin has been suggested to also promote
cell adhesion by binding one or more host receptors, and allelic differences in intimin have
been associated with differences in tissue and host speciﬁcity.We assessed the function of
EHEC, EPEC, or C. rodentium intimin, or a set of intimin derivatives with varyingTir-binding
abilities in animal models of infection.We found that EPEC and EHEC intimin were function-
ally indistinguishable during infection of gnotobiotic piglets by EHEC, and that EPEC, EHEC,
and C. rodentium intimin were functionally indistinguishable during infection of C57BL/6
mice by C. rodentium. A derivative of EHEC intimin that bound Tir but did not promote
robust pedestal formation on cultured cells was unable to promote C. rodentium coloniza-
tion of conventional mice, indicating that the ability to trigger actin assembly, not simply to
bind Tir, is required for intimin-mediated intestinal colonization. Interestingly, streptomycin
pre-treatment of mice eliminated the requirement forTir but not intimin during colonization,
and intimin derivatives that were defective inTir-binding still promoted colonization of these
mice. These results indicate that EPEC, EHEC, and C. rodentium intimin are functionally
interchangeable during infection of gnotobiotic piglets or conventional C57BL/6 mice, and
that whereas the ability to trigger Tir-mediated pedestal formation is essential for coloniza-
tion of conventional mice, intimin provides a Tir-independent activity during colonization of
streptomycin pre-treated mice.

Keywords: Citrobacter rodentium,
Escherichia coli

intimin, enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli,

invasin, enteropathogenic

INTRODUCTION
The family of attaching and effacing (AE) pathogens consists
of enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC), enteropathogenic
E. coli (EPEC), and Citrobacter rodentium. EHEC colonizes the
large intestine and can result in diarrhea, hemorrhagic colitis, and
life-threatening hemolytic uremic syndrome (Kaper et al., 2004;
Pennington, 2010). The highly related EPEC colonizes the small
intestine and is a causative agent of infantile diarrhea in the devel-
oping world (Chen and Frankel, 2005; Spears et al., 2006). C.
rodentium, is a related murine pathogen that typically colonizes
the large intestine and causes transmissible murine colonic hyper-
plasia, characterized by colonic epithelial cell proliferation and
high rates of mortality in suckling animals (reviewed in Luperchio
and Schauer, 2001; Mundy et al., 2005).

The three pathogens are so-named AE pathogens because they
each colonize the intestinal epithelium by inducing in host cells“AE
lesions,” which consist of effacement of brush border microvilli,
intimate adherence of bacteria, and polymerization of actin into
a pedestal-like extension of the epithelial cell beneath the bound
bacterium (Moon et al., 1983; for review, see Kaper et al., 2004).
Bacteria entirely incapable of generating AE lesions are severely
defective for colonization and disease (Donnenberg et al., 1993a,b;
Schauer and Falkow, 1993b; Tzipori et al., 1995; Deng et al.,
2003; Ritchie et al., 2003), while bacteria still capable of inti-
mate attachment but defective selectively for pedestal formation
are moderately attenuated (Ritchie et al., 2008; Crepin et al., 2010).
The ability to generate the AE phenotype by these organisms
requires the locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE), a pathogenicity

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 1

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

island that encodes a type III secretion system (TTSS) and several
translocated effectors (Kenny and Finlay, 1995; McDaniel et al.,
1995). Translocated intimin receptor (Tir), a type III translo-
cated effector critical for intimate bacterial attachment and actin
pedestal formation, becomes localized in the host plasma mem-
brane with the N- and C-terminal cytoplasmic domains (for
review, see Lommel et al., 2004; Frankel and Phillips, 2008;
Campellone, 2010). The central, extracellular domain is recog-
nized by the outer membrane adhesin intimin, encoded by the eae
gene (Jerse et al., 1990; Donnenberg and Kaper, 1991). The intimin
N-terminus promotes outer membrane localization and multi-
merization, whereas the intimin C-terminus encodes its adhesive
activities (Frankel et al., 1995; Liu et al., 1999; Batchelor et al., 2000;
Luo et al., 2000; Yi et al., 2010).

It has been postulated that in addition to binding Tir, intimin
possesses host receptor adhesive activities that also contribute to
colonization. For instance, the intimin related Yersinia pseudotu-
berculosis invasin protein binds to β1-chain integrins (Isberg et al.,
1987), and EPEC intimin was shown to be capable of recogniz-
ing β1-chain integrins, albeit with apparently much lower afﬁnity
(Frankel et al., 1996a). Nucleolin is recognized by EHEC intimin
(Sinclair and O’Brien, 2002) and localized beneath cell-associated
EPEC during infection of cultured monolayers (Dean and Kenny,
2011). Finally, intimin but not Tir, contributes to the disruption
of epithelial barrier function (Dean and Kenny, 2004), suggesting
the existence of Tir-independent functions of intimin.

Although EPEC and EHEC intimin have been demonstrated
to be interchangeable for pedestal formation on cultured cells,
intimin exhibits considerable allelic variation in the C-terminal
domain responsible for adhesive activity (Frankel et al., 1994),
and the intimin alleles from the canonical EHEC, EPEC, and C.
rodentium strains are distinct and have been associated with dif-
ferences in function. For example, although tissue tropism during
infection of human intestinal explants is multifactorial, infection
of intestinal tissue ex vivo suggests that intimin of EHEC O157:H7
(also known as intimin γ) promotes colonization of different
epithelial types than intimin of canonical EPEC (intimin α) or
C. rodentium (intimin β) (Phillips and Frankel, 2000; Fitzhenry
et al., 2002; Girard et al., 2005; Mundy et al., 2007). In addition,
whereas wild type EHEC colonizes the large bowel of gnotobi-
otic piglets, an EHEC strain harboring a plasmid expressing EPEC
intimin acquired the additional ability to colonize the small intes-
tine (Tzipori et al., 1995). Allelic differences may also contribute
to differences in species host range, because whereas C. roden-
tium expressing EPEC intimin is able to efﬁciently colonize Swiss
NIH and C3H/HeJ mice (Schauer and Falkow, 1993b; Frankel
et al., 1996b; Hartland et al., 2000), C. rodentium expressing a
derivative EPEC intimin harboring the adhesive domain of EHEC
intimin provided only poor colonization function in these animals
(Hartland et al., 2000; Mundy et al., 2007).

To gain insight into the critical activities of intimin, we assessed
the in vivo functionality of EHEC, EPEC, or C. rodentium intimin,
or a set of EHEC intimin derivatives with varying Tir-binding
abilities. Colonization was not detectably altered by allele-speciﬁc
differences in intimin in two animal infection models. Notably,
whereas the ability to trigger Tir-mediated pedestal formation
was found to be essential for colonization of conventional mice,

intimin provided a Tir-independent function during colonization
of antibiotic pre-treated mice.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
MEDIA, BACTERIAL STRAINS, AND GROWTH CONDITIONS
Bacteria were stored in Luria–Bertani (LB) broth (American Bio-
analytical, Natick, MA, USA) with 50% glycerol at either −80˚ or
−135˚C. Bacteria were grown at 37˚C in LB broth, in Antibiotic
Medium 3 (Difco, Laboratories, Detroit, MI, USA), on LB agar
(American Bioanalytical, Natick, MA, USA), on MacConkey lac-
tose agar, or on eosin–methylene blue agar (Difco Laboratories,
Lawrence, KS, USA). Where indicated, kanamycin, chlorampheni-
col, gentamicin, ampicillin, and zeocin were added at ﬁnal con-
centrations of 20, 10, 100, 100 or 750, and 75 μg/ml respectively.
The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in
Tables 1 and 2.

(cid:2)

CONSTRUCTION OF pCVD438 (pINTEPEC) DERIVATIVES
Genomic DNA from EHEC O157:H7 strain EDL933 and plas-
mid pIntEPEC were puriﬁed using standard methodologies. All
primers used to construct these pCVD438 derivatives are listed
in Table 3. To construct pHL69 (pIntEHEC), a two-step ampliﬁca-
tion (fusion PCR) was performed. First, the Pfu Turbo PCR system
(Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA) was used to generate three frag-
ments: the region 5
of the eaeEPEC open reading frame (ORF) in
pIntEPEC (from the HindIII site to the eae start codon), the region
(cid:2)
3
of the eaeEPEC ORF in pIntEPEC (from the eae stop codon to
the SalI site), and the coding region of the eaeEHEC gene from
EDL933. To generate the ﬁrst two fragments, pIntEPEC was restric-
tion enzyme digested with Bst EII to delete an internal 1,847-bp
fragment (nucleotides 585–2432 of eaeEPEC) and used as the PCR
template. The coding region of EDL933 eaeEHEC was ampliﬁed
from genomic DNA. Each primer at a junction point in the fusion
PCR was tailed with a 9- to 15-bp overhanging sequence from the
neighboring fragment. The ampliﬁcation products were isolated
using the QIAquick PCR puriﬁcation kit (QIAgen Inc., Valencia,
CA, USA), mixed, and subjected to a second round of ampliﬁ-
cation with the pACYC184 primers listed in Table 3. The fusion
PCR product was conﬁrmed by DNA sequencing and ligated into
the corresponding HindIII/SalI site of pIntEPEC, effectively replac-
ing the eaeEPEC ORF of pIntEPEC with that of EHEC EDL933.
The ligation mix was introduced into laboratory strains of E. coli
by high-voltage electroporation and chloramphenicol-resistant
clones were isolated.

A similar methodology was used to generate pInv, pInv–Int395,
pInv–Int181, and pInv–Int100 (Table 2). In the case of pInv, the
coding region of the Y. pseudotuberculosis inv gene was ampliﬁed
from pRI203. For the latter three plasmids, the hybrid invasin–
intimin alleles had been previously generated and cloned into
pT7-4 (Liu et al., 1999). These pT7-4 derivatives, pHL35, pHL49,
and pHL55, respectively, were used as template DNA to amplify
the coding region for pInv–Int395, pInv–Int181, and pInv–Int100,
respectively.

GENERATION OF C. RODENTIUM STRAINS
Plasmid DNA was isolated using the QIAprep Spin Miniprep Kit
(QIAgen, Valencia, CA, USA) and quantiﬁed by UV spectropho-
tometry. Plasmids were introduced into the C. rodentiumΔeae

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 2

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

Table 1 | Bacterial strains used in this study.

Strain

DBS100
DBS255
DBS434
SAL31
SAL32
SAL56
SAL57
SAL58
DH5α

SAL35

EDL933
JPN15.96
BL21 DE3/pDV205
EDL933
TUV93-0
KM60
KM48
JPN15/pMAR7
LM-1
C. rodentium Δtir

Description or genotype

Source or reference

C. rodentium (prototype TMCH isolate, ATCC 51459, original biotype 4280)
C. rodentiumΔeae; KanR
C. rodentiumΔeae/pCVD438
C. rodentiumΔeae/pHL69
C. rodentiumΔeae/pHL70
C. rodentiumΔeae/pHL76
C. rodentiumΔeae/pHL79
C. rodentiumΔeae/pHL80
F-ø80dlacZΔM15 Δ(lacZYA-argF) U169 endA1 recA1 hsdR17 (rK
deoR thi-1 phoA supE44 l−gyrA96 relA1 gal−
DH5α/pHL70F-ø80dlacZΔM15 Δ(lacZYA-argF) U169 endA1 recA1 hsdR17
(rK
EHEC O157:H7
EPEC eae::TnphoA
BL21 DE3 containing EHEC tir expression vector
EHEC O157:H7 prototype
Stx− derivative of EDL933
EHEC TUV93-0 Δeae
EHEC TUV93-0 Δeae::cat-sacB
AmpR derivative of EPEC E2348/69 O127:H6 prototype
KM46 derivative expressing EHEC tir-cesT and EPEC eae
DBS100 with an in-frame deletion of tir ; ZeoR (i.e., zeocin resistance)

+) deoR thi-1 phoA supE44 l−gyrA96 relA1 gal−

− mK

− mK

+)

Barthold et al. (1976), Schauer and Falkow (1993b)
Schauer and Falkow (1993a)
Frankel et al. (1996b)
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
Gibco BRL

This study

Riley et al. (1983)
Jerse et al. (1990)
Vingadassalom et al. (2009)
Riley et al. (1983)
Campellone et al. (2002)
Murphy and Campellone (2003)
Murphy and Campellone (2003)
Jerse et al. (1990)
This study
This study

Table 2 | Description of plasmids used in study.

Plasmid

Protein

Description

pCVD438
pHL69
pHL70
pHL76

IntEPEC
IntEHEC
Inv
Inv–Int395

pHL79

Inv–Int181

pHL80

Inv–Int100

pT7-4
pRI203
pACYC184
pHL35
pHL49
pHL55
pDV205
pUC19
pHL4
pHL6
pTP223
pKD46

EHEC Tir

IntEPEC
IntEHEC

pACYC184-derived plasmid encoding eae from E2348/69
pCVD438 with eaeEPEC ORF replaced by eaeEHEC ORF
pCVD438 with eaeEPEC ORF replaced by inv ORF
pCVD438 with eaeEPEC ORF replaced by the 5(cid:2) 489 codons of inv fused to the
3(cid:2) 395 codons of eaeEHEC.
pCVD438 with eaeEPEC ORF replaced by the 5(cid:2) 793 codons of inv fused to the
3(cid:2) 181 codons of eaeEHEC
pCVD438 with eaeEPEC ORF replaced by the 5(cid:2) 878 codons of inv fused to the
3(cid:2) 100 codons of eaeEHEC
AmpR Pφ10
pT7-4 with inv from Y. pseudotuberculosis
cloning vector, CamR, TetR
pT7-4 with inv (bp 1–1467)/eaeEHEC (bp 1617–2802); produces the protein Inv–Int395
pT7-4 with inv (bp 1–2379)/eaeEHEC (bp 2260–2802); produces the protein Inv–Int181
pT7-4 with inv (bp 1–2634)/eaeEHEC (bp 2503–2802); produces the protein Inv–Int100
pET21 containing EHEC tir
High copy cloning vector, AmpR
pUC19 derivative encoding EPEC eae
pUC19 derivative encoding EHEC eae
Produces λ-gam-bet-exa downstream of lac promoter
Expresses lambda-red recombinase, AmpR

Reference

Donnenberg and Kaper (1991)
This study
This study
This study

This study

This study

Tabor and Richardson (1985)
Isberg et al. (1987)
Rose (1988)
Liu et al. (1999)
Liu et al. (1999)
Liu et al. (1999)
Vingadassalom et al. (2009)
Yanisch-Perron et al. (1985)
Liu et al. (1999)
Liu et al. (1999)
Murphy and Campellone (2003)
Datsenko and Wanner (2000)

strain by chemical transformation using calcium chloride. Success-
ful transformants were selected with chloramphenicol and were
conﬁrmed to be carrying the proper plasmid.

GENERATION OF AN EHEC STRAIN ENCODING EPEC INTIMIN
A three-way PCR was performed using templates encoding
EHEC cesT with 3
tail encoding EPEC eae (∼750 bp), EPEC

(cid:2)

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 3

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

Table 3 | DNA sequences of oligonucleotides used in this study.

Sequence

5(cid:2) acc tga agt cag ccc cat acg ata 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) agt aat cat gtt tgg gct cca cca caa tg 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) aac cat cat gtt tgg gct cca cca caa tg 3(cid:2)

5(cid:2) gtt tgt gta gaa taa att taa taa ata tct aat cat tgt ccg gct aa 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) ccg ctc gag gct ctc cct tat gcg act cc 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) gcg ctg tca ata taa att taa taa ata tct aat cat tgt ccg gct aa 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) tga ctg ggt tga agg ctc tca agg 3(cid:2)

5(cid:2) agc cca aac atg att act cat ggt tgt ta 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) aga tat tta tta aat tta ttc tac aca aac cgc at 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) agc cca aac atg atg gtt ttc cag cca at 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) aga tat tta tta aat tta tat tga cag cgc aca ga 3(cid:2)

Primera
eaeEPEC 5(cid:2) REGIONb,c
F-pACYC184
R-eaeEPEC
R-eaeEPEC-2
eaeEPEC 3(cid:2) REGIONb,d
F-eaeEPEC
R-pACYC184
F-eaeEPEC-2
R-pACYC184-2
OPEN READING FRAMESb,e
F-eaeEHEC
R-eaeEHEC
F-inv
R-inv
C. RODENTIUM tir MUTANTf,g
F-A-Tir-KO
R-B-Tir-KO
F-C-Tir-KO-zeo
R-D-Tir-KO-zeo
F-E-Tir-KO

R-F-Tir-KO
F-Tir-Ext
R-Tir-Ext
F-Tir-Int-323–342
R-Tir-Int-819–838
F-Tir-Int-590–610
R-Tir-Int-1049–1069
F-Zeo-Int
R-Zeo-Int

5(cid:2) gtg cac aat cat caa tca gtc ac 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) acc aaa atc cct taa cgt gag tta cgc gtc gtt cca ctg agc gtc aga cca cat ata tcc ttt tat tta atc gga aat ttt aca cta atc c 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) ggt ctg acg ctc agt gga acg acg cgt aac tca cgt taa ggg att ttg gt 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) tca gtc ctg ctc ctc ggc cac gaa gtg cac gca gtt gcc ggc cgg gtc gc 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) gtg cac ttc gtg gcc gag gag cag gac tga cgc tac aac acc ggg agt tga acg ttt cgt cta aat ata taa tgg gta ttt tgt tgg ggg gga
ggg gga g 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) ggc tcc acc aca atg agt tag 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) gct tgc atca taa gtt aga ctg tg 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) cgt cat tag tgt cag ata acg aga 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) ttc gtg ttg aac agc agc ca 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) tcg cag ctt ctg cag cat tt 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) ata cac gtt ctg ttg gtg tcg 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) cca att cct gct gac gtt tag 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) gag cgg tcg agt tct gg 3(cid:2)
5(cid:2) gcc acg aag tgc acg cag t 3(cid:2)

aF, forward (top strand) primer; R, reverse (bottom strand) primer.
bUnderlined sequences represent the restriction enzyme sites used for cloning. Italicized sequences indicate the tails used for fusing eaeEPEC 5(cid:2) and 3(cid:2) sequences
with eaeEHEC, inv, or hybrid allele coding regions.
cFor pIntEHEC, F-pACYC184, and R-eaeEPEC were used. For all others, F-pACYC184 and R-eaeEPEC-2 were used.
dFor pInv, F-eaeEPEC-2, and R-pACYC184-2 were used. For all others, F-eaeEPEC and R-pACYC184 were used.
eFor pIntEHEC, F-eaeEHEC, and R-eaeEHEC were used. For pInv, F-inv, and R-inv were used. For all others, F-inv and R-eaeEHEC were used.
fPrimers used to construct C. rodentiumΔtir. Italicized regions indicate homology to zeocin cassette.
gNumbers in primer name correspond to nucleotide positions primer is located within tir gene. Int represents screening primers internal to the gene (tir or zeocin)
and Ext represents screening primers that are external to the gene.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

EHEC tail, and EHEC 3

UTR (∼960 bp).
eae (∼2.8 kb) with 3
The PCR product was cloned into pGEM7xf(+), linearized by
BamHI and XbaI digestion, and transformed into KM48 harbor-
ing pTP223. Transformants were screened by sucrose resistance
and chloramphenicol sensitivity. Candidates were conﬁrmed by
PCR and sequencing.

GENERATION OF C. RODENTIUM ΔTIR
The C. rodentium tir deletion mutant was made using a slightly
modiﬁed version of the one-step PCR-based gene activation pro-
tocol (Datsenko and Wanner, 2000). Brieﬂy, a tertiary PCR prod-
uct containing the zeocin cassette and its promoter ﬂanked by
576 bp homology upstream of the start of tir and 608 base pairs

downstream of the stop of tir was generated using three tem-
plate PCR products, A+ B, C+ D, and E+ F. Product A+ B was
generated using primers F-A-Tir-KO and R-B-Tir-KO (Table 3)
with genomic C. rodentium (DBS100) DNA (isolated using a kit
by Promega, Madison, WI, USA) as a template. Primers F-C-Tir-
KO-zeo and R-D-Tir-KO-zeo were used to amplify a MluI/EcoRI
cut pDONORzeo fragment to generate the 504-bp PCR prod-
uct C+ D. Primers F-E-Tir-KO and R-F-Tir-KO were used to
amplify genomic C. rodentium DNA to make PCR product E+ F.
This 1.65 kb PCR product was electroporated into C. rodentium
(DBS100) containing the lambda-red plasmid, pKD46, and recom-
binants were selected for by plating on LB plates supplemented
with 750 μg/ml ampicillin. Replacement of tir with the zeocin

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 4

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

cassette and its promoter was conﬁrmed by PCR using the fol-
lowing primers: F-Tir-Ext, R-Tir-Ext, F-Tir-Int-323–342, R-Tir-
Int-819–838, F-Tir-Int-590–610, R-Tir-Int-1049–1069, F-Zeo-Int,
and R-Zeo-Int (see Table 3).

PURIFICATION OF EHEC TIR AND GENERATION OF AN ANTI-EHEC TIR
ANTIBODY
pDV205 (ampR) is a derivative of pET21 that contains EHEC tir
with a histidine tag. For expression and puriﬁcation of EHEC
Tir, BL21 DE3+ pDV205 was cultured in 2x YT media at 37˚C
to an OD600 of 0.6–0.7 then induced with 1 mM IPTG for 3 h at
37˚C. The culture was spun at 4,420× g, 20 min at 4˚C, and the
supernatant was discarded. The pellet was resuspended in 2.5 ml
lysis buffer per gram wet weight. Four milligrams of lysozyme was
added and the sample was sonicated (Branson Soniﬁer 450, Bran-
son Ultrasonics Corporation, Danbury, CT, USA) Duty cycle 70,
output 3, 10 s bursts× 6 cycles). The lysate was then centrifuged at
16,100× g, 20 min at 4˚C, and the supernatant was run on a QIA-
gen Ni-NTA Agarose column (QIAgen, Valencia, CA, USA) and
the resulting EHEC Tir was eluted and quantiﬁed using a Bio-Rad
Protein Assay kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA, USA).
For antibody production, all inoculations were completed sub-
cutaneously with 30 ng of puriﬁed EHEC Tir in 50 μl with 50 μl of
adjuvant for a total inoculation volume of 100 μl. Female BALB/c
mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) were inocu-
lated with EHEC Tir supplemented with Imject Freund’s Complete
Adjuvant (Thermo Scientiﬁc, Rockford, IL, USA). At days 14 and
28, mice were boosted with EHEC Tir supplemented with Imject
Freund’s Incomplete Adjuvant (Thermo Scientiﬁc, Rockford, IL,
USA). Mice were sacriﬁced on day 38 and blood was harvested via
cardiac bleed, allowed to clot at room temperature for 30 min, and
then was spun twice at 8,600× g, 15 min at 4˚C. Serum was then
aliquoted and stored at −80˚C.

INVASION ASSAYS
Entry into cultured cells was measured in a manner similar to
that described previously (Finlay and Falkow, 1988). Brieﬂy, HEp-
2 cells (ATCC CCL-23) were seeded in 24-well plates and grown
overnight at 37˚C in 5% CO2 and Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagles
medium supplemented with 10% heat inactivated calf serum and
2 mM l-glutamine (DMEM). Bacteria were grown overnight in
LB, diluted in fresh cell culture medium, and inoculated at an
approximate multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 100. The cells
were incubated for 3 h at 37˚C in 5% CO2 and then washed with
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Fresh cell culture medium sup-
plemented with gentamicin was added to each well and the cells
were incubated at 37˚C in 5% CO2 for 1 h. The cells were washed
with PBS, lysed with 1% Triton X-100 in PBS, and diluted to 1 ml
with LB broth. Percent invasion for each well was determined by
plating dilution series.

INFECTION OF MONOLAYERS PRE-INFECTED WITH EPEC EAE
The “prime and challenge” assay is a modiﬁcation of a previously
described bacterial adherence assay (Rosenshine et al., 1996; Liu
et al., 1999) and was used to quantify intimin–Tir interactions
in vitro. Brieﬂy, nearly conﬂuent monolayers of HEp-2 cells were
washed twice in PBS, and RHFM [RPMI-1640 supplemented with

20 mM HEPES, pH 7.0, 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS), and 0.5%
d-mannose] was added to the monolayers. The monolayers were
then mock-infected or infected with the EPEC eae mutant strain
JPN15.96 at MOI of ∼200 and incubated at 37˚C in 5% CO2 for
3 h. JPN15.96 is capable of high efﬁciency translocation of Tir into
mammalian cells, but unable to form pedestals due to the absence
of intimin. The monolayers were washed twice with PBS and then
incubated for 1 h at 37˚C in 5% CO2 with 100 μg/ml gentamicin in
DMEM/HEPES to kill remaining bacteria. The monolayers were
washed three times in PBS and then infected with the appropriate
“challenge” bacterium (i.e., C. rodentium, C. rodentiumΔeae, or C.
rodentiumΔeae expressing EPEC intimin, EHEC intimin, invasin,
or an invasin–intimin hybrid) diluted in fresh DMEM/HEPES at
an MOI of 100 for 3 h at 37˚ in 5% CO2. At the conclusion of the
assay, monolayers were washed six times with PBS, lysed with 1%
Triton X-100 in PBS, and diluted to 1 ml with LB broth. Percent
adherence for each well was determined by plating dilution series.
The prime and challenge assay was also adapted to evaluate
actin pedestal formation mediated by intimin and its derivatives by
seeding HEp-2 cells onto coverslips. At the conclusion of the assay
described above, coverslips were washed six times with PBS, ﬁxed
with 2.5% paraformaldehyde, and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton
X-100 in PBS. Coverslips were then double ﬂuorescently labeled
for F-actin and bacteria and examined on a Nikon Eclipse E600
microscope. F-actin was labeled with Texas red-conjugated phal-
loidin (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) and visualized with a
580-nm dichroic ﬁlter. C. rodentium were labeled with an anti-C.
rodentium polyclonal rabbit antibody raised against C. rodentium
strain DBS100 and visualized with a Cascade blue-conjugated goat
anti-rabbit IgG antibody (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA)
using a 400-nm dichroic ﬁlter. Coverslips labeled only with anti-
C. rodentium primary antibody and the Cascade blue-conjugated
secondary antibody showed no crossover when viewed with the
580-nm ﬁlter. Image acquisition was performed with the Spot
program (Diagnostics Instruments, software version 3.0.4) and
imported into Adobe Photoshop 5.0.

PEDESTAL, BACTERIAL BINDING, AND TIR FOCUSING ASSAYS
The FAS assay of (Nicholls et al., 2000), as modiﬁed for C.
rodentium (Newman et al., 1999) was the basis for this assay. A
single colony from each strain was grown in 1 ml media (+/−
antibiotic) for 8 h. Cultures were diluted 1:500 into 5 ml DMEM
supplemented with 0.1 M HEPES (pH 7.0; +/− antibiotic) and
incubated at 37˚C without agitation with 5% CO2 for 12–15 h.
Cell monolayers were prepared by splitting 95–100% conﬂuent
mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts (MEFs) into 24-well culture plates
containing sterile glass coverslips followed by overnight growth
at 37˚C with 5% CO2. Prior to seeing onto culture plates, MEFs
were maintained in MEF cell culture media [DMEM (hi glucose)
+ 10% FBS with penicillin, streptomycin, and glutamine] at 37˚C,
5% CO2. For infections, cell monolayers were washed twice with
sterile PBS followed by addition of FAS media containing 25 μl
of overnight cultured C. rodentium to each well. Plates were spun
at 700 g for 10 min then incubated at 37˚C with 5% CO2 for 3 h.
After 1.5 h, plates were spun again at 700 g for an additional 10 min
to insure proper bacterial binding to cells. After 3 h, cells were
washed twice with sterile PBS and 0.5 ml pre-warmed FAS media

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 5

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

was added to each well and cells were then incubated for an addi-
tional 3 h. Cells were then washed ﬁve times with sterile PBS, ﬁxed
with 4% PFA for 30 min, washed, permeabilized with 0.1% Tri-
ton X-100, and stained with anti-EHEC Tir antibody (1:500) as a
primary antibody for 30 min. The samples were washed and then
stained for 30 min with anti-Mouse 488 secondary antibody (Invit-
rogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA; 1:200), phalloidin (Molecular Probes,
OR, USA; 1:100), and DAPI (1:500). After washing cells an addi-
tional three times with PBS, the coverslips were mounted on slides
using ProLong® Gold anti-fade reagent (Invitrogen, Eugene, OR,
USA). For binding assays, the number of bacteria per cell was
counted for 25 random cells. Counting was done in triplicate and
the mean, median, and maximum number of bacteria bound to
cells was determined. The stratiﬁcation of the number of cells with
the given amount of bound bacteria in each interval (0, 1–5, 6–10,
11–15, 16–20, and >20) was also determined.

IMMUNOBLOTTING
Preparation of bacterial cell lysates was performed as described
previously (Campellone et al., 2002; Brady et al., 2007). Samples
were resolved by 10% SDS PAGE and transferred to PVDF mem-
brane. Membranes were blocked in PBS supplemented with 5%
milk for 30 min prior to treatment with sheep anti-EHEC Intimin
(1:500), goat anti-EPEC Intimin (1:2000), rabbit anti-OmpA, or
rabbit anti-O157 antiserum (1:750, Difco Laboratories, Lawrence,
KS, USA) for 2 h, washed and treated with secondary antibody as
previously described (Campellone et al., 2004a; Campellone and
Leong, 2005; Brady et al., 2007).

IMMUNOFLUORESCENCE MICROSCOPY OF EHEC STRAINS
To ensure an EHEC strain expressing EPEC intimin can gener-
ate actin pedestals and that intimin plasmids used to overexpress
EHEC and EPEC intimin are functional to complement a dele-
tion of EHEC intimin by FAS, HeLa cell monolayers were infected
with indicated strains, ﬁxed, and permeabilized as described previ-
ously (Campellone et al., 2002). For each strain, qualitative scoring
of F-actin pedestals was performed as indicated. Approximately
equal numbers of actin pedestals were observed for EHECΔeae
expressing EHEC intimin (pHL6) or EPEC intimin (pHL4).

MOUSE INFECTION STUDIES
Mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME,
USA) and housed in the UMMS animal facility. All animal proce-
dures were done in compliance with the University of Massachu-
setts Medical School IACUC. Female, eight-week-old C57BL/6J
mice were gavaged with PBS or ∼2× 109 of overnight culture of
C. rodentium strain speciﬁed in 100 μl PBS. Inoculum concentra-
tions were conﬁrmed by serial dilution plating. C. rodentium fecal
shedding was determined by serial dilution plating of fecal slurries
(10% w/v in PBS) on Maconkey agar or LB agar with selection for
zeocin, kanamycin, chloramphenicol, or kanamycin and chloram-
phenicol. For streptomycin pre-treatment experiments, mice were
given 5 mg/ml streptomycin for 48 h prior to infection.

were evaluated and scored blindly by a board-certiﬁed pathologist
(Vijay Vanguri). Assessment of mucosal hyperplasia was targeted
to areas of comparable muscularis propria thickness in order to
reduce error from differences in planes of section.

TRANSMISSION ELECTRON MICROSCOPY
Mouse intestinal tissue samples were taken at various time points
post-infection and ﬁxed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.05 M Sodium
Phosphate buffer, pH 7.2. Samples were processed and ana-
lyzed at the University of Massachusetts Medical School Electron
Microscopy core facility according to standard procedures. Brieﬂy,
ﬁxed samples were moved into fresh 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.05 M
Sodium Phosphate buffer and left overnight at 4˚C. The samples
were then rinsed twice in the same ﬁxation buffer and post-ﬁxed
with 1% osmium tetroxide for 1 h at room temperature. Sam-
ples were then washed twice with DH2O for 20 min at 4˚C and
then dehydrated through a graded ethanol series of 20% incre-
ments, before two changes in 100% ethanol. Samples were then
inﬁltrated ﬁrst with two changes of 100% Propylene Oxide and
then with a 1:1 mix of propylene oxide: SPI-Pon 812 resin. The
following day three changes of fresh 100% SPI-Pon 812 resin were
done before the samples were polymerized at 68˚C in plastic cap-
sules. The samples were then reoriented and thin sections were
placed on copper support grids and stained with lead citrate and
uranyl acetate. Sections were examined using the FEI Tecani 12 BT
with 80 kV accelerating voltage, and images were captured using a
Gatan TEM CCD camera.

PIGLET INFECTIONS
Gnotobiotic piglets were derived and infected orally with TUV93-
0, which is deﬁcient for the expression of Stx, thus eliminating the
potentially confounding toxigenic effects on colonization (Tzipori
et al., 1995), as described previously (Campellone et al., 2007;
Ritchie et al., 2008; Brady et al., 2011). To quantify bacteria in the
small intestine, the small intestine was divided into ﬁve parts and
each section was viewed individually for the presence of bacteria
and AE lesions. If bacteria or AE lesions were found in any of these
sections, they were given the score of “+.” The average score was
then determined for the small intestines of piglets in each group.
A score of “+” indicates the presence of bacteria and AE lesions in
at least one of the ﬁve sections of the small intestine in each of the
piglets, a score of “+/−” indicates the presence of bacteria and AE
lesions in at least one of the ﬁve sections of the small intestine in
at least half of the piglets, and a score of “−” indicates that fewer
than half of the piglets had bacteria and AE lesions in at least one
of the ﬁve sections of the small intestine and also includes piglets
that did not become colonized. To enumerate bacteria in the spi-
ral colon and cecum, each section was scored for the presence of
bacteria and AE lesions. A score of “+” indicates that every piglet
in the group had bacteria and AE lesions present, a score of “+/−”
indicates that at least half of the piglets in the group had bacteria
and AE lesions present, and a score of “−” indicates that fewer than
half of the piglets had bacteria and AE lesions present.

MOUSE TISSUE COLLECTION AND HISTOLOGY
At necropsy the large intestine (colon through cecum) was ﬁxed
in 10% buffered formalin, dehydrated, and embedded in paraf-
ﬁn. Five-micron sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism. Comparison of mul-
tiple groups was performed using one-way analysis of vari-
ance (ANOVA) with Bonferroni multiple comparison post-tests.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 6

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

∗

Statistical signiﬁcance of differences between two groups was eval-
uated using two-tailed unpaired t -tests. In all tests p-values below
0.05 (
) were considered statistically
signiﬁcant, unless indicated otherwise. In all graphs, error bars
represent SEM.

), and 0.001 (

), 0.01 (

∗∗∗

∗∗

RESULTS
PRECISE CHROMOSOMAL REPLACEMENT OF EHEC EAE WITH EPEC
EAE DOES NOT ALTER TISSUE TROPISM IN PIGLETS
Plasmid complementation of an EHEC eae mutant with EPEC eae
results in a strain with altered tissue tropism that colonizes the
small bowel of piglets (Tzipori et al., 1995). To determine if EPEC
and EHEC intimin might be functionally interchangeable when
expressed from the endogenous chromosomal locus, we precisely
replaced the EHEC eae allele in EHEC TUV93-0 with the eae allele
from EPEC strain JPN15/pMAR7 (Figure 1A). Immunoblotting
conﬁrmed that the resulting strain, LM-1, produced EPEC intimin
(Figure 1B). As predicted from previous work demonstrating
that EHEC and EPEC intimin are functionally interchangeable
for in vitro pedestal formation (DeVinney et al., 1999), LM-1
generated actin pedestals on cultured cells (Figure 1C).

To test the function of EPEC intimin during infection by EHEC,
gnotobiotic piglets were infected orally with LM-1 and after 72 h,
infection was assessed by histological analysis of the small and large
intestines. Upon infection with wild type EHEC, piglets suffered
diarrheal illness and bacteria were associated with extensive seg-
ments of the cecal and colonic epithelium (Table 4). Wild type
EHEC were only occasionally associated with the epithelium of the
small intestine. In contrast, infection of gnotobiotic piglets with
EHECΔeae did not result in detectable bacterial association with
epithelium of any intestinal segment, and correspondingly, the
animals did not suffer from diarrhea. Notably, EHEC strain LM-
1, which expresses EPEC intimin, colonized the epithelium of the
cecum and spiral colon at levels indistinguishable from that of wild
type EHEC, and like the wild type strain, induced diarrheal illness
(Table 4). In contrast to the previous ﬁnding that EHEC expressing
EPEC intimin from a plasmid could efﬁciently colonize the small
intestine of gnotobiotic piglets (Tzipori et al., 1995), bacteria were
vanishingly sparse in the small intestine (Table 4). These results
demonstrate that EPEC intimin, when expressed in EHEC from
the endogenous chromosomal locus, can provide intimin function

during intestinal infection of piglets, but does not inﬂuence tissue
tropism in this model.

EHEC INTIMIN CAN PROMOTE MURINE COLONIZATION AND DISEASE
BY C. RODENTIUM
We further assessed ability of EHEC intimin to complement a C.
rodentiumΔeae mutant for colonization and intestinal disease in
mice. Previous work demonstrated that C. rodentiumΔeae har-
boring pCVD438, which encodes EPEC intimin, was fully virulent
in Swiss NIH and C3H/HeJ mice (Hartland et al., 2000; Mundy

FIGURE 1 | An EHEC strain containing EPEC intimin on the
chromosome is functional for pedestal formation. (A) The endogenous
EHEC eae gene was precisely replaced by EPEC eae to create LM-1. (B)
Expression of EHEC and EPEC intimin in wild type EHEC, EHECΔeae, and
LM-1 was assessed by western blot. Blotting with anti-OmpA was included
as a loading control. (C) HeLa cells were infected with the indicated strain
and the monolayers were stained with DAPI (blue) to visualize bound
bacteria and phalloidin (red) to visualize actin pedestals.

Table 4 | An EHEC strain carrying a precise chromosomal replacement of eae with EPEC eae displays piglet intestinal tropism indistinguishable
from wild type.

E. coli strain

No. of animals

No. of animals with diarrhea

AE lesions and colonization

Small intestine

Cecum

Spiral colon

5
4
4

WT EHEC
EHEC Δeae
EHEC LM-1
Gnotobiotic piglets were infected orally with 5× 109 EHEC, EHECΔeae, or LM-1. Animals were sacriﬁced 72 h after infection and the intestines were removed, ﬁxed,
stained, and scored for colonization using a score adapted fromTzipori et al., 1995; see Materials and Methods. “+” indicates bacteria and AE lesions present, “+/−”
indicates minimal bacteria and AE lesions present, and “−” indicates no bacteria or AE lesions present. Values represent the average colonization score of all the
piglets in the group.

5
0
4

+
−
+

+
−
+

+/−
−
+/−

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 7

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

et al., 2007). In contrast, C. rodentiumΔeae expressing an intimin
hybrid carrying the N-terminal 554 residues of EPEC intimin and
the C-terminal 380 residues of EHEC intimin colonized mice 100-
fold less efﬁciently and did not cause the colonic hyperplasia that
is characteristic of C. rodentium infection (Hartland et al., 2000;
Mundy et al., 2007).

To compare the colonization function of EPEC and EHEC
intimin in mice, we precisely replaced the EPEC eae coding
sequence of pCVD438 (which for simplicity we herein refer to
as “pIntEPEC”) with the EHEC eae coding sequence to create
pIntEHEC (i.e., pHL69; Table 2). C57BL/6 mice were infected with
approximately 5× 109 CFU of C. rodentium, C. rodentiumΔeae, C.
rodentiumΔeae/ pIntEPEC, or C. rodentiumΔeae/pIntEHEC. Mice
infected with C. rodentium reached peak colonization levels seven
days post-infection with approximately 109 bacteria per gram of
feces before being cleared from mice by approximately 15–20 days
after inoculation, presumably due to the development of an adap-
tive immune response (Ghaem-Maghami et al., 2001; Vallance
et al., 2002; Simmons et al., 2003; Figure 2A and data not shown).
In contrast, the number of C. rodentiumΔeae in the stool peaked at
three days post-infection, reaching less than 106 bacteria per gram
of feces, and quickly diminished, never rising to more than 104
bacteria per gram of feces thereafter (Figure 2A). Similar to what
was previously reported (Frankel et al., 1996b; Hartland et al.,
2000; Mundy et al., 2007), EPEC intimin, when expressed in C.
rodentiumΔeae promoted high level colonization with compara-
ble kinetics to wild type C. rodentium (Figure 2A). Additionally,
intestinal sections from rodents infected with C. rodentiumΔeae
expressing EPEC intimin showed colonic mucosal hyperplasia,
goblet cell depletion, acute inﬂammation, erosions, and degenera-
tive epithelial changes on the surface and in the crypts (Figure 2B).

Interestingly, we also found that EHEC intimin, when expressed
in C. rodentiumΔeae, promoted colonization, colonic hyperplasia,
and intestinal damage indistinguishable from wild type C. roden-
tium (Figure 2) and generated AE lesions morphologically identi-
cal to wild type C. rodentium (Figure 3). Thus, EHEC intimin, in
spite of being signiﬁcantly divergent in sequence from C. roden-
tium intimin, could provide complete intimin function in this
model.

EHEC INTIMIN AND TIR-BINDING INVASIN–INTIMIN FUSIONS CAN
MEDIATE HOST CELL ADHERENCE BY C. RODENTIUM
We next characterized the ability of C. rodentiumΔeae expressing
EHEC intimin to attach to host cells that express high levels of
Tir on their surface, which more sensitively assesses Tir–intimin
interactions compared to conventional infection assays (Liu et al.,
2002). Pre-infection (i.e., “priming”) of cells with an EPECΔeae
mutant permits efﬁcient delivery of Tir to the eukaryotic cell
(Rosenshine et al., 1996; Liu et al., 1999). After gentamycin treat-
ment and washing to kill and remove bound bacteria, infection
(i.e., “challenge”) of these monolayers with intimin-expressing
bacteria permits sensitive assessment of bacterial binding medi-
ated by Tir–intimin interaction (Rosenshine et al., 1996; Liu et al.,
1999). Utilizing this assay, C. rodentiumΔeae/pIntEHEC bound to
pre-infected monolayers indistinguishably from that of wild type
C. rodentium, and approximately 20-fold more efﬁciently than C.
rodentiumΔeae (Figure 4A).

We next characterized the minimal region of EHEC intimin
required for Tir-mediated cell adherence when expressed in
C. rodentium. The intimin related protein Y. pseudotuberculosis
invasin, which binds to β1-chain integrins (Isberg and Leong,
1990; Frankel et al., 1996a), was previously used to deliver various

FIGURE 2 | Enterohemorrhagic E. coli intimin is able to restore
colonization and disease in a C. rodentium eae mutant.
(A) Colonization of eight-week-old C57BL/6 mice by C. rodentium (“Cr ”),
C. rodentiumΔeae, C. rodentiumΔeae/ pIntEPEC, or C.
rodentiumΔeae/ pIntEHEC was determined by viable stool counts. Shown
are the averages CFU (±SEM) of ﬁve mice. Data shown are representative

of one of three independent experiments. (B) Hematoxylin and eosin
stained large intestinal sections from mock-infected mice or mice infected
with indicated strain are shown under 100× magniﬁcation. Arrow heads
point to ragged areas of the surface epithelium at sites of surface erosion.
Arrows point to areas of many goblet cells. Asterisks indicate areas of
active inﬂammation. Scale bars measure 50 μm.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 8

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

average of more than nine bacteria per cell, and fewer than ﬁve
of the 25 cells were entirely free of bacteria (Figure 4B). Intimin
was required for binding, because approximately 20 of the 25
cells infected with C. rodentiumΔeae were bacteria-free, and vir-
tually no cells harbored more than ﬁve bacteria (Figure 4B).
EHEC intimin, when expressed in C. rodentiumΔeae, was able to
restore binding capabilities of the mutant strain, with an average
of approximately six bacteria per cell (Figure 4B).

We similarly tested the ability of the invasin–intimin hybrids to
bind to cells. Invasin, when expressed on the surface of C. roden-
tiumΔeae, dramatically enhanced the ability of the bacteria to
associate with cells (p < 0.05), with an average of approximately
19 bacteria per cell, consistent with its ability to promote high-
level host cell interaction (Figure 4B; Isberg and Leong, 1990).
C. rodentiumΔeae expressing Inv–Int395, which mediated attach-
ment of C. rodentium in the prime and challenge assay (Figure 4A),
bound to mammalian cells statistically indistinguishably from wild
type C. rodentium, with an average of approximately eight bacteria
bound to each cell (Figure 4B). On average, fewer than ﬁve of the
25 cells were bacteria-free. In contrast, C. rodentium expressing
Inv–Int181 and Inv–Int100 bound to cells indistinguishably from
C. rodentiumΔeae, with an average of less than two bacteria per
cell and the majority of cells harboring fewer than ﬁve bacteria
(Figure 4B). These data indicate that EHEC intimin can comple-
ment a C. rodentiumΔeae mutant for cell attachment, and that the
binding function of this protein is encompassed by the C-terminal
395 amino acids.

EHEC INTIMIN, BUT NOT A TIR-BINDING INVASIN–INTIMIN HYBRID,
PROMOTES TIR CLUSTERING AND PEDESTAL FORMATION BY C.
RODENTIUM
Given the ability of EHEC intimin and the hybrid Inv–Int395 to
promote binding of C. rodentium to mammalian cells, we next
tested their ability to promote Tir clustering and pedestal forma-
tion upon infection of mammalian cells. As expected, cells infected
with C. rodentiumΔeae demonstrated virtually no bound bacteria
and after staining monolayers with anti-EHEC Tir, only one quar-
ter of the rare bound bacteria were associated with somewhat dif-
fuse foci of Tir (Figure 5, column 2; and data not shown). In con-
trast, upon infection with wild type C. rodentium, 95% of bound
bacteria were associated with intensely stained Tir foci, and 98% of
bacteria generated actin pedestals (Figure 5, “Cr”). These defects
in Tir clustering and pedestal formation were fully complemented
by a plasmid expressing EHEC intimin, as well as by a plasmid
expressing EPEC intimin, which was included as a positive control
(Figure 5, “pIntEHEC” and “pIntEPEC”, respectively). Thus, EHEC
intimin appears to provide full function for cell binding, Tir clus-
tering, and pedestal formation when expressed in C. rodentium.

To deﬁne the region of EHEC intimin critical for Tir cluster-
ing and pedestal formation, in parallel we infected monolayers
with C. rodentiumΔeae expressing invasin–intimin hybrids. C.
rodentiumΔeae expressing invasin or either of the two fusion
proteins, Inv–Int181 or Inv–Int100, that were unable to promote
Tir-mediated cellular attachment by C. rodentium, resulted in
detectable Tir foci no more frequently than was found for C. roden-
tiumΔeae (Figure 5, “pInv”, “pInv–Int181”, or “pInv–Int100”). In
contrast, 59% of C. rodentiumΔeae expressing Inv–Int395, which

FIGURE 3 | Enterohemorrhagic E. coli intimin can complement a C.
rodentium eae mutant for AE lesion formation in vivo. Transmission
electron micrograph showing AE pedestal formation on colonic epithelial
cells from the distal colon of mice infected with C.
rodentiumΔeae/ pIntEHEC. Original magniﬁcation, 25,000×. Bar, 0.5 μm.

portions of EHEC intimin to the surface of the bacteria in the form
of invasin–intimin hybrid proteins (Liu et al., 1999). C. roden-
tiumΔeae expressing invasin was capable of high efﬁciency entry
into cultured epithelial cells, strongly suggesting that invasin can be
expressed in functional form on the surface of C. rodentium (data
not shown). Thus, we determined the minimal region of EHEC
intimin required for cell adherence by C. rodentium by expression
of invasin–intimin fusions in this bacterium. C. rodentiumΔeae
producing Inv–Int395, a hybrid that contains the C-terminal 395
amino acids of intimin, bound to pre-infected monolayers at wild
type levels, implying that this hybrid promotes Tir-binding when
expressed in C. rodentiumΔeae, as it does when expressed in E. coli
K12 (Figure 4A; Liu et al., 1999). In contrast, Inv–Int181, which
was previously shown to retain some Tir-binding activity when
expressed in E. coli K12 (Liu et al., 1999), and Inv–Int100, bound
poorly to monolayers pre-infected with the EPECΔeae mutant
(Figure 4A). These data suggest that the minimal functional
domain of EHEC intimin that can confer high level Tir-binding
on C. rodentium is located in the C-terminal 395 amino acids.

To determine if the functional Tir-binding domain deﬁned by
the more elaborate prime and challenge assay described above
also functioned to promote cell attachment by C. rodentium dur-
ing simple infection, we infected MEFs with C. rodentiumΔeae
expressing invasin or EHEC intimin derivatives and determined
the number of bacteria bound to each of 25 randomly selected
cells. Cells infected with wild type C. rodentium harbored an

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 9

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

FIGURE 4 | A hybrid containing the C-terminal 395 amino acids of EHEC
intimin can complement a C. rodentium eae mutant for host cell
attachment. (A) HEp-2 cells pre-infected with an EPECΔeae strain were
infected with wild type C. rodentium, C. rodentiumΔeae, or C.
rodentiumΔeae strains expressing EHEC intimin, invasin, or the indicated
invasin–EHEC intimin hybrids (Inv–Int395, Inv–Int181, and Inv–Int100), and
stably bound bacteria were determined (Materials and Methods). Data are
shown as the mean± SEM and represent two independent assays with at
least three replicates per assay. Asterisk indicates binding signiﬁcantly

(p < 0.05) higher than C. rodentiumΔeae of C. rodentiumΔeae expressing
pInv–Int181 or pInv–Int100, determined by two-tailed unpaired t-test. (B)
Mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts were infected with the indicated C. rodentium
strains and the number of bound bacteria per cell was counted for four sets of
25 randomly selected cells. Shown are the number of cells with the given
number (0, 1–5, 6–10, 11–15, 16–20, and >20) of bound bacteria. The
experiment was performed in triplicate. Shown in box is the mean number of
bacteria per cell± SEM. Asterisk indicates a signiﬁcant difference (p < 0.05)
compared to C. rodentiumΔeae, determined using a one-way ANOVA test.

promotes binding to C. rodentium to mammalian cells (Figure 4),
were associated with Tir foci (Figure 5, “pInv–Int395”), a per-
centage that was both signiﬁcantly higher than that of C. roden-
tiumΔeae and signiﬁcantly lower than that of wild type C. roden-
tium or C. rodentiumΔeae expressing wild type EHEC intimin.
The partial complementation of Tir clustering by pInv–Int395 was
also reﬂected in the low (i.e., 7%) frequency of pedestal formation
(Figure 5, “pInv–Int395”). Thus, although the expression of Inv–
Int395 in C. rodentium resulted in high-level Tir-mediated cell
binding, it did not result in efﬁcient Tir clustering or pedestal
formation in cultured mammalian cells.

A TIR-BINDING INVASIN–INTIMIN FUSION PROTEIN DOES NOT
PROMOTE MURINE COLONIZATION BY C. RODENTIUM AND RESULTS
IN MINIMAL COLONIC HYPERPLASIA
After characterizing the invasin–intimin hybrids in vitro, we next
determined their ability to complement a C. rodentiumΔeae
mutant for colonization and disease in vivo. As shown above
(Figure 2A), after oral gavage of C57BL/6 mice with approxi-

mately 5× 109 C. rodentiumΔeae/pIntEHEC, C. rodentiumΔeae

expressing EHEC intimin demonstrated wild type levels of

colonization, colonic hyperplasia, goblet cell depletion, and abun-
dant inﬂammation (Figures 6A,B). In contrast, in most instances
C. rodentiumΔeae/pInv displayed colonization kinetics indistin-
guishable from C. rodentiumΔeae (Figure 6A) and did not trigger
colitis (Figure 6B), showing that bacterial binding to β1-chain
integrins, even by a high afﬁnity ligand such as invasin (Tran Van
Nhieu and Isberg, 1993) is not sufﬁcient to promote C. roden-
tium colonization. (Occasionally, C. rodentiumΔeae/pInv colo-
nized mice somewhat better than C. rodentiumΔeae, but always at
a level several orders of magnitude lower that wild type C. roden-
tium or C. rodentium expressing EHEC intimin and usually just
above the limit of detection, i.e., 100 CFU/g feces; data not shown).
As expected, C. rodentiumΔeae expressing Inv–Int181 or Inv–
Int100, neither of which mediated mammalian cell attachment,
Tir clustering, or pedestal formation in vitro, colonized mice
no better than C. rodentiumΔeae and resulted in no detectable
intestinal histopathology (Figures 6A,B). Notably, C. roden-
tiumΔeae expressing Inv–Int395, which promoted Tir-mediated
attachment to cultured monolayers but did not cluster Tir efﬁ-
ciently or trigger pedestal formation on cultured cells, was as
defective as C. rodentiumΔeae in colonization and triggered

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 10

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

FIGURE 5 | Enterohemorrhagic E. coli intimin, but not a Tir-binding
invasin–intimin hybrid, promotes Tir clustering and pedestal formation
by C. rodentium. Monolayers were infected with the indicated C.
rodentium (“Cr ”) strains and stained with DAPI to visualize bacteria (blue),
anti-EHEC Tir antibody (green), and ﬂuorescent phalloidin (red) to detect
F-actin. Twenty-ﬁve bound bacteria were scored for their association with Tir
foci or pedestals. †Note that when quantifying the percentage of cells

infected with C. rodentiumΔeae that had Tir foci and/or actin pedestals
associated with bound bacteria, many more cells needed to be counted
given the inability of this strain to adhere efﬁciently to cells. Data represent
quadruplicate samples. Asterisk indicates that percent positive bacteria is
signiﬁcantly (p < 0.05) greater than that for C. rodentiumΔeae. “#”
Indicates that percent positive bacteria is signiﬁcantly (p < 0.05) lower than
that for C. rodentium/pIntEHEC.

FIGURE 6 | A Tir-binding invasin–intimin fusion protein does not promote
murine colonization by C. rodentium. (A) Eight-week-old C57BL/6 mice
were inoculated with indicated C. rodentium strains by oral gavage and
intestinal colonization was determined by viable stool counts. Shown are the
averages CFU (±SEM) of groups of ﬁve mice. Each strain was tested in at
least three independent experiments. The data displayed includes data from
two different experiments, one in which C. rodentiumΔeae/ pInv and C.

rodentiumΔeae were analyzed and another in which the remaining strains
were tested. The combined results are overlaid on the graph for ease of
comparison. (B) Hematoxylin and eosin stained large intestinal sections from
mice infected with designated strain were analyzed upon 100× magniﬁcation.
Scale bars measure 50 μm. Arrow heads indicate foci of epithelial surface
disruption. Arrows indicate areas of goblet cells and asterisks indicate foci of
active inﬂammation.

virtually no intestinal damage (Figures 6A,B). The inability of
Inv–Int395 to demonstrate wild type intimin function during
mammalian infection demonstrates that the ability of intimin to

bind Tir, in the absence of efﬁciently clustering Tir and triggering
pedestal formation, is insufﬁcient to promote colonization and
disease.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 11

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

INTIMIN BUT NOT TIR IS REQUIRED FOR C. RODENTIUM
COLONIZATION OF MICE PRE-TREATED WITH STREPTOMYCIN
Streptomycin pre-treatment of mice permits EHEC, which is not
normally an efﬁcient mouse pathogen, to both colonize mice
and cause toxigenic disease (Wadolkowski et al., 1990a,b; Melton-
Celsa et al., 1996; Mohawk and O’Brien, 2011). Pilot experiments
indicated that brief streptomycin pre-treatment of out-bred Swiss-
Webster mice facilitated C. rodentium infection (David B. Schauer,
Joseph Newman, and Steven A. Luperchio, unpublished observa-
tions), so we pre-treated C57BL/6 mice with streptomycin for 48 h
prior to infection with C. rodentium strains that display differ-
ent capacities to generate actin pedestals. Wild type C. rodentium
colonized these mice with high efﬁciency, reaching ∼108–109/g
feces by day three after inoculation and persisting at that level
for ∼15 days (Figure 7A, “Cr”). Intestinal colonization dimin-
ished after day 15 post-infection, but unlike infection of untreated
mice, easily detectable CFU were present until the experiment
was terminated at 31 days post-infection. Although C. roden-
tiumΔeae was present in the stool at high levels at three days
post-infection, this strain was not capable of stable colonization

FIGURE 7 | Intimin but not Tir is required for colonization of
streptomycin pre-treated mice by C. rodentium. (A,B) Eight-week-old
C57BL/6 mice were pre-treated with streptomycin in their drinking water
for 48 h prior to being inoculated with approximately 5× 109 CFU of
indicated C. rodentium strains by oral gavage (see Materials and Methods),
with the exception of C. rodentiumΔtir in (A), in which approximately
106 CFU were inoculated. Colonization was determined by viable stool
counts, and shown are the averages CFU (±SEM) of three to ﬁve mice per
group. [Note that the slightly lower level of colonization by C. rodentiumΔtir
in (A) at three days post-infection was likely due to the lower inoculum
used]. Each strain was tested in at least two independent experiments.

(Figure 7A, “Cr Δeae”). The colonization defect was fully com-
plemented by plasmid-borne EHEC or EPEC intimin for at least
the ﬁrst 15 days post-infection (Figure 7A, “Cr Δeae/pIntEHEC”
or “Cr Δeae/pIntEPEC,” respectively). At later time points, comple-
mentation was not complete, as bacteria expressing either EPEC
or EHEC intimin were cleared somewhat more rapidly than wild
type C. rodentium. These data indicate even when the ﬂora is
disrupted by antibiotic pre-treatment, intimin is required for
maximal murine colonization. In addition, the late time point
differences notwithstanding, EHEC or EPEC intimin were able to
provide wild type colonization function for the ﬁrst two weeks of
infection.

To determine whether the requirement for intimin was a reﬂec-
tion of its ability to interact with Tir, we inoculated strepto-
mycin pre-treated mice with a C. rodentiumΔtir mutant. Notably,
whereas Tir is essential for colonization by C. rodentium in con-
ventional mice (Deng et al., 2003), we found that Tir was dis-
pensable in streptomycin pre-treated mice. In fact, fecal counts
of C. rodentiumΔtir reached approximately 1010 CFU/gram of
feces by six days post-infection and remained highly elevated
thereafter (Figure 7A, “Cr Δtir”). Clearly, intimin provides a
Tir-independent colonization function in this infection model.

To test whether the potential

integrin binding activity of
intimin might be the Tir-independent activity that provides this
function, we infected streptomycin pre-treated mice with C. roden-
tiumΔeae harboring pInv, which expresses the β1-chain integrin
ligand invasin. C. rodentiumΔeae/pInv, like C. rodentiumΔeae,
was present at high levels transiently (at post-infection day three)
in the stool of infected mice but was typically unable to sustain
infection, suggesting that integrin binding of intimin did not con-
tribute to colonization function (Figure 7B, “Cr Δeae/pInv”). (As
was the case for infection of untreated C57BL/6 mice, occasionally
the expression of invasin promoted a level colonization several
orders of magnitude lower than C. rodentium that expressed
endogenous or EHEC intimin; data not shown).

rodentiumΔeae/pInv–Int395 or C.

Finally, to determine what region of intimin was required
to promote infection of antibiotic pre-treated mice, we infected
mice with a C.
roden-
tiumΔeae/pInv–Int100. We found that expression of either Inv–
Int395, which binds Tir, or Inv–Int100, which does not, was
sufﬁcient to promote stable high level colonization (Figure 7B,
“Cr Δeae/pInv–Int395” and “Cr Δeae/pInv–Int100”). In some
instances, the degree of colonization by C. rodentiumΔeae/pInv–
Int100 was somewhat less than C. rodentiumΔeae/pInv–Int395
after ten days post-infection, but remained >∼106/g feces
throughout the 25- to 31-days of infection (Figure 7B and data
not shown). Thus, it appears that the C-terminal 100 residues of
intimin contain the activity that promotes colonization of antibi-
otic pre-treated mice. The ﬁnding that this portion of intimin
is incapable of binding to Tir is consistent with the hypothe-
sis that a Tir-independent function of intimin provides acritical
colonization activity in animals with altered ﬂora.

DISCUSSION
Intimin, encoded by eae, is an adhesin essential for colonization
by AE pathogens (Donnenberg et al., 1993a; Schauer and Falkow,
1993b; Tzipori et al., 1995; Dean-Nystrom et al., 1998; Ritchie

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 12

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

et al., 2003). Allelic variation of intimin has been associated with
differences in colonization of intestinal samples ex vivo (Fitzhenry
et al., 2002; Mundy et al., 2007), and inoculation of gnotobiotic
piglets with an EHEC strain harboring a plasmid encoding EPEC
intimin resulted in colonization of the small intestine, a property
not possessed by the same strain harboring a plasmid encoding
EHEC intimin (Tzipori et al., 1995). To avoid potential effects
related solely to high copy number expression of intimin, in this
study we precisely replaced the endogenous (chromosomal) eae
coding sequence of EHEC with EPEC eae. In fact, we found that
the recombinant strain was incapable of efﬁciently colonizing the
small intestine and infected the piglet indistinguishably from its
isogenic wild type EHEC parent. A previous study utilizing a new-
born (not gnotobiotic) piglet model also failed to note differences
in tissue tropism due to intimin allele, although that study was
not designed to carefully assess tissue tropism (Donnenberg et al.,
1993a). Preliminary ﬁndings suggest that neither overexpression
of EHEC nor EPEC intimin is associated with clear change in
EHEC tissue tropism in gnotobiotic piglets, suggesting that simple
overexpression does not account for the previously described tro-
pism differences (Michael J. Brady and Saul Tzipori, unpublished
observations).

To assess potential functional differences speciﬁc to intimin to
particular alleles in a second animal model, we infected mice with
C. rodentium strains expressing endogenous intimin, or intimin of
canonical EPEC or EHEC strains. We found that EHEC intimin,
like EPEC intimin, promoted efﬁcient intestinal colonization and
wild type disease. Notably, previous studies indicated that C.
rodentium expressing a chimeric intimin composed of the 554
N-terminal residues of EPEC intimin fused to the 380 C-terminal
residues of EHEC intimin colonized the murine intestine approx-
imately a 100-fold less efﬁciently than wild type C. rodentium and
was entirely defective for inducing disease (Hartland et al., 2000;
Mundy et al., 2007). The N-terminal 554 residues of EPEC and
EHEC intimin are 97% identical, and although we cannot rule out
the possibility that an important (perhaps Tir-binding) activity of
EHEC intimin is diminished by the exchange of its N-terminus for
that of EPEC intimin, an alternative hypothesis is that differences
in the murine host strain contribute to the apparent discrepant
results; previous studies demonstrating allele-speciﬁc differences
utilized Swiss NIH or C3H/Hej mice (Hartland et al., 2000; Mundy
et al., 2007), whereas we utilized C57BL/6 mice in the current
study. Additionally, anecdotal evidence suggests that the degree of
murine infection by C. rodentium is dependent on the commercial
source of mice (M. McBee, personal communication), a factor that
might inﬂuence the composition of the intestinal microbiome.
Regardless, the demonstration here that EHEC intimin can confer
apparently full biological function in this infection model pro-
vides a facile experimental system in which to assess either EHEC
intimin function or therapeutic strategies targeting this important
virulence factor.

Intimin has the capacity to recognize mammalian proteins,
such as β1-chain integrins or nucleolin, activities that have been
postulated to facilitate colonization by promoting initial bacter-
ial attachment to mucosal surfaces (Frankel et al., 1996a; Sinclair
and O’Brien, 2002). Expression of invasin, a high afﬁnity β1-
chain integrin ligand, conferred on C. rodentium the ability to

enter mammalian cells in vitro, indicating that the invasin inte-
grin binding domain was presented in a functional form on
the bacterial surface. Invasin did not, however, provide consis-
tent intimin function in promoting murine colonization by C.
rodentium, indicating that the β1-chain integrin binding activ-
ity is not the sole activity of intimin required for biological
function.

The above ﬁnding is predicted from the demonstration that
an essential receptor for intimin is the type III effector Tir,
which becomes localized in the plasma membrane after translo-
cation (Kenny et al., 1997). Tir-binding by intimin is required
for high level attachment to cultured mammalian cells (Liu et al.,
1999), and Tir-deﬁcient mutants of AE pathogens, like intimin
mutants, are incapable of intestinal colonization (Marches et al.,
2000; Deng et al., 2003; Ritchie et al., 2003). We found that C.
rodentium expressing EHEC intimin was capable of Tir-mediated
binding to mammalian cells. A C. rodentium strain expressing
the intimin–invasin chimera Inv–Int395, which contains three
intimin immunoglobulin-like domains and the C type lectin-like
domain (Frankel et al., 1995; Luo et al., 2000), also efﬁciently
bound to mammalian cells. C. rodentium expressing Inv–Int181,
which contains a region that is capable of binding Tir when
expressed as a recombinant protein, did not bind primed cells
or unmanipulated cells. Previous analysis of recombinant intimin
derivatives revealed that sequences N-terminal to the minimal
181-residue Tir-recognition domain may inﬂuence binding (Liu
et al., 1999). Interestingly however, a laboratory E. coli K12 strain
expressing Inv–Int181, in contrast to C. rodentium expressing this
chimera, bound to mammalian cells that had been pre-infected
with EPEC (Liu et al., 1999). LPS O antigen can sterically hin-
der the recognition of invasin in the outer membrane (Voorhis
et al., 1991), and the strain-speciﬁc difference in the activity of
Inv–Int181 may reﬂect differences in O antigen length and/or
density.

Intimin-mediated clustering of Tir in the plasma membrane
promotes the formation of an actin assembly complex beneath
bound bacteria, leading to actin assembly (Campellone et al.,
2004a; Touze et al., 2004). Indeed, C. rodentium expressing EHEC
intimin not only bound to monolayers that were primed with
EPECΔeae, but also triggered robust actin assembly. In con-
trast, whereas C. rodentium expressing Inv–Int395 was capable
of Tir-mediated binding to mammalian monolayers, this inter-
action did not trigger efﬁcient pedestal formation. Given the
extensive sequence differences between invasin and intimin, any
number of factors may account for the partial function of Inv–
Int395 in pedestal formation. However, multimeric interactions
greatly facilitate the efﬁciency of actin assembly (Blasutig et al.,
2008; Padrick et al., 2008; Sallee et al., 2008), and it is possi-
ble that Tir-binding by C. rodentium producing Inv–Int395 did
not result in the high-density membrane clustering of Tir that
triggers efﬁcient actin assembly. Consistent with this hypothe-
sis, C. rodentium expressing Inv–Int395 generated foci of Tir in
infected cells at a signiﬁcantly lower efﬁciency did C. rodentium
expressing full-length C. rodentium, EPEC, or EHEC intimin.
Indeed, whereas latex beads coated at high concentrations with C-
terminal fragments of puriﬁed EHEC intimin stimulated robust
actin assembly on monolayers pre-infected with EPECΔeae, E.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 13

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

coli K12 strains expressing invasin–intimin hybrids containing the
equivalent regions of intimin did not (Liu et al., 1999).

The ﬁnding that C. rodentium expressing either EHEC intimin
or Inv–Int395 both bound to Tir but only the former triggered
actin pedestal formation in vitro, provided an opportunity to
determine if pedestal formation correlated with intestinal colo-
nization. Indeed, whereas C. rodentium expressing EHEC intimin
was capable of colonizing mice to levels indistinguishable from
levels attained by wild type C. rodentium, C. rodentium expressing
Inv–Int395 colonized mice at levels a million-fold lower, barely
above background, and were cleared from the mice by day ﬁve
post-infection. C. rodentiumΔeae expressing Inv–Int395 also was
not associated with any manifestations of disease. A correlation
between the ability to generate robust pedestal in vitro and efﬁ-
cient colonization of the mammalian host has previously been
described. First, an EHEC strain lacking a second translocated
effector, EspFU (also known as TccP), remains capable of Tir
translocation and intimin-mediated binding but is incapable of
stimulating robust actin assembly (Campellone et al., 2004b; Gar-
mendia et al., 2004), and is defective (albeit mildly) in late-stage
colonization in infant rabbits (Ritchie et al., 2008). Second, a C.
rodentium encoding a mutant Tir that binds intimin but is deﬁ-
cient in downstream actin signaling is out-competed late in infec-
tion by a wild type strain during co-infection experiments (Crepin
et al., 2010). Thus, mutants of any of the three bacterial factors
directly involved in pedestal formation, intimin, Tir, and EspFU,
that speciﬁcally diminish pedestal formation in vitro also diminish
colonization in vivo. A genetically engineered C. rodentium strain
that generates pedestals using an additional mechanism did not
display a competitive advantage over a wild type strain (Girard
et al., 2009), suggesting that even though inefﬁcient pedestal for-
mation is associated with diminished colonization, pedestal for-
mation enhanced over wild type levels does not lead to enhanced
colonization. The means by which a threshold pedestal forma-
tion activity may be required for maximal intestinal colonization
is currently unclear, but the observation that the EHECΔespFU
mutant formed smaller than wild type aggregates on the intesti-
nal epithelium of piglets and showed a late colonization defect in
infant rabbits (Ritchie et al., 2008) suggests that pedestals may sta-
bilize bacterial interaction with the mucosal surface or otherwise
promote expansion of the infectious niche at that site.

REFERENCES
Barthold, S. W., Coleman, G. L., Bhatt,
P. N., Osbaldiston, G. W., and Jonas,
A. M. (1976). The etiology of trans-
missible murine colonic hyperplasia.
Lab. Anim. Sci. 26, 889–894.

Batchelor, M., Prasannan, S., Daniell, S.,
Reece, S., Connerton, I., Bloomberg,
G., Dougan, G., Frankel, G., and
Matthews, S. (2000). Structural basis
for recognition of the translocated
intimin receptor (Tir) by intimin
from enteropathogenic Escherichia
coli. EMBO J. 19, 2452–2464.

Blasutig, I. M., New, L. A., Thana-
balasuriar, A., Dayarathna, T. K.,
Goudreault, M., Quaggin, S. E., Li,

S. S., Gruenheid, S., Jones, N., and
Pawson, T. (2008). Phosphorylated
YDXV motifs and Nck SH2/SH3
adaptors act cooperatively to induce
actin reorganization. Mol. Cell Biol.
28, 2035–2046.

Brady, M.

J., Campellone, K. G.,
Ghildiyal, M., and Leong, J. M.
(2007). Enterohaemorrhagic and
enteropathogenic Escherichia coli Tir
proteins trigger a common Nck-
independent actin assembly path-
way. Cell. Microbiol. 9, 2242–2253.

Brady, M. J., Radhakrishnan, P., Liu,
H., Magoun, L., Murphy, K. C.,
Mukherjee, J., Donohue-Rolfe, A.,
Tzipori, S., and Leong, J. M. (2011).

Whereas Tir-mediated actin pedestal formation appears to
contribute to colonization of gnotobiotic piglets and conven-
tional mice, infection of streptomycin pre-treated revealed a Tir-
independent function of intimin. Intimin function in this model
was largely independent of intimin allele – C. rodentium expressing
EPEC or EHEC intimin colonized these mice at high levels for at
least two weeks, although they both showed somewhat diminished
colonization relative to wild type C. rodentium beyond that time
point. Most notably, whereas C. rodentiumΔeae was incapable of
stably colonizing antibiotic-treated mice, C. rodentiumΔtir col-
onized these mice at least as well as wild type C. rodentium. The
ability of intimin to bind host cells or components of host cells such
as β1-chain integrins or nucleolin has been previously mapped to
C-terminal portions of intimin (Frankel et al., 1994, 1996a; Sin-
clair and O’Brien, 2002, 2004). We found that the colonization
activity of intimin in this infection model was retained by intimin
derivative sharboring C-terminal regions of intimin, even if such
derivatives (e.g., Inv–Int100, containing only the C-terminal 100
residues of intimin) were incapable of binding Tir. Intimin also
contributes to the disruption of epithelial barrier function in vitro
in a Tir-independent manner (Dean and Kenny, 2004). Notably,
the Tir-independent intimin activities in cell attachment or bar-
rier disruption have been characterized entirely by in vitro assays,
and the contribution of these activities to colonization and dis-
ease during mammalian infection has not been documented. A
comparison of these Tir-independent intimin in vitro activities
to intimin function in promoting colonization of streptomycin-
treated mice might provide insight into novel activities of intimin
relevant to colonization of a mammalian host.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Joseph Newman for helpful discussion and technical
assistance. We thank the UMASS DERC core facility for ﬁxing,
sectioning, and staining all tissue sections and also Lara Strittmat-
ter and Greg Hendricks of the UMass Electron Microscopy Core
Facility. The anti-EHEC intimin antibody was a generous gift
from Alison O’Brien and the anti-OmpA antibody was a kind gift
from Carol Kumamoto. This work was supported by PHS grant
CA63112 from the NCI to David B. Schauer and R01-AI46454
to John M. Leong. Steven A. Luperchio was supported by NIEHS
Training Grant ES07020.

Enhanced actin pedestal formation
by enterohemorrhagic Escherichia
coli O157:H7 adapted to the mam-
malian host. Front. Microbiol. 2:226.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2011.00226

Campellone,

of

K.

G.

(2010).
effec-
Cytoskeleton-modulating
and
tors
Escherichia
enterohaemorrhagic
coli: Tir, EspFu and actin pedestal
assembly. FEBS J. 277, 2390–2402.

enteropathogenic

Campellone, K. G., Giese, A., Tipper,
D. J., and Leong, J. M. (2002). A
tyrosine-phosphorylated 12-amino-
acid sequence of enteropathogenic
Escherichia
the
host adaptor protein Nck and is

coli Tir binds

required for Nck localization to
actin pedestals. Mol. Microbiol. 43,
1227–1241.

is mediated by

Campellone, K. G., and Leong, J. M.
actin
(2005). Nck-independent
assembly
two
phosphorylated tyrosines within
Escherichia
enteropathogenic
coli
56,
416–432.

Tir. Mol. Microbiol.

Campellone, K. G., Rankin, S., Pawson,
T., Kirschner, M. W., Tipper, D. J.,
and Leong, J. M. (2004a). Clustering
of Nck by a 12-residue Tir phospho-
peptide is sufﬁcient to trigger local-
ized actin assembly. J. Cell Biol. 164,
407–416.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 14

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

Campellone, K. G., Robbins, D., and
Leong, J. M. (2004b). EspFU is
a translocated EHEC effector that
interacts with Tir and N-WASP and
promotes Nck-independent actin
assembly. Dev. Cell 7, 217–228.

Campellone, K. G., Roe, A. J., Lobner-
Olesen, A., Murphy, K. C., Magoun,
L., Brady, M. J., Donohue-Rolfe,
A., Tzipori, S., Gally, D. L., Leong,
J. M., and Marinus, M. G. (2007).
Increased adherence
and actin
pedestal formation by dam-deﬁcient
enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli
O157:H7. Mol. Microbiol.
63,
1468–1481.

Chen, H. D., and Frankel, G. (2005).
Enteropathogenic Escherichia coli:
unravelling pathogenesis.
FEMS
Microbiol. Rev. 29, 83–98.

Crepin, V. F., Girard, F., Schuller,
S., Phillips, A. D., Mousnier, A.,
and Frankel, G. (2010). Dissect-
ing the role of
the Tir:Nck and
Tir:IRTKS/IRSp53 signalling path-
ways in vivo. Mol. Microbiol. 75,
308–323.

Datsenko, K. A., and Wanner, B. L.
(2000). One-step inactivation of
chromosomal genes in Escherichia
coli K-12 using PCR products.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97,
6640–6645.

Dean, P.,

and Kenny, B.

(2004).
Intestinal barrier dysfunction by
enteropathogenic Escherichia coli is
mediated by two effector molecules
and a bacterial surface protein. Mol.
Microbiol. 54, 665–675.

Dean, P., and Kenny, B. (2011). Cell-
surface nucleolin is sequestered into
EPEC microcolonies and may play
a role during infection. Microbiology
157, 1761–1767.

Dean-Nystrom, E. A., Bosworth, B. T.,
Moon, H. W., and O’Brien, A. D.
(1998). Escherichia coli O157:H7
requires intimin for enteropatho-
genicity in calves. Infect. Immun. 66,
4560–4563.

Deng, W., Vallance, B. A., Li, Y., Puente,
J. L., and Finlay, B. B. (2003).
Citrobacter rodentium translocated
intimin receptor (Tir) is an essen-
tial virulence factor needed for actin
condensation,
intestinal coloniza-
tion and colonic hyperplasia in mice.
Mol. Microbiol. 48, 95–115.

DeVinney, R., Stein, M., Reinscheid, D.,
Abe, A., Ruschkowski, S., and Fin-
lay, B. B. (1999). Enterohemorrhagic
Escherichia coli O157:H7 produces
Tir, which is translocated to the host
cell membrane but is not tyrosine
phosphorylated. Infect. Immun. 67,
2389–2398.

Donnenberg, M. S., and Kaper,

J.
B. (1991). Construction of an eae

deletion mutant of enteropatho-
genic Escherichia coli by using
a positive-selection suicide vector.
Infect. Immun. 59, 4310–4317.

Donnenberg, M. S., Tacket, C. O.,
James, S. P., Losonsky, G., Nataro,
J. P., Wasserman, S. S., Kaper, J. B.,
and Levine, M. M. (1993a). Role
the eaeA gene in experimen-
of
enteropathogenic Escherichia
tal
coli
infection. J. Clin. Invest. 92,
1412–1417.

Donnenberg, M. S., Tzipori, S., McKee,
M. L., O’Brien, A. D., Alroy, J., and
Kaper, J. B. (1993b). The role of
the eae gene of enterohemorrhagic
Escherichia coli in intimate attach-
ment
in vitro and in a porcine
model. J. Clin. Invest. 92, 1418–1424.
Finlay, B. B., and Falkow, S. (1988).
Comparison of the invasion strate-
gies used by Salmonella cholerae-
suis, Shigella ﬂexneri and Yersinia
enterocolitica to enter cultured ani-
mal cells: endosome acidiﬁcation is
not required for bacterial invasion or
intracellular replication. Biochimie
70, 1089–1099.

Fitzhenry, R. J., Pickard, D. J., Hart-
land, E. L., Reece, S., Dougan, G.,
Phillips, A. D., and Frankel, G.
(2002). Intimin type inﬂuences the
site of human intestinal mucosal
colonisation by enterohaemorrhagic
Escherichia coli O157:H7. Gut 50,
180–185.

Frankel, G., Candy, D. C., Ever-
est, P., and Dougan, G. (1994).
Characterization of the C-terminal
domains of intimin-like proteins of
enteropathogenic and enterohemor-
rhagic Escherichia coli, Citrobacter
freundii, and Hafnia alvei. Infect.
Immun. 62, 1835–1842.

Frankel, G., Candy, D. C., Fabiani, E.,
Adu-Bobie, J., Gil, S., Novakova,
M., Phillips, A. D., and Dougan, G.
(1995). Molecular characterization
of a carboxy-terminal eukaryotic-
cell-binding domain of intimin from
enteropathogenic Escherichia coli.
Infect. Immun. 63, 4323–4328.

Frankel, G., Lider, O., Hershkoviz, R.,
Mould, A. P., Kachalsky, S. G.,
Candy, D., Cahalon, L., Humphries,
M. J., and Dougan, G. (1996a).
The cell-binding domain of intimin
from enteropathogenic Escherichia
coli binds to beta1 integrins. J. Biol.
Chem. 271, 20359–20364.

Frankel, G., Phillips, A. D., Novakova,
M., Field, H., Candy, D. C., Schauer,
D. B., Douce, G., and Dougan, G.
(1996b). Intimin from enteropath-
ogenic Escherichia
restores
murine virulence to a Citrobacter
rodentium eaeA mutant: induction
of an immunoglobulin A response

coli

to intimin and EspB. Infect. Immun.
64, 5315–5325.

Frankel, G., and Phillips, A. D. (2008).
Attaching effacing Escherichia coli
and paradigms of Tir-triggered
actin polymerization: getting off
the pedestal. Cell. Microbiol. 10,
549–556.

Garmendia, J., Phillips, A. D., Car-
lier, M. F., Chong, Y., Schuller, S.,
Marches, O., Dahan, S., Oswald, E.,
Shaw, R. K., Knutton, S., and Frankel,
G. (2004). TccP is an enterohaem-
orrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7
type III effector protein that couples
Tir to the actin-cytoskeleton. Cell.
Microbiol. 6, 1167–1183.

Ghaem-Maghami, M., Simmons, C. P.,
Daniell, S., Pizza, M., Lewis, D.,
Frankel, G., and Dougan, G. (2001).
Intimin-speciﬁc immune responses
prevent bacterial colonization by
the attaching-effacing pathogen Cit-
robacter rodentium. Infect. Immun.
69, 5597–5605.

Girard, F., Batisson, I., Frankel, G. M.,
Harel, J., and Fairbrother, J. M.
(2005). Interaction of enteropath-
ogenic and Shiga toxin-producing
Escherichia coli and porcine intesti-
nal mucosa: role of
intimin and
Tir in adherence. Infect. Immun. 73,
6005–6016.

Girard, F., Crepin, V. F., and Frankel,
G. (2009). Modelling of infection
by enteropathogenic Escherichia coli
strains in lineages 2 and 4 ex vivo and
in vivo by using Citrobacter roden-
tium expressing TccP. Infect. Immun.
77, 1304–1314.

Hartland, E. L., Huter, V., Higgins, L.
M., Goncalves, N. S., Dougan, G.,
Phillips, A. D., MacDonald, T. T.,
and Frankel, G. (2000). Expression
of intimin gamma from enterohe-
morrhagic Escherichia coli
in Cit-
robacter rodentium. Infect. Immun.
68, 4637–4646.

Isberg, R. R., and Leong, J. M. (1990).
Multiple β1 chain integrins are
receptors for invasin, a protein that
promoted bacterial penetration into
mammalian cells. Cell 60, 861–871.
Isberg, R. R., Voorhis, D. L., and Falkow,
S. (1987). Identiﬁcation of invasin: a
protein that allows enteric bacteria
to penetrate cultured mammalian
cells. Cell 50, 769–778.

Jerse, A. E., Yu, J., Tall, B. D., and
Kaper, J. B. (1990). A genetic locus
of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli
necessary for the production of
attaching and effacing lesions on tis-
sue culture cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 87, 7839–7843.

Kaper, J. B., Nataro, J. P., and Mobley,
H. L. (2004). Pathogenic Escherichia
coli. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2, 123–140.

Kenny, B., DeVinney, R., Stein, M., Rein-
scheid, D. J., Frey, E. A., and Finlay,
B. B. (1997). Enteropathogenic E.
coli (EPEC) transfers its receptor for
intimate adherence into mammalian
cells. Cell 91, 511–520.

Kenny, B., and Finlay, B. B. (1995).
Protein secretion by enteropatho-
genic Escherichia coli
is essential
for transducing signals to epithelial
cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92,
7991–7995.

Liu, H., Magoun, L., Luperchio, S.,
Schauer, D. B., and Leong,
J.
M. (1999). The Tir-binding region
of enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia
coli intimin is sufﬁcient to trigger
actin condensation after bacterial-
induced host cell signalling. Mol.
Microbiol. 34, 67–81.

Liu, H., Radhakrishnan, P., Magoun, L.,
Prabu, M., Campellone, K. G., Sav-
age, P., He, F., Schiffer, C. A., and
Leong, J. M. (2002). Point mutants
of EHEC intimin that diminish
Tir recognition and actin pedestal
formation highlight a putative Tir
binding pocket. Mol. Microbiol. 45,
1557–1573.

Lommel,

S., Benesch,

S., Rohde,
M., Wehland, J., and Rottner, K.
(2004). Enterohaemorrhagic and
enteropathogenic Escherichia coli
use different mechanisms for actin
pedestal formation that converge on
N-WASP. Cell. Microbiol. 6, 243–254.
Luo, Y., Frey, E. A., Pfuetzner, R.
A., Creagh, A. L., Knoechel, D.
G., Haynes, C. A., Finlay, B. B.,
and Strynadka, N. C. (2000). Crys-
tal structure of enteropathogenic
Escherichia
intimin-receptor
complex. Nature 405, 1073–1077.

coli

Luperchio, S. A., and Schauer, D. B.
(2001). Molecular pathogenesis of
Citrobacter rodentium and transmis-
sible murine colonic hyperplasia.
Microbes Infect. 3, 333–340.

Marches, O., Nougayrede, J. P., Boullier,
S., Mainil, J., Charlier, G., Raymond,
I., Pohl, P., Boury, M., De Rycke, J.,
Milon, A., and Oswald, E. (2000).
Role of Tir and intimin in the vir-
ulence of rabbit enteropathogenic
Escherichia coli serotype O103:H2.
Infect. Immun. 68, 2171–2182.

McDaniel, T. K., Jarvis, K. G., Don-
nenberg, M. S., and Kaper, J. B.
(1995). A genetic locus of entero-
cyte effacement conserved among
diverse enterobacterial pathogens.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92,
1664–1668.

Melton-Celsa, A. R., Darnell,

S.
(1996).
C., and O’Brien, A. D.
toxins
Activation of
Shiga-like
by mouse and human intestinal
mucus correlates with virulence of

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 15

Mallick et al.

Intimin function in diverse models

enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli
O91:H21 isolates in orally infected,
streptomycin-treated mice.
Infect.
Immun. 64, 1569–1576.

Mohawk, K. L., and O’Brien, A. D.
(2011). Mouse models of Escherichia
coli O157:H7 infection and Shiga
toxin injection. J. Biomed. Biotech-
nol. 2011, 258185.

Moon, H. W., Whipp, S. C., Argenzio,
R. A., Levine, M. M., and Giannella,
R. A. (1983). Attaching and effac-
ing activities of rabbit and human
enteropathogenic Escherichia coli in
pig and rabbit
Infect.
Immun. 41, 1340–1351.

intestines.

Mundy, R., MacDonald, T. T., Dougan,
G., Frankel, G., and Wiles, S. (2005).
Citrobacter rodentium of mice and
man. Cell. Microbiol. 7, 1697–1706.
Mundy, R., Schuller, S., Girard, F., Fair-
brother, J. M., Phillips, A. D., and
Frankel, G. (2007). Functional stud-
ies of intimin in vivo and ex vivo:
implications for host speciﬁcity and
tissue tropism. Microbiology 153,
959–967.

Murphy, K. C., and Campellone, K.
G. (2003). Lambda red-mediated
recombinogenic
of
enterohemorrhagic and enteropath-
ogenic E. coli. BMC Mol. Biol. 4, 11.
doi:10.1186/1471-2199-4-11

engineering

Newman, J. V., Zabel, B. A., Jha, S. S.,
and Schauer, D. B. (1999). Citrobac-
ter rodentium espB is necessary for
signal transduction and for infection
of laboratory mice. Infect. Immun.
67, 6019–6025.

Nicholls, L., Grant, T. H., and Robins-
Browne, R. M. (2000). Identiﬁca-
tion of a novel genetic locus that
is required for in vitro adhesion of
a clinical isolate of enterohaemor-
rhagic Escherichia coli to epithelial
cells. Mol. Microbiol. 35, 275–288.

Padrick, S. B., Cheng, H. C., Ismail, A.
M., Panchal, S. C., Doolittle, L. K.,
Kim, S., Skehan, B. M., Umetani, J.,
Brautigam, C. A., Leong, J. M., and
Rosen, M. K. (2008). Hierarchical
regulation of WASP/WAVE proteins.
Mol. Cell 32, 426–438.

Pennington, H. (2010). Escherichia coli

O157. Lancet 376, 1428–1435.

Phillips, A. D., and Frankel, G. (2000).
Intimin-mediated tissue speciﬁcity
in enteropathogenic Escherichia coli
interaction with human intestinal
organ cultures. J. Infect. Dis. 181,
1496–1500.

Riley, L. W., Remis, R. S., Helgerson,
S. D., McGee, H. B., Wells, J. G.,
Davis, B. R., Hebert, R. J., Olcott, E.

S., Johnson, L. M., Hargrett, N. T.,
Blake, P. A., and Cohen, M. L. (1983).
Hemorrhagic colitis associated with
a rare Escherichia coli serotype. N.
Engl. J. Med. 308, 681–685.

Ritchie, J. M., Brady, M. J., Riley, K. N.,
Ho, T. D., Campellone, K. G., Her-
man, I. M., Donohue-Rolfe, A., Tzi-
pori, S., Waldor, M. K., and Leong,
J. M. (2008). EspFU, a type III-
translocated effector of actin assem-
bly, fosters epithelial association and
late-stage intestinal colonization by
E. coli O157:H7. Cell. Microbiol. 10,
836–847.

Ritchie, J. M., Thorpe, C. M., Rogers,
A. B., and Waldor, M. K. (2003).
Critical roles for stx2, eae, and Tir
in enterohemorrhagic Escherichia
coli-induced diarrhea and intesti-
nal inﬂammation in infant rabbits.
Infect. Immun. 71, 7129–7139.

Rose, R. E. (1988). The nucleotide
sequence of pACYC184. Nucleic
Acids Res. 16, 355.

Rosenshine, I., Ruschkowski, S., Stein,
M., Reinscheid, D. J., Mills, S. D.,
and Finlay, B. B. (1996). A path-
ogenic bacterium triggers epithelial
signals to form a functional bac-
terial receptor that mediates actin
pseudopod formation. EMBO J. 15,
2613–2624.

Sallee, N. A., Rivera, G. M., Dueber, J. E.,
Vasilescu, D., Mullins, R. D., Mayer,
B. J., and Lim, W. A. (2008). The
pathogen protein EspF(U) hijacks
actin polymerization using mim-
icry and multivalency. Nature 454,
1005–1008.

Schauer, D. B., and Falkow, S. (1993a).
Attaching and effacing locus of a Cit-
robacter freundii biotype that causes
transmissible murine colonic hyper-
plasia. Infect. Immun. 61, 2486–2492.
Schauer, D. B., and Falkow, S. (1993b).
The eae gene of Citrobacter freundii
biotype 4280 is necessary for col-
onization in transmissible murine
colonic hyperplasia. Infect. Immun.
61, 4654–4661.

Simmons, C. P., Clare, S., Ghaem-
Maghami, M., Uren, T. K., Rankin,
J., Huett, A., Goldin, R., Lewis, D. J.,
MacDonald, T. T., Strugnell, R. A.,
Frankel, G., and Dougan, G. (2003).
Central role for B lymphocytes and
CD4+ T cells in immunity to infec-
tion by the attaching and effac-
ing pathogen Citrobacter rodentium.
Infect. Immun. 71, 5077–5086.

Sinclair, J. F., and O’Brien, A. D. (2002).
Cell surface-localized nucleolin is a
eukaryotic receptor for the adhesin

intimin-gamma of
enterohemor-
rhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7. J.
Biol. Chem. 277, 2876–2885.

Sinclair,

J. F., and O’Brien, A. D.
(2004). Intimin types alpha, beta,
and gamma bind to nucleolin
with equivalent afﬁnity but lower
avidity than to the translocated
intimin receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 279,
33751–33758.

Spears, K. J., Roe, A. J., and Gally,
D. L. (2006). A comparison of
enteropathogenic and enterohaem-
orrhagic Escherichia coli pathogen-
esis. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 255,
187–202.

Tabor, S., and Richardson, C. C. (1985).
A bacteriophage T7 RNA poly-
merase/promoter system for con-
trolled exclusive expression of spe-
ciﬁc genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 82, 1074–1078.

Touze, T., Hayward, R. D., Eswaran,
J., Leong, J. M., and Koronakis,
V. (2004). Self-association of EPEC
intimin mediated by the beta-barrel-
containing anchor domain: a role in
clustering of the Tir receptor. Mol.
Microbiol. 51, 73–87.

Tran Van Nhieu, G., and Isberg, R.
R. (1993). Bacterial internalization
mediated by β1 chain integrins
is determined by ligand afﬁnity
and receptor density. EMBO J. 12,
1887–1895.

Tzipori, S., Gunzer, F., Donnenberg, M.
S., de Montigny, L., Kaper, J. B., and
Donohue-Rolfe, A. (1995). The role
of the eaeA gene in diarrhea and
neurological complications in a gno-
tobiotic piglet model of enterohe-
morrhagic Escherichia coli infection.
Infect. Immun. 63, 3621–3627.

Vallance, B. A., Deng, W., Knodler, L. A.,
and Finlay, B. B. (2002). Mice lack-
ing T and B lymphocytes develop
transient colitis and crypt hyper-
plasia yet suffer impaired bacterial
clearance during Citrobacter roden-
tium infection. Infect. Immun. 70,
2070–2081.

Vingadassalom, D., Kazlauskas, A., Ske-
han, B., Cheng, H. C., Magoun, L.,
Robbins, D., Rosen, M. K., Sak-
sela, K., and Leong, J. M. (2009).
Insulin receptor tyrosine kinase sub-
strate links the E. coli O157:H7
actin assembly effectors Tir and
EspF(U) during pedestal formation.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106,
6754–6759.

Voorhis, D. L., Dillon, S., Formal, S.
B., and Isberg, R. R. (1991). An
O antigen can interfere with the

function of the Yersinia pseudotuber-
culosis invasin protein. Mol. Micro-
biol. 5, 317–325.

Wadolkowski, E. A., Burris,

J. A.,
and O’Brien, A. D. (1990a). Mouse
model
for colonization and dis-
ease caused by enterohemorrhagic
Escherichia coli O157:H7.
Infect.
Immun. 58, 2438–2445.

Wadolkowski, E. A., Sung, L. M., Bur-
ris, J. A., Samuel, J. E., and O’Brien,
A. D. (1990b). Acute renal tubu-
lar necrosis and death of mice
orally
infected with Escherichia
coli strains that produce Shiga-like
toxin type II. Infect. Immun. 58,
3959–3965.

Yanisch-Perron, C., Vieira,

J., and
Messing, J. (1985). Improved M13
phage cloning vectors and host
strains: nucleotide sequences of the
M13mp18 and pUC19 vectors. Gene
33, 103–119.

Yi, Y., Ma, Y., Gao, F., Mao, X., Peng,
H., Feng, Y., Fan, Z., Wang, G., Guo,
G., Yan, J., Zeng, H., Zou, Q., and
Gao, G. F. (2010). Crystal struc-
ture of EHEC intimin: insights into
the complementarity between EPEC
and EHEC. PLoS ONE 5, e15285.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0015285

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 05 April 2011; accepted: 07 Jan-
uary 2012; published online: 31 January
2012.
Citation: Mallick EM, Brady MJ, Luper-
chio SA, Vanguri VK, Magoun L, Liu
H, Sheppard BJ, Mukherjee J, Donohue-
Rolfe A, Tzipori S, Leong JM and Schauer
DB (2012) Allele- and Tir-independent
functions of intimin in diverse animal
infection models. Front. Microbio. 3:11.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00011
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Cellular and Infection Microbiology, a
specialty of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Mallick, Brady, Luper-
chio, Vanguri, Magoun, Liu, Shep-
pard, Mukherjee, Donohue-Rolfe, Tzi-
pori, Leong and Schauer. This is an
open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 11 | 16

