METHODS ARTICLE
published: 08 February 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00040

A microﬂuidic device for simple and rapid evaluation of
multidrug efﬂux pump inhibitors

Ryota Iino1,2, Kunihiko Nishino3, Hiroyuki Noji 1,2, Akihito Yamaguchi 4,5 and Yoshimi Matsumoto4*

1 Department of Applied Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan
2 Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Chiyodaku, Tokyo, Japan
3 Laboratory of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Institute of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan
4 Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan
5 Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan

Edited by:
Tzi Bun Ng, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, China
Reviewed by:
Veljo Kisand, University of Tartu,
Estonia
M. Pilar Francino, Center for Public
Health Research, Spain
Jer-Horng Wu, National Cheng Kung
University, Taiwan
*Correspondence:
Yoshimi Matsumoto, Institute of
Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research,
Osaka University, Department of Cell
Membrane Biology, 8-1 Mihogaoka,
Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.
e-mail: yoshimi@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

Recently, multidrug-resistant pathogens have disseminated widely owing essentially to
their increased multidrug efﬂux pump activity. Presently, there is a scarcity of new antibac-
terial agents, and hence, inhibitors of multidrug efﬂux pumps belonging to the resistance–
nodulation–cell division (RND) family appear useful
in the treatment of infections by
multidrug-resistant pathogens. Moreover, recent progress in microfabrication technolo-
gies has expanded the application of nano/micro-devices to the ﬁeld of human healthcare,
such as the detection of infections and diagnosis of diseases. We developed a microﬂu-
idic channel device for a simple and rapid evaluation of bacterial drug efﬂux activity.
By combining the microﬂuidic device with a ﬂuorogenic compound, ﬂuorescein-di-β-D-
galactopyranoside, which is hydrolyzed to a ﬂuorescent dye in the cytoplasm of Escherichia
coli, we successfully evaluated the effects of inhibitors on the RND-type multidrug efﬂux
pumps MexAB–OprM and MexXY–OprM from Pseudomonas aeruginosa in E. coli. Our new
method successfully detected the MexB-speciﬁc inhibitory effect of D13-9001 and revealed
an unexpected membrane-permeabilizing effect of Phe-Arg-β-naphthylamide, which has
long been used as an efﬂux pump inhibitor.

Keywords: ﬂuorescein-di-β-D-galactopyranoside, microﬂuidic channel, ﬂuorescence microscopy, pyridopyrimidine,
Phe-Arg-β-naphthylamide, polymyxin B nonapeptide, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

INTRODUCTION
Currently, increase in multidrug resistance among clinical iso-
lates is a major problem in infection control. In particular, the
so-called “multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (MDRP)”
which is resistant to major antipseudomonal agents such as car-
bapenems, quinolones, and aminoglycosides (Sekiguchi et al.,
2007b; Kirikae et al., 2008), has been isolated and identiﬁed as
a cause of nosocomial outbreaks in Japan (Sekiguchi et al., 2007a;
Satoh et al., 2008). P. aeruginosa has natural intrinsic resistance
tendencies, and MDRP isolates have variable complex resistance
mechanisms (Livermore, 2002; Lister et al., 2009). In particular,
multidrug efﬂux pumps, particularly resistance–nodulation–cell
division (RND) family pumps, can decrease the sensitivity of P.
aeruginosa to various compounds (Masuda et al., 2000; Ryan et al.,
2001). The RND-type multidrug efﬂux systems have extremely
broad substrate speciﬁcities and protect the cells from the actions
of antibiotics. They usually function as three-component assem-
blies spanning the outer and cytoplasmic membranes and the
periplasmic space of Gram-negative bacteria. That is, the RND
efﬂux system consists of three different proteins: a cytoplasmic
membrane protein (such as MexB), a membrane fusion protein
(MexA), and an outer membrane channel (OprM).

Twelve intrinsic efﬂux systems belonging to the RND family
have been identiﬁed from the genomic sequence of P. aeruginosa
(Schweizer, 2003). Among them, MexAB–OprM, MexCD–OprJ,
MexEF–OprN, and MexXY efﬂux systems are known to have

important roles in multidrug resistance (Morita et al., 2001; Llanes
et al., 2004; Mesaros et al., 2007; Lister et al., 2009). These sys-
tems can increase their resistance levels by acquiring additional
resistance factors (Henrichfreise et al., 2007; Giske et al., 2008).
During the current era of scarcity of new antibacterial agents,
RND pump inhibitors in combination with available antibiotics
could be useful for treating MDRP infections. Although no clin-
ically useful inhibitor is known presently, the enhancing effects
of experimentally available efﬂux pump inhibitors, namely pyri-
dopyrimidine (D13-9001; Yoshida et al., 2007) and Phe-Arg-β-
naphthylamide (PAβN, MC-207,110; Lomovskaya et al., 2001), on
the antibacterial activities of combined antibiotics have been pub-
lished (Lomovskaya et al., 2001; Mesaros et al., 2007; Tohidpour
et al., 2009). Recently, the 3D structures of AcrB (Murakami et al.,
2002) and MexB (Sennhauser et al., 2009) and co-crystal struc-
tures of AcrB with various substrates were resolved (Murakami
et al., 2006; Nakashima et al., 2011), and much information
regarding their mechanisms of efﬂux is now available. At present,
rational approaches are being used to develop potent efﬂux
pump inhibitors. However, there is no satisfactory method to
directly determine the efﬂux-inhibiting activities of candidate
compounds.

In this review article, we focused on a new technique for
a simple and rapid measurement of the activities of bacter-
ial drug efﬂux pumps and inhibitors by using a microﬂuidic
device recently reported by Matsumoto et al. (2011). We utilized

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 40 | 1

Iino et al.

Visualization of efﬂux pump activity

an appropriate substrate, ﬂuorescein-di-β-d-galactopyranoside
(FDG), for a visual assay. FDG is non-ﬂuorescent until it is hydrol-
ysed by β-galactosidase in the cytoplasm of Escherichia coli to
produce a highly ﬂuorescent dye, ﬂuorescein (Russo-Marie et al.,
1993; Fieldler and Hinz, 1994; Yang and Hu, 2004). We conﬁrmed
that both FDG and ﬂuorescein are substrates of RND pumps in E.
coli. In combination with microfabrication technologies including
soft lithography (Whitesides et al., 2001), we constructed a simple
microﬂuidic channel device in order to observe several bacterial
cultures simultaneously. By combining FDG and the microﬂu-
idic device, we developed a novel and highly sensitive method to
evaluate the efﬂux inhibitory activities of compounds against P.
aeruginosa MexB and MexY in E. coli and clariﬁed the different
action mechanisms of two inhibitors, D13-9001 and PAβN.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
BACTERIAL STRAINS
Escherichia coli MG1655 (wild-type), and its efﬂux pump
gene deletion mutants – ΔacrB, ΔtolC, and ΔacrBΔtolC
(Nishino et al., 2008) – were used. The vector plasmid
pMMB67HE recombined with efﬂux pump genes mexAB–
oprM and mexXY–oprM from P. aeruginosa (Mokhonov et al.,
2004) was transformed with E. coli MG1655 ΔacrBΔtolC to
construct ΔacrBΔtolC/pMMB67HE (ΔBC/pV), ΔacrBΔtolC/
pMMB67HE::mexAB–oprM (ΔBC/pABM), and ΔacrBΔtolC/
pMMB67HE::mexXY–oprM (ΔBC/pXYM). For these strains har-
boring a plasmid, ampicillin (Sigma-Aldrich, Tokyo, Japan) was
added to the cultures to ensure retention of the plasmid. Lactose
(Sigma-Aldrich) and isopropyl-β-d-galactopyranoside (IPTG;
Sigma-Aldrich) were added to the medium for β-galactosidase and
plasmid-mediated pump inductions, respectively. P. aeruginosa
IMCJ2.S1 (Sekiguchi et al., 2005) served as the multidrug-resistant
strain, and P. aeruginosa PAO1 served as the standard strain.

ANTIBACTERIAL AGENTS AND CHEMICALS
The antibacterial agents used were aztreonam (Sigma-Aldrich),
ciproﬂoxacin (Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan),
and erythromycin (Nacalai Tesque, Inc., Kyoto, Japan). D13-9001
(Daiichi Sankyo Co., Tokyo, Japan) and PAβN (Sigma-Aldrich)
were used as efﬂux pump inhibitors. Polymyxin B (MERCK
KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) was used as an outer and inner
membrane permeabilizer, and Polymyxin B nonapeptide (PMBN;
Sigma-Aldrich) was used as an outer membrane permeabilizer.

PREPARATION OF MICROFLUIDIC CHANNELS
Microﬂuidic channels (100 μm width, 17 μm height, 25–33 mm
length; Figure 1B) fabricated in polydimethylsiloxane (Silpot 184,
Dow Corning Toray Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) on a cover glass
(Matsunami Glass Ind., Ltd., Osaka, Japan) were prepared by a
conventional method described in previous studies (Whitesides
et al., 2001; Matsumoto et al., 2011).

EFFLUX PUMP INHIBITION ASSAY
FDG (Marker Gene Technologies, Inc., Eugene, USA), a ﬂuoro-
genic compound, is hydrolyzed by β-galactosidase in the cytoplasm
of E. coli to produce a ﬂuorescent dye, ﬂuorescein. Both FDG
and ﬂuorescein are substrates of an efﬂux pump, AcrB, in E. coli.

AcrB effectively prevents FDG inﬂux in wild-type cells, resulting
in no ﬂuorescence. The ΔacrB and ΔtolC strains easily imported
and hydrolyzed FDG to ﬂuorescein, which is exported by residual
pumps in the ΔacrB strain. Consequently, ﬂuorescent medium in
ΔacrB and ﬂuorescent ΔtolC and ΔacrBΔtolC cells were observed
in the microﬂuidic channels (Figures 1A,B). The induced activities
of β-galactosidase in strains used in this study were compara-
ble after acrB and/or tolC deletion and the plasmid-mediated
introduction of pumps from P. aeruginosa.

The effects of inhibitors on FDG and ﬂuorescein efﬂux were
observed in the microﬂuidic channel with a BZ-8000 ﬂuorescence
microscope (Keyence, Osaka, Japan). Overnight Luria–Bertani
(LB) broth (Becton Dickinson and Company, Sparks, USA) cul-
tures were inoculated in fresh LB broth and incubated on a shaker
until the culture reached an OD600 of 0.6–0.8. Lactose (50 mM)
was added to induce β-galactosidase activity in strains harbor-
ing no plasmid. LB medium containing 100 μg/ml ampicillin and
1 mM IPTG was used to grow strains harboring the plasmid in
order to retain plasmid and induce plasmid-mediated pumps and
chromosomal β-galactosidase. The cultures were premixed with
an inhibitor, injected in the microﬂuidic channels (Figure 1B)
with 100 μg/ml FDG, and observed under the microscope after
incubation for 15 min at 37˚C. Different samples containing mul-
tiple channels were observed simultaneously in a single image ﬁeld
(Figures 1B–D).

DETERMINATION OF MINIMUM INHIBITORY CONCENTRATION AND
CHECKERBOARD MIC
The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of the antibac-
terial agents and checkerboard MICs of these agents in com-
bination with the inhibitors or the membrane permeabilizer
were determined using the standard micro dilution method
deﬁned by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute
(Wayne, PA, USA). Strains harboring the plasmid were cul-
tured in LB medium containing 100 μg/ml ampicillin and
1 mM IPTG. The fractional
inhibitory concentration (FIC)
indices were calculated as follows: FIC= [MICA in combination/
MICA alone + MICB in combination/MICB alone]. Synergy was deﬁned

as an FIC index of less than 0.5.

RESULTS
EVALUATION OF INHIBITORS BY THE CLASSIC CHECKERBOARD
METHOD
Checkerboard MIC determination is a simple method to evalu-
ate the effects of inhibitors on antibacterial activity. Although the
method can only evaluate the combinatorial effect of an inhibitor
on antimicrobials (synergy, addition, indifference, or antagonism),
it is possible to estimate the action mechanism of an inhibitor
by using different types of antimicrobials and target gene-deleted
or gene-introduced mutants. From the viewpoint of efﬂux, we
used three different types of antimicrobial agents in this study.
Aztreonam is a substrate of MexB, although ciproﬂoxacin and
erythromycin are substrates of several pumps. Furthermore, from
the viewpoint of inﬂux, ciproﬂoxacin easily penetrates the outer
membranes of Gram-negative bacteria, erythromycin hardly pen-
etrates them (Vaara, 1993), while the penetrability of aztreonam
appears to be intermediate of the two. Table 1 shows the MICs

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 40 | 2

Iino et al.

Visualization of efﬂux pump activity

FIGURE 1 | The micro ﬂuidic device and principle of the efﬂux pump
inhibition assay used in this study. (A) Mechanism of the inhibition assay
of efﬂux pumps using FDG as a substrate. (B) Images of the microﬂuidic
device, and an example of the assay: bright-ﬁeld (top) and ﬂuorescence
images (bottom) of the E. coli wild-type, ΔacrB (ΔB), ΔtolC (ΔC), and

ΔacrBΔtolC (ΔBC) cells. (C) Fuorescence images of the
ΔacrBΔtolC/pABM (ΔBC/pABM), ΔacrBΔtolC/pXYM (ΔBC/pXYM) cells
treated with different concentrations of D13-9001. (D) Fluorescence images
of the E. coli ΔtolC cells treated with different concentrations of D13-9001,
PAβN, PMBN, and polymyxin B. Modiﬁed from Matsumoto et al. (2011).

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 40 | 3

Iino et al.

Visualization of efﬂux pump activity

Table 1 | Minimum inhibitory concentrations of agents against tested strains.

Agents

MIC (μg/ml)

Wild

ΔacrB

ΔtolC

ΔacrBΔtolC/pV

ΔacrB ΔtolC/pABM

ΔacrB ΔtolC/pXYM

PAO1

IMCJ2.S1 (MDR)

E. coli MG1655

P. aeruginosa

ATM
CIP
ERY
D13-9001
PAβN
PMB
PMBN

0.125
0.016
32
>64
256
2
>64

0.063
0.004
2
>64
64
2
64

0.125
0.002
1
>64
64
2
64

0.125
0.002
1
>64
32
2
>8

1
0.016
16
>64
256
2
>8

0.125
0.031
32
>64
128
2
>8

2
0.063
256
>64
512
2
>8

64
32
256
>64
512
2
>8

ATM, aztreonam; CIP, ciproﬂoxacin; ERY, erythromycin; D13-9001, pyridopyrimidine; PAβN, Phe-Arg-β-naphthylamide; PMB, polymyxin B; PMBN, polymyxin B
nonapeptide. Table based on the results from Matsumoto et al. (2011).

of agents against strains of E. coli and P. aeruginosa used in this
study. The MIC of aztreonam against E. coli was not inﬂuenced by
acrB and tolC deletion or plasmid-mediated mexXY–oprM intro-
duction. However, plasmid-mediated mexAB–oprM introduction
decreased the sensitivity of ΔacrBΔtolC to aztreonam by eight-
fold. By contrast, the MICs of ciproﬂoxacin and erythromycin
against E. coli were decreased by acrB and/or tolC deletion and
increased by plasmid-mediated pseudomonal efﬂux pump gene
(mexAB–oprM or mexXY–oprM ) introduction.

There are two famous efﬂux pump inhibitors: D13-9001 and
PAβN. The former is speciﬁc for MexB, whereas the latter is non-
speciﬁc. PAβN had weak antibacterial activity against these E. coli
and P. aeruginosa strains, and its MIC was changed by the deletion
or introduction of pump genes, which revealed that pump deletion
mutants had higher sensitivity to PAβN than the wild-type strain.
The results indicate that PAβN is a substrate of RND pumps. D13-
9001 had no antibacterial activity against these strains at concen-
trations less than 64 μg/ml. Inhibitor’s concentration-dependent
changes in the MICs of antimicrobial agents were compared
(Figure 2). Data obtained from ΔtolC, ΔacrBΔtolC, and ΔBC/pV
were similar for all antimicrobial agents used in this study, and
thus, we presented the data forΔBC/pV as a representative full
RND pump deletion mutant in Figure 2.

In E. coli MG1655, D13-9001 acted synergistically with
ciproﬂoxacin and erythromycin against the wild-type strain and
had no effect with either agents against ΔacrB, ΔtolC, or ΔBC/pV
(Figures 2A,D,G). In P. aeruginosa, D13-9001 acted synergis-
tically with aztreonam and ciproﬂoxacin but not with ery-
thromycin, which had a higher afﬁnity for MexY than for MexB
(Table 1), against both sensitive and multidrug-resistant strains,
and the synergy between D13-9001 and aztreonam was remark-
able in these strains. D13-9001 increased the susceptibilities of
E. coliΔBC/pABM to all three agents and had no effect on the
susceptibilities of ΔBC/pV and ΔBC/pXYM (Figures 2A,D,G).

In contrast, PAβN signiﬁcantly increased erythromycin activ-
ity against all strains including ΔacrB and ΔBC/pV (Figure 2H),
although the effect of PAβN on ciproﬂoxacin activity remained
additive against all E. coli strains (Figure 2B). However, PAβN
exhibited remarkable synergy against MDRP IMCJ2.S1 with all of

the three agents (Figures 2B,E,H),and the FIC indices of PAβN
were 0.016, 0.031, and 0.063 with ciproﬂoxacin, aztreonam, and
erythromycin, respectively. The effect of PAβN was less strong
on PAO1 than on MDRP with ciproﬂoxacin or aztreonam. Fur-
thermore, PAβN acted synergistically with aztreonam in ΔBC/pV,
although this combination was additive in ΔBC/pABM and the
wild-type. Synergy between PAβN and these antimicrobial agents
could not be explained by efﬂux pump inhibition by PAβN.

Other than efﬂux pump inhibitors, outer membrane permeabi-
lizers have also been used for enhancing the activity of antimicro-
bial agents (Vaara, 1992; Vaara and Porro, 1996; Vaara et al., 2010;
Vingsbo Lundberg et al., 2010). Among them, PMBN is known to
permeabilize only the outer membrane of Gram-negative bac-
teria, whereas polymyxin B permeabilizes both the outer and
inner membranes (Vaara and Vaara, 1983a,b; Viljanen and Vaara,
1984). PMBN had also weak antimicrobial activities against pump-
deleted strains, and it appeared to be a substrate of pumps. The
effect of PMBN on ciproﬂoxacin activity was additive against the
E. coli strains and PAO1 and was synergistic against IMCJ2.S1. By
contrast, PMBN increased erythromycin activity against all strains
including pump deletion mutants ΔacrB, ΔtolC, and ΔBC/pV.
These results obtained for PMBN were comparable to and stronger
than the results for PAβN. PMBN also increased aztreonam activity
against all strains.

EFFLUX PUMP INHIBITION OBSERVED BY THE NEW DEVICE
AcrAB–TolC and the analogous RND pumps effectively prevented
FDG inﬂux in E. coli wild-type cells, resulting in no ﬂuorescence
(Figures 1A,B). By contrast, ΔacrB and ΔtolC easily accumulated
and hydrolyzed FDG to ﬂuorescein, which accumulated in ΔtolC
cells but not in ΔacrB cells. Consequently, we observed ﬂuores-
cent medium in ΔacrB experiments and ﬂuorescent cells in ΔtolC
experiments. Images of these strains in the microﬂuidic channels
are shown in Figure 1B. Fluorescence was highly accumulated
only in tolC-deleted strains. We also evaluated the inhibitors in
relation to the MexAB–OprM and MexXY–OprM pumps from
P. aeruginosa in E. coli. Fluorescent medium was observed in
ΔBC/pABM and ΔBC/pXYM (Figure 1C), whereas ﬂuorescent
cells were observed in ΔBC/pV like in ΔtolC (Figure 1D). Thus,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 40 | 4

Iino et al.

Visualization of efﬂux pump activity

FIGURE 2 | Effect of D13-9001, PAβN, and PMBN on ciproﬂoxacin,
aztreonam, and erythromycin activity. E. coli MG1655 wild, ΔacrB,
ΔacrBΔtolC/pMMB67HE (ΔBC/pV), ΔacrBΔtolC/pABM (ΔBC/pABM),
ΔacrBΔtolC/pXYM (ΔBC/pXYM), P. aeruginosa PAO1, and MDRP

IMCJ2.S1 were used. Changes in the MICs of ciproﬂoxacin [CIP: (A-C)],
aztreonam [ATM: (D-F)], and erythromycin [ERY: (G-I)] induced by
D13-9001 (A,D,G), PAβN (B,E,H), or PMBN (C,F,I) were determined by
checkerboard method. Modiﬁed from Matsumoto et al. (2011).

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 40 | 5

Iino et al.

Visualization of efﬂux pump activity

these RND pumps from P. aeruginosa appeared to be functional
in E. coli ΔacrBΔtolC.

The effect of D13-9001 was not signiﬁcant in wild-type E.
coli in the new method (Matsumoto et al., 2011). Fluorescence
in the device was decreased to a minor level by D13-9001 in a
concentration-dependent manner in ΔacrB and ΔtolC, and the
possibility of FDG inﬂux-blocking activity of D13-9001 was sug-
gested. However, D13-9001 clearly increased the accumulation of
ﬂuorescein in ΔBC/pABM cells, and the number of ﬂuorescent
cells was increased by D13-9001 in a concentration-dependent
manner in ΔBC/pABM, although it had almost no effect in
ΔBC/pXYM (Figure 1C). Conversely, PAβN increased the ﬂu-
orescence in the medium of all strains, particularly for ΔtolC
(Matsumoto et al., 2011), and the accumulation of ﬂuorescein
in the cells of ΔtolC disappeared (Figure 1D). PAβN appeared to
have membrane-permeabilizing activities.

MEMBRANE-PERMEABILIZING ACTIVITY ESTIMATED BY THE NEW
DEVICE
We further evaluated the effect of PAβN in comparison with
those of polymyxin B and PMBN in ΔtolC by the device.
The membrane-permeabilizing activities of PAβN, PMBN, and
polymyxin Bwere visualized by this new method using the pump-
deﬁcient strain ΔtolC. The MexB inhibitor D13-9001 had almost
no effect on ﬂuorescein distribution in ΔtolC (Figure 1D).
By contrast, ﬂuorescein accumulation in ΔtolC cells was dis-
appeared by 4 μg/ml PAβN or by 4 μg/ml PMBN. Polymyxin
B increased the ﬂuorescence in the medium at concentrations
exceeding 1 μg/ml, but ﬂuorescein accumulation was observed
in the presence of 1 μg/ml polymyxin B also. The disappeared
accumulation of ﬂuorescein in ΔtolC cells and increased ﬂuores-
cence in the medium of ΔtolC appears to correspond with the
outer and inner membrane permeabilization of E. coli, respec-
tively. The effect of PAβN was similar to that of PMBN at lower
concentrations and was similar to that of polymyxin B at higher
concentrations (Figure 1D). The effect of outer membrane perme-
abilizers is signiﬁcant with antibacterial agents that are effectively
excluded by the intact outer membrane. The synergistic action of
PAβN in combination with erythromycin appeared to arise from
the outer membrane-permeabilizing activity of PAβN. In E. coli,
the outer membrane-permeabilizing activity of PAβN was con-
ﬁrmed by the increased hydrolysis of nitroceﬁn, and the inner
membrane-permeabilizing activity of PAβN was conﬁrmed by
the increased accumulation of SYTOX Green (Matsumoto et al.,
2011).

DISCUSSION
FEATURES OF THE NEW METHOD TO DETERMINE EFFLUX PUMP
INHIBITORY ACTIVITIES AND MEMBRANE-PERMEABILIZING
ACTIVITIES
FDG was deﬁned as a substrate of RND pumps because it was
more easily hydrolyzed in pump deletion mutants than in wild-
type cells. Fluorescein was also deﬁned as a substrate of pumps
based on its accumulation in ΔtolC cells. Furthermore, from the
results of the complete blockage of FDG hydrolysis by the addition
of a protonophore, carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone
(CCCP), in all of the strains including ΔtolC (data not shown),

FDG was conﬁrmed to be actively imported into the cytoplasm. If
CCCP only blocks efﬂux pumps, increased ﬂuorescence would be
observed in wild-type cells. The lactose permease LacY is not an
FDG permease because lacY deletion in ΔlacI mutants (consti-
tutive β-galactosidase producer) had no effect on FDG hydrolysis
in the mutants (data not shown), and we have yet to identify an
FDG permease. In wild-type cells, FDG is hardly imported into the
cytoplasm because FDG is exported by AcrB from the periplasm
before it is trapped by permease. The rate of FDG inﬂux will
increase in relation to the concentration of FDG in the periplasm
until it reaches its maximum rate. Moderate inhibition of the
pumps causes FDG inﬂux and an efﬂux of ﬂuorescein from the
cells by the remaining activity of the pumps, and full inhibition
of the pumps results in ﬂuorescein accumulation in cells, sim-
ilar to what is observed in ΔtolC cells. A real pump inhibitor
without any effect on the bacterial membrane will increase ﬂuo-
rescence in wild-type cells in a concentration-dependent manner
and will increase the accumulation of ﬂuorescence in the cells.
The microﬂuidic channel allowed these discriminations to be
monitored using ﬂuorescence microscopy. In fact, we detected
moderately increasing ﬂuorescence and increased accumulation
of ﬂuorescence in ΔBC/pABM in relation to the increasing con-
centration of D13-9001 (Figure 1C) which is known as a speciﬁc
inhibiter of the MexAB–OprM pump. D13-9001 had no effect
on the MexXY–OprM pump producing E. coli. The combinato-
rial effects of D13-9001 with the antimicrobials assessed by the
checkerboard method are easily understandable by the inhibitory
effect of D13-9001 on the AcrB or MexB pump in all of the tested
strains of E. coli and P. aeruginosa.

While evaluating the activity of PAβN, we found that our
method is also valuable for evaluation of the outer and inner
membrane-permeabilizing activities of compounds. Outer mem-
brane permeabilization causes the leakage of ﬂuorescein from
ΔtolC cells, and inner membrane permeabilization efﬁciently
increases FDG inﬂux and ﬂuorescein production, resulting in ﬂuo-
rescein release from cells with or without pumps. By the FDG assay,
it is easy to detect outer membrane permeabilization by the dis-
appearance of ﬂuorescein accumulation in ΔtolC cells and inner
membrane permeabilization based on increases in ﬂuorescence,
particularly in the medium of pump deletion mutants.

COMPARISON OF OUR NEW METHOD WITH OTHER AVAILABLE
METHODS FOR DETERMINING EFFLUX PUMP-INHIBITORY ACTIVITIES
Several ﬂuorometric methods
for evaluating efﬂux pump
inhibitors have been published using substrates of these pumps
such as alanine β-naphthylamide (Lomovskaya et al., 2001), N -
phenylnaphthylamine (Lomovskaya et al., 2001), ethidium bro-
mide (Lomovskaya et al., 2001), and pyronin Y (Kaatz et al.,
2003). However, the inhibitory activities of PAβN itself could not
be determined by the methods utilizing alanine β-naphthylamide
or N -phenylnaphthylamine due to the high background ﬂuores-
cence (Lomovskaya et al., 2001). Furthermore, PAβN has been
reported to have no inhibitory effect on the efﬂux of ethid-
ium bromide (Lomovskaya et al., 2001; Schumacher et al., 2006;
Viveiros et al., 2008), which is also a known substrate of ABC-
type transporters (Martins et al., 2009). The ﬂuorescence of these
compounds was less strong than that of ﬂuorescein, and thus, they

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 40 | 6

Iino et al.

Visualization of efﬂux pump activity

are not considered suitable for visualization in the microﬂuidic
channel.

The determination of efﬂux pump inhibition activity via the
typical methods of measuring the inﬂux or efﬂux of some sub-
strates by their ﬂuorescence with a plate reader makes it difﬁcult
to exclude the effect of outer membrane-permeabilizing activity.
In addition, accurate estimation of FDG hydrolysis by monitoring
ﬂuorescence with a plate reader is impractical, because the total
ﬂuorescence of ﬂuorescein determined by a plate reader is higher
when it diffused in the medium than when it is accumulated into
cells; ﬂuorescence determined by a plate reader in this study was
generally higher in ΔacrB than in ΔtolC (data not shown). There-
fore, ﬂuorescence determined by a plate reader does not accurately
correlate with the amount of ﬂuorescein produced, and it is dif-
ﬁcult to estimate the inhibitory effect on pumps with FDG by
using a plate reader. The microﬂuidic channel method enables the
discrimination of pure efﬂux pump inhibition from membrane
permeabilization. However, when more than two different pumps
are present in a cell, it may be difﬁcult to detect the effect of a
speciﬁc inhibitor on either pump. To overcome this problem, we
need a mutant lacking all RND pumps and producing TolC that
accumulates ﬂuorescein. Deletions of acrB, acrD, acrEF, mdtABC,
and mdtEF were not sufﬁcient to ensure the accumulation of ﬂu-
orescein in a manner similar to that in ΔtolC (data not shown).
The effect of D13-9001 on E. coli AcrAB–TolC can be detected
by this method for a strain that produces only AcrAB–TolC. We
would be able to apply this method for evaluation of the efﬂux
pump inhibitors against RND pumps in P. aeruginosa when we
construct a strain of P. aeruginosa producing both β-galactosidase
and FDG permease. In addition, the microﬂuidic channels are use-
ful for comparative observation of multiple samples at the same
time and easy to tailor-make. We are expanding application of
these micro-devices for other microbiological assays.

SUSPICION OF THE EFFLUX PUMP INHIBITORY ACTIVITY OF PAβN
Throughout this study, we could not deﬁnitively determine
whether PAβN actually inhibits efﬂux pumps. Using our new
method, we observed that PAβN increased FDG hydrolysis and
ﬂuorescein leakage in all strains (Matsumoto et al., 2011), par-
ticularly in pump deletion mutants (Figure 1D). Because PAβN
was reported ﬁrst, it has been universally recognized as an efﬂux
pump inhibitor (Lomovskaya et al., 2001; Mesaros et al., 2007).
The effect of PAβN on MDRP IMCJ2.S1 was remarkably synergis-
tic with all the agents examined in the present study (Figure 2).
However, PAβN increased the susceptibilities of pump deletion
mutants of E. coli especially to erythromycin, although it had
almost no effect on ciproﬂoxacin in E. coli expressing MexAB–
OprM or MexXY–OprM (Figure 2); this suggests that PAβN could
not inhibit the efﬂux of ciproﬂoxacin by MexB or MexY. These
actions of PAβN do not correlate with efﬂux pumps and are sim-
ilar to those of the outer membrane permeabilizer PMBN. The
effect of PAβN on the outer membrane was already known when
it was discovered (Lomovskaya et al., 2001). Previous authors used
a nitroceﬁn hydrolysis assay with intact cells to evaluate the outer
membrane-permeabilizing activity of PAβN in P. aeruginosa, and
permeabilizing activity was visible at PAβN concentrations lower
than 16 μg/ml on the outer membranes of pump-deﬁcient or

CCCP-applied strains. Nitroceﬁn is a substrate of efﬂux pumps
(Nagano and Nikaido, 2009), and thus, the permeabilizing activity
of agents should be evaluated in the pump-deﬁcient condition.
The permeabilizing activity of PAβN on the outer membrane of
E. coli by nitroceﬁn hydrolysis assay was comparable to the activ-
ity obtained in the FDG assay (Matsumoto et al., 2011) and was
higher than that reported previously for the outer membrane of
P. aeruginosa (Lomovskaya et al., 2001). The outer membrane-
permeabilizing activity of PAβN has also been published by other
researchers using resazurin as a substrate (Vidal-Aroca et al., 2009).
In the FDG assay, the effect of PAβN on the outer membrane of
E. coli was visible at 4 μg/ml (Figure 1D). LB was used for the
FDG assay and the results were easy to compare with the results
of synergy in MICs with antimicrobial agents in which the effect
of PAβN was also detected in concentrations higher than 4 μg/ml.
Outer membrane-permeabilizing activity is known to increase the
sensitivity of bacteria to antimicrobial agents such as erythromycin
that are excluded by an intact outer membrane (Vaara, 2009; Vaara
et al., 2010) as well as efﬂux pump inhibitors, and we could obtain
similar results using PMBN. The effect of PAβN on antimicrobial
agents (Figure 2) appears to be due to its activity on the E. coli
cell membranes. We could not obtain any clear evidence of the
inhibitory activity of PAβN on the efﬂux pump itself. The pos-
sibility that PAβN competes with a substrate for binding to the
efﬂux pump cannot be excluded completely, although competitive
inhibition of efﬂux pumps by another substrate was not proven
in E. coli by Elkins and Mullis (2007). The precise mechanism of
synergy between PAβN and antimicrobial agents needs to be eluci-
dated in future. Based on our ﬁndings using this new method, we
concluded that PAβN appears to be a substrate of the pumps and
permeabilizes the membranes of E. coli in contrast to D13-9001,
which speciﬁcally inhibits MexB.

AVAILABILITY OF EFFLUX PUMP INHIBITORS AND MEMBRANE
PERMEABILIZERS
The effect of D13-9001 is simple and speciﬁc to strains expressing
AcrB or MexB pumps. D13-9001 exhibits maximum synergistic
effect with aztreonam, a substrate preferred only by MexB. How-
ever, D13-9001 was not completely synergistic with ciproﬂoxacin,
which is a substrate of MexB, MexY, and other pumps. Because var-
ious pump structures exist, it may be difﬁcult to develop a super
inhibitor that can inhibit all major pumps in P. aeruginosa. Match-
ing an inhibitor with combined antimicrobial agents is essential.
Susceptibility augmenting agents such as PAβN may be useful
when used in combination with a substrate of multiple efﬂux
pumps such as erythromycin and ciproﬂoxacin. Considerably,
membrane permeabilizers can enhance activities of antimicrobial
agents against efﬂux pump deﬁcient strains, enabling expansion
of the spectrum from targeting anti-Gram positives to anti-Gram
negatives. These features can transform old antimicrobial agents
to newer and improved ones, and these activities can be evaluated
by our new method all together. Discovery of a clinically useful
agent augmenting antipseudomonal activities is anticipated.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by the Grant for Promotion of Fun-
damental Studies in Health Sciences of the National Institute

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 40 | 7

Iino et al.

Visualization of efﬂux pump activity

of Biomedical Innovation (Project ID 07-03), Grants from the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, and the Min-
istry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology

Japan. We are grateful

of
to Dr. Taiji Nakae for provid-
ing plasmids and to Dr. Kirikae for providing P. aeruginosa
IMCJ2.S1.

REFERENCES
Elkins, C. A., and Mullis, L. B. (2007).
Substrate competition studies using
whole-cell
assays
with the major tripartite multidrug
efﬂux pumps of Escherichia coli.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 51,
923–929.

accumulation

Fieldler, F., and Hinz, H. (1994). No
intermediate channelling in stepwise
hydrolysis of ﬂuorescein di-beta-
D-galactoside by beta-galactosidase.
Eur. J. Biochem. 222, 75–81.

Giske, C. G., Buaro, L., Sunds-
fjord, A., and Wretlind, B. (2008).
Alterations of porin, pumps, and
penicillin-binding proteins in car-
bapenem resistant clinical
isolates
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Microb.
Drug Resist. 14, 23–30.

Henrichfreise, B., Wiegand, I., Pﬁster,
W., and Wiedemann, B. (2007).
Resistance mechanisms of mul-
tiresistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa
from Germany and cor-
strains
relation
hypermutation.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 51,
4062–4070.

with

Kaatz, G. W., Moudgal, V. V., Seo, S.
M., and Kristiansen, J. E. (2003).
Phenothiazines and thioxanthenes
inhibit multidrug efﬂux pump activ-
ity in Staphylococcus aureus. Antimi-
crob. Agents Chemother. 47, 719–726.
Kirikae, T., Mizuguchi, Y., and Arakawa,
Y. (2008). Investigation of
isola-
tion rates of Pseudomonas aerug-
inosa with and without mul-
tidrug resistance in medical facil-
ities and clinical
in
Japan. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 61,
612–615.

laboratories

Lister, P. D., Wolter, D. J., and Han-
son, N. D. (2009). Antibacterial-
resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa:
clinical impact and complex regu-
lation of chromosomally encoded
resistance mechanisms. Clin. Micro-
biol. Rev. 22, 582–610.

Livermore, D. M.

(2002). Multiple
mechanisms of antimicrobial resis-
tance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa:
our worst nightmare? Clin. Infect.
Dis. 34, 634–640.

Llanes, C., Hocquet, D., Vogne, C.,
Benali-Baitich, D., Neuwirth, C.,
and Plesiat, P.
(2004). Clinical
strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
overproducing MexAB-OprM and
MexXY efﬂux pumps simultane-
ously. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
48, 1797–1802.

Lomovskaya, O., Warren, M. S., Lee,
A., Galazzo, J., Fronko, R., Lee, M.,
Blais, J., Cho, D., Chamberland, S.,
Renau, T., Leger, R., Hecker, S.,
Watkins, W., Hoshino, K., Ishida, H.,
and Lee, V. J. (2001). Identiﬁcation
and characterization of inhibitors of
multidrug resistance efﬂux pumps
in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: novel
agents
for combination therapy.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45,
105–116.

Martins, A., Spengler, G., Rodrigues,
L., Viveiros, M., Ramos, J., Martins,
M., Couto, I., Fanning, S., Pages,
J. M., Bolla, J. M., Molnar, J., and
Amaral, L. (2009). pH Modulation
of efﬂux pump activity of multi-
drug resistant Escherichia coli: pro-
tection during its passage and even-
tual colonization of the colon. PLoS
ONE 4, e6656. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0006656

Masuda, N., Sakagawa, E., Ohya, S.,
Gotoh, N., Tsujimoto, H., and
Nishino, T. (2000). Substrate speci-
ﬁcities of MexAB-OprM, MexCD-
OprJ,
and MexXY-oprM efﬂux
pumps in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 44,
3322–3327.

Matsumoto, Y., Hayama, K., Sakaki-
hara, S., Nishino, K., Noji, H., Iino,
R., and Yamaguchi, A. (2011). Eval-
uation of multidrug efﬂux pump
inhibitors by a new method using
microﬂuidic channels. PLoS ONE 6,
e18547. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0018547

Mesaros, N., Glupczynski, Y., Avrain, L.,
Caceres, N. E., Tulkens, P. M., and
Van Bambeke, F. (2007). A com-
bined phenotypic and genotypic
method for the detection of Mex
efﬂux pumps in Pseudomonas aerug-
inosa. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 59,
378–386.

Mokhonov, V. V., Mokhonova, E. I.,
Akama, H., and Nakae, T. (2004).
Role of the membrane fusion pro-
tein in the assembly of resistance-
nodulation-cell division multidrug
efﬂux pump in Pseudomonas aerug-
inosa. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Com-
mun. 322, 483–489.

Morita, Y., Kimura, N., Mima, T.,
Mizushima, T., and Tsuchiya, T.
(2001). Roles of MexXY-
and
MexAB-multidrug efﬂux pumps in
intrinsic multidrug resistance of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1. J.
Gen. Appl. Microbiol. 47, 27–32.

Murakami,

S.,

Nakashima,

R.,
Yamashita, E., Matsumoto, T.,
and Yamaguchi, A. (2006). Crystal
structures of a multidrug trans-
porter reveal a functionally rotating
mechanism. Nature 443, 173–179.

Murakami,

S.,

Nakashima,
R.,
Yamashita, E.,
and Yamaguchi,
A. (2002). Crystal structure of bac-
terial multidrug efﬂux transporter
AcrB. Nature 419, 587–593.

Nagano, K., and Nikaido, H. (2009).
Kinetic behavior of
the major
multidrug efﬂux pump AcrB of
Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 106, 5854–5858.

Nakashima, R., Sakurai, K., Yamasaki,
S., Nishino, K., and Yamaguchi,
A. (2011). Structures of the mul-
tidrug exporter AcrB reveal a prox-
imal multisite drug-binding pocket.
Nature 480, 565–569.

Nishino, K., Senda, Y., and Yamaguchi,
A. (2008). The AraC-family regula-
tor GadX enhances multidrug resis-
tance in Escherichia coli by activat-
ing expression of mdtEF multidrug
efﬂux genes. J. Infect. Chemother. 14,
23–29.

Russo-Marie, F., Roederer, M., Sager,
B., Herzenberg, L. A., and Kaiser,
D. (1993). Beta-galactosidase activ-
ity in single differentiating bacterial
cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 90,
8194–8198.

Ryan, B. M., Dougherty, T. J., Beaulieu,
D., Chuang, J., Dougherty, B. A., and
Barrett, J. F. (2001). Efﬂux in bacte-
ria: what do we really know about
it? Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs 10,
1409–1422.

Satoh, R., Tsukada, H., Tanabe, Y.,
Tamura, Y., Yamamoto, T., Takano,
M., Ozaki, K., Tamura, T., and Gejyo,
F. (2008). An outbreak and isola-
tion of drug-resistant Pseudomonas
aeruginosa at Niigata University
Hospital, Japan. J. Infect. Chemother.
14, 325–329.

Schumacher, A., Steinke, P., Bohn-
ert, J. A., Akova, M., Jonas, D.,
and Kern, W. V. (2006). Effect of
1-(1-naphthylmethyl)-piperazine, a
novel putative efﬂux pump inhibitor,
on antimicrobial drug susceptibil-
ity in clinical
isolates of Enter-
obacteriaceae other than Escherichia
coli. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 57,
344–348.

Schweizer, H. P. (2003). Efﬂux as a
mechanism of resistance to antimi-
crobials in Pseudomonas aeruginosa

Sekiguchi,

and related bacteria: unanswered
questions. Genet. Mol. Res. 2, 48–62.
J., Asagi, T., Miyoshi-
Akiyama, T., Fujino, T., Kobayashi,
I., Morita, K., Kikuchi, Y., Kurat-
suji, T., and Kirikae, T. (2005).
Multidrug-resistant
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa strain that caused an
outbreak in a neurosurgery ward
)-Iae gene cassette
and its aac(6
encoding a novel aminoglycoside
acetyltransferase. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 49, 3734–3742.

(cid:2)

Sekiguchi,

J., Asagi, T., Miyoshi-
Akiyama, T., Kasai, A., Mizuguchi,
Y., Araake, M., Fujino, T., Kikuchi,
H., Sasaki, S., Watari, H., Kojima,
T., Miki, H., Kanemitsu, K., Kun-
ishima, H., Kikuchi, Y., Kaku,
M., Yoshikura, H., Kuratsuji, T.,
and Kirikae, T. (2007a). Outbreaks
of multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas
aeruginosa in community hospi-
tals in Japan. J. Clin. Microbiol. 45,
979–989.

Sekiguchi,

J., Teruya, K., Horii,
K., Kuroda, E., Konosaki, H.,
Mizuguchi, Y., Araake, M., Kawana,
A., Yoshikura, H., Kuratsuji, T.,
Miyazaki, H.,
and Kirikae, T.
(2007b). Molecular epidemiology
and containment
of outbreaks
of
Pseudomonas
in a Tokyo hospi-
aeruginosa
tal.
13,
418–422.

Infect. Chemother.

drug-resistant

J.

Sennhauser, G., Bukowska, M. A.,
Briand, C., and Grutter, M. G.
(2009). Crystal
the
multidrug exporter MexB from
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
J. Mol.
Biol. 389, 134–145.

structure of

Tohidpour, A., Peerayeh,

S. N.,
Mehrabadi, J. F., and Yazdi, H. R.
(2009). Determination of the efﬂux
pump-mediated resistance preva-
lence in Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
using an efﬂux pump inhibitor.
Curr. Microbiol. 59, 352–355.

Vaara, M. (1992). Agents that increase
the outer
56,

the permeability of
membrane. Microbiol. Rev.
395–411.

Vaara, M. (1993). Outer membrane per-
meability barrier to azithromycin,
clarithromycin, and roxithromycin
in gram-negative enteric bacteria.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 37,
354–356.

Vaara, M. (2009). New approaches
in peptide antibiotics. Curr. Opin.
Pharmacol. 9, 571–576.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 40 | 8

Iino et al.

Visualization of efﬂux pump activity

Vaara, M., and Porro, M.

(1996).
Group of peptides that act synergis-
tically with hydrophobic antibiotics
against gram-negative enteric bac-
teria. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
40, 1801–1805.

Vaara, M., Siikanen, O., Apajalahti, J.,
J., Frimodt-Moller, N., He,
Fox,
H., Poudyal, A., Li, J., Nation, R.
L., and Vaara, T. (2010). A novel
polymyxin derivative that lacks the
fatty acid tail and carries only
three positive charges has strong
synergism with agents excluded
by the intact outer membrane.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54,
3341–3346.

Vaara, M., and Vaara, T.

(1983a).
Polycations as outer membrane-
disorganizing agents. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 24, 114–122.

Vaara, M., and Vaara, T.

(1983b).
Polycations sensitize enteric bacte-
ria to antibiotics. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 24, 107–113.

Vidal-Aroca, F., Meng, A., Minz, T.,
Page, M. G. P., and Dreier, J. (2009).

Use of resazurin to detect meﬂo-
quine as an efﬂux-pump inhibitor
in Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Escherichia coli. J. Microbiol. Methods
79, 232–237.

Viljanen, P., and Vaara, M. (1984). Sus-
ceptibility of gram-negative bacte-
ria to polymyxin B nonapeptide.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 25,
701–705.

Vingsbo Lundberg, C., Vaara, T.,
Frimodt-Moller, N., and Vaara, M.
(2010). Novel polymyxin derivatives
are effective in treating experimental
Escherichia coli peritoneal infection
in mice. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
65, 981–985.

Viveiros, M., Martins, A., Paixao, L.,
Rodrigues, L., Martins, M., Couto,
I., Fahnrich, E., Kern, W. V., and
Amaral, L. (2008). Demonstration of
intrinsic efﬂux activity of Escherichia
coli K-12 AG100 by an automated
ethidium bromide method. Int. J.
Antimicrob. Agents 31, 458–462.

Whitesides, G. M., Ostuni, E., Takayama,
S., Jiang, X. Y., and Ingber, D. E.

(2001). Soft lithography in biology
and biochemistry. Annu. Rev. Bio-
med. Eng. 3, 335–373.

Yang, N. C., and Hu, M. L. (2004). A
ﬂuorimetric method using ﬂuores-
di-beta-D-galactopyranoside
cein
senescence-
for quantifying the
associated
beta-galactosidase
activity in human foreskin ﬁbroblast
Hs68 cells. Anal. Biochem. 325,
337–343.

Yoshida, K., Nakayama, K., Ohtsuka, M.,
Kuru, N., Yokomizo, Y., Sakamoto,
A., Takemura, M., Hoshino, K.,
Kanda, H., Nitanai, H., Namba,
K., Imamura, Y., Zhang, J. Z., Lee,
V. J., and Watkins, W. J. (2007).
MexAB-OprM speciﬁc efﬂux pump
inhibitors in Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa. Part 7: highly soluble and
in vivo active quaternary ammo-
nium analogue D13-9001, a poten-
tial preclinical candidate. Bioorg.
Med. Chem. 15, 7087–7097.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was

conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 31 October 2011; accepted: 26
January 2012; published online: 08 Feb-
ruary 2012.
Citation: Iino R, Nishino K, Noji H, Yam-
aguchi A and Matsumoto Y (2012) A
microﬂuidic device for simple and rapid
evaluation of multidrug efﬂux pump
inhibitors. Front. Microbio. 3:40. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00040
This article was
submitted to Fron-
tiers in Antimicrobials, Resistance and
Chemotherapy, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Iino, Nishino, Noji,
Yamaguchi and Matsumoto. This is an
open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 40 | 9

