REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 18 January 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00272

Development and applications of VSV vectors based on
cell tropism

Hideki Tani 1*, Shigeru Morikawa1 and Yoshiharu Matsuura2

1 Special Pathogens Laboratory, Department of Virology I, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Musashimurayama, Tokyo, Japan
2 Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan

Edited by:
Akio Adachi, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Japan
Reviewed by:
Ikuo Shoji, Kobe University Graduate
School of Medicine, Japan
Tatsuo Shioda, Osaka University,
Japan
*Correspondence:
Hideki Tani, Special Pathogens
Laboratory, Department of Virology I,
National Institute of Infectious
Diseases, 4-7-1 Gakuen,
Musashimurayama, 208-0011 Tokyo,
Japan.
e-mail: htani@nih.go.jp

Viral vectors have been available in various ﬁelds such as medical and biological research
or gene therapy applications. Targeting vectors pseudotyped with distinct viral envelope
proteins that inﬂuence cell tropism and transfection efﬁciency are useful tools not only for
examining entry mechanisms or cell tropisms but also for vaccine vector development.
Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) is an excellent candidate for development as a pseudotype
vector. A recombinant VSV lacking its own envelope (G) gene has been used to produce a
pseudotype or recombinantVSV possessing the envelope proteins of heterologous viruses.
These viruses possess a reporter gene instead of a VSV G gene in their genome, and there-
fore it is easy to evaluate their infectivity in the study of viral entry, including identiﬁcation
of viral receptors. Furthermore, advantage can be taken of a property of the pseudotype
VSV, which is competence for single-round infection, in handling many different viruses that
are either difﬁcult to amplify in cultured cells or animals or that require specialized contain-
ment facilities. Here we describe procedures for producing pseudotype or recombinant
VSVs and a few of the more prominent examples from envelope viruses, such as hepatitis
C virus, Japanese encephalitis virus, baculovirus, and hemorrhagic fever viruses.

Keywords: vesicular stomatitis virus, pseudotype, recombinant, entry mechanism

INTRODUCTION
Viruses are obligate parasites of living organisms, and their repli-
cation is absolutely dependent on the host cell’s machinery. The
entry of enveloped viruses requires host cell binding and mem-
brane fusion that is mediated by envelope proteins located on the
surface of the virion.

Some viruses utilize a single molecule as a receptor for entry
into the host cell, while many viruses require co-receptor(s) local-
ized near the receptor for complete entry. Identiﬁcation of viral
entry receptors that are composed of membrane proteins, lipids,
or carbohydrates is important for examining the life cycle of a
virus and for further developing entry inhibitors. However, recep-
tors or co-receptors of several viruses have been difﬁcult to identify
because of the lack of reliable cell culture systems, an insufﬁcient
amount of native viral particles, or difﬁculty in handling because
of the requirement for biosafety level (BSL)-3 or -4 containment.
Therefore, several surrogate systems have been developed to study
the initial step of infection. One of the most primitive assays is
a binding assay. Puriﬁed soluble envelope proteins, viral-like par-
ticles which are produced in insect cells by baculoviral vectors,
and authentic viral particles obtained from patients have been
used to study the mechanisms of viral attachment and to identify
binding receptor molecules. However, these binding assays cannot
be used to analyze further steps of infection such as fusion and
penetration. A cell fusion assay was established to examine the
membrane fusion activity of viral envelope proteins. This assay
is sensitive and can easily determine cell fusion using reporter
genes. Pseudotype virus systems based on vesicular stomatitis virus
(VSV), inﬂuenza virus, retroviruses, and lentiviruses have also

been established to examine entry mechanisms and to identify
putative entry receptors for targeted viruses (Table 1). Pseudotype
viruses have also been applied in neutralization tests for antibod-
ies and vaccine development (Table 1). As for the application of a
pseudotype virus system for VSV, a recombinant virus system with
a heterologous viral envelope gene together with a reporter gene
encoded into its own genome instead of the G gene has also been
developed.

In this paper, we describe the properties of pseudotype or
recombinant VSVs and their application to some enveloped viruses
we have studied, such as the hepatitis C virus (HCV), Japan-
ese encephalitis virus (JEV), baculovirus, and hemorrhagic fever
viruses.

PSEUDOTYPE AND RECOMBINANT VSV
Vesicular stomatitis virus is a non-segmented, negative-stranded
RNA virus that belongs to the family Rhabdoviridae, genus
Vesiculovirus. VSV infects a broad range of animals, includ-
ing cattle, horses, and swine. The genome of the virus codes
for ﬁve major proteins, glycoprotein (G), matrix protein (M),
nucleoprotein (N), large protein (L), and phosphoprotein (P).
The G protein mediates both viral binding and host cell fusion
with the endosomal membrane following endocytosis. The L
and P proteins are subunits of the viral RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase.

The simple structure and rapid high-titer growth of VSV in
mammalian and many other cells has made it a useful tool in
the ﬁelds of cellular and molecular biology and virology, and this
was further strengthened with the establishment of the reverse

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 272 | 1

Tani et al.

Development and applications of VSV vectors

genetics system for VSV. Recombinant VSV in which native enve-
lope G protein is replaced with a foreign reporter gene such as a
ﬂuorescent reporter protein, luciferase, or secreted alkaline phos-
phatase (SEAP) can normally bud from producing cells even in
the absence of G protein, and heterologous viral envelope proteins
are incorporated into the virion. Previous studies demonstrated
that VSV forms a “pseudotype” when a cell is co-infected with
VSV and other enveloped viruses (Huang et al., 1974; Witte and
Baltimore, 1977). A pseudotype virus is deﬁned as a viral par-
ticle harboring other types of viral envelopes or host cellular
proteins with or without its own envelope. By virtue of these
characteristics of VSV, pseudotype virus systems, in which VSV
G proteins are completely replaced with other types of viral enve-
lope proteins, have been established (Figure 1). Up to the present,
numerous types of pseudotype viruses have been constructed
with heterologous viral envelope proteins and used in studies
examining the entry of viruses, for identiﬁcation of novel viral
receptors, for development of neutralization tests, and as vac-
cine vectors (Table 1). In particular, availability of pseudotype
viruses has been useful in the study of several high-risk viruses
that require high-level containment facilities, i.e., in the handling
of BSL-3 or -4 viruses. Infectivity of these pseudotype viruses
can be easily and quantitatively evaluated by measurement of
the reporter gene activities. A recombinant virus system, which
encodes a heterologous viral envelope gene instead of an envelope
gene in its own genome, has also been made available by estab-
lishment of reverse genetics (Figure 2). This recombinant virus
is replication-competent both in vitro and in vivo and can con-
tribute to the study of targeted viruses that inefﬁciently replicate
in experimental systems. Although the pseudotype virus is lim-
ited to single-step infection and therefore provides a poor model
for actual infection processes, the recombinant virus is a far more
authentic and powerful tool for investigating targeted viral infec-
tion. Currently, this system is applicable to the VSV or other

FIGURE 1 | Schematic representation of the production of pseudotype
VSV. Producer cells were transfected with an expression plasmid encoding
foreign envelope genes and then infected with a VSV G-complemented
pseudotype virus (*G-VSVΔG). The pseudotype virus released from the
producer cells infected target cells but was not able to produce infectious
progeny viruses.

several viruses and not to retroviruses or lentiviruses. Recom-
binant VSV can be produced in various cells without regard to
transfection efﬁciency; on the other hand, recovery of pseudotype
VSV as well as pseudotype retroviruses or lentiviruses is restricted
to 293T or some other type of cells that exhibit a high compe-
tency of transfection. Recombinant VSV could also lead to the
induction of cellular and humoral host immunity (Schnell et al.,
1996).

CONSTRUCTION OF PSEUDOTYPE AND RECOMBINANT VSV
Seeded or recombinant VSVs in which the G gene is replaced
by a foreign reporter gene such as a ﬂuorescent reporter pro-
tein (green ﬂuorescent protein, GFP; red ﬂuorescent protein, RFP;
and so on), luciferase, or SEAP or each viral envelope gene were
generated as described below. Either 293T or BHK cells were
grown to 90% conﬂuence on 35-mm tissue culture plates. The
cells were infected with a recombinant vaccinia virus encoding
the bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase (vTF7-3) at a multiplicity
of infection (MOI) of 5. After incubation at room temperature
for 1 h, the cells were transfected with helper plasmids, pBS-N,
pBS-P, pBS-L, and pBS-G, and template plasmids, pVSVΔG–
GFP (RFP), pVSVΔG–Luci, pVSVΔG–SEAP, or pVSVΔG–Env
using a cationic liposome reagent. After 4 h, the supernatants were

Table 1 | Application studies of pseudotype and recombinant VSV.

Target viruses

Reference

CHARACTERIZATION OF GLYCOPROTEIN, ENTRY TROPISM, ETC.
Ebola virus
HCV

Takada et al. (1997)
Lagging et al. (1998)
Matsuura et al. (2001)
Tani et al. (2007)
Boritz et al. (1999)
Tatsuo et al. (2000)
Okuma et al. (2001)
Kahn et al. (2001)
Fukushi et al. (2005)
Saha et al. (2005)
Vela et al. (2007)
Tani et al. (2010)
Kaname et al. (2010)
Muik et al. (2011)

Roberts et al. (1998)
Roberts et al. (2004)
Garbutt et al. (2004)
Publicover et al. (2005)
Iyer et al. (2009)
Cobleigh et al. (2010)
Ma and Li (2011)

Perez et al. (2001)
Lee et al. (2006)
Fukushi et al. (2006)
Kaku et al. (2009)

HIV-1
Measles virus
HTLV-1
RSV
SARS–CoV
HBV
Arenavirus
JEV
Baculovirus
LCMV
VACCINE VECTORS
Inﬂuenza Virus
Papillomavirus
Marburg, Ebola, Lassa
HIV-1
West Nile virus
HBV
Norovirus
DIAGNOSIS
Borna disease virus
Hantaan Virus
SARS–CoV
Nipah virus

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 272 | 2

Tani et al.

Development and applications of VSV vectors

APPLICATION IN THE STUDY OF ENTRY MECHANISMS OF
HCV
Hepatitis C virus has already infected more than 3% of the world-
wide population and 80% of those infected develop persistent
HCV infection (Cerny and Chisari, 1999; Theodore and Fried,
2000). Persistent HCV infection often leads to chronic hepatitis,
hepatic steatosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Cur-
rently, there are still 1.5 million or more HCV carriers in Japan.
In past years, anti-hepatitis C therapy has modestly improved;
however, a currently available combination therapy, consisting of
interferon and the nucleoside analog, ribavirin, shows a sustained
response in only less than half of the treated patients. The devel-
opment of innovative treatment alternatives for patients infected
with HCV is urgently required, and a better understanding of
the life cycle of HCV should allow us to improve HCV thera-
pies. However, due to the lack of an in vitro cell culture system
for the isolation of virus directly from patient sera at present,
various surrogate systems such as replicon cells (Lohmann et al.,
1999), pseudotype viruses (Lagging et al., 1998; Matsuura et al.,
2001; Bartosch et al., 2003; Hsu et al., 2003; Tani et al., 2007), or
trans-complement particles (Ishii et al., 2008; Steinmann et al.,
2008) have been developed to study each step of HCV infection.
Although in vitro binding assays using soluble puriﬁed envelope
proteins or HCV–LPs have identiﬁed several candidate receptors
for HCV, the ﬁnal determination of a true entry receptor or co-
receptor capable of internalizing HCV may be made using an
infection assay. Toward this end, pseudotype virus systems based
on VSV and retrovirus or lentivirus have been established and
applied to identify entry receptors for HCV. Although it is still
unknown how HCV envelope proteins retained in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) are incorporated into both VSV and retroviruses,
which naturally bud from the plasma membrane, signiﬁcant infec-
tivity of these pseudotype viruses has been exhibited in several
human hepatoma cell lines. These infections could be inhibited
by treatment with antibodies or soluble proteins against putative
receptors or HCV envelope proteins, or by a knockdown of recep-
tor molecules by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), suggesting that
innate HCV infection had occurred. We also successfully gener-
ated infectious pseudotype and recombinant VSVs incorporating
unmodiﬁed HCV envelope proteins in hepatic and non-hepatic
human cell lines. These viruses exhibited high infectivity in a
human hepatoma cell line, Huh7, which is highly susceptible to
infection by cell-cultured HCV (HCVcc). The recombinant virus,
but not the pseudotype virus, was able to propagate and form
foci only in Huh7 cells. The infection of Huh7 cells with pseudo-
type and recombinant viruses was inhibited by anti-hCD81 and
anti-E2 antibodies and by sera from chronic HCV patients. These
viruses, as well as pseudotype retroviruses (HCVpp) or HCVcc,
were sensitive to the inhibitors of vacuolar acidiﬁcation, such as
ammonium chloride, concanamycin A, or baﬁlomycin A1, or for-
mation of clathrin-coated pits, chlorpromazine, suggesting that
these viruses enter via pH-dependent and clathrin-mediated endo-
cytosis into target cells (Blanchard et al., 2006; Tani et al., 2007).
The infectivity of the recombinant virus was inhibited by an ER α-
glucosidase inhibitor, N -(n-nonyl) deoxynojirimycin (Nn-DNJ),
but not by a Golgi mannosidase inhibitor, deoxymannojirimycin

FIGURE 2 | Schematic representation of the production of
recombinant VSV. Various mammalian producer cells were inoculated with
a VSV G-complemented recombinant virus encoding foreign envelope
genes instead of VSV G. The recombinant VSV was able to undergo a fully
productive infection generating infectious progeny viruses that could be
passaged into naïve cells.

∗

replaced with 10% FBS DMEM, and cells were incubated at 37˚C
for 48 h. The supernatants were then ﬁltered through a 0.22-μm-
pore-size ﬁlter to remove vaccinia virus and were applied to 293T
or BHK cells that had been transfected with pCAGVSVG 24 h pre-
viously. If BHK cells constitutively expressing the bacteriophage
T7 RNA polymerase (BHKT7) were utilized, the cells were only
transfected with helper plasmids, pIRES-N, pIRES-P, pIRES-L,
pIRES-G, and template plasmids using a cationic liposome reagent
without the vaccinia virus infection. Recovery of the virus was
assessed by examining the cells for the cytopathic effects that are
typical of a VSV infection after 24 h. Stock of
G-complemented
viruses, i.e.,VSVΔG virus or recombinant viruses transiently bear-
ing VSV G protein on the virion surface, were grown from the
single plaque on BHK cells transfected with pCAGVSVG and then
stored at −80˚C. The infectious titers of the recovered viruses
were determined by a plaque assay. To generate pseudotype virus,
293T, BHK, or some other type of cells that exhibit a high compe-
tency of transfection were transfected with a plasmid expressing
the envelope protein using a cationic liposome reagent. After 24 h
of incubation at 37˚C, cells were infected at an MOI of 0.5 with the
∗
G-VSVΔG–Luci and
G-VSVΔG–
GFP (RFP). The virus was adsorbed for 2 h at 37˚C and then
extensively washed four times or more with serum-free DMEM.
After 24 h of incubation at 37˚C, the culture supernatants were
collected, centrifuged to remove cell debris, and stored at −80˚C.
To generate recombinant virus in various mammalian cells, cells
G-complemented VSVΔG–Env at an MOI
were infected with the
of 5 for 2 h at 37˚C and then extensively washed four times or
more with serum-free DMEM. After 24 h of incubation at 37˚C,
the culture supernatants were collected and stored at −80˚C. The
infectious titers of the viruses were determined by evaluation of
each reporter assay or a focus-forming assay. Further details of the
protocol can be found in a recent paper (Whitt, 2010).

G-VSVΔG–SEAP, or 5 with

∗

∗

∗

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 272 | 3

Tani et al.

Development and applications of VSV vectors

(Tani et al., 2007). Focus formation of the recombinant virus
was also impaired by Nn-DNJ treatment. It was obvious that the
appearance of infectious or non-infectious viruses was dependent
on the cell type as a result of the infectivity of the recombinant
viruses generated from various cell lines. Although the precise
mechanisms of HCV assembly or budding that cause the differ-
ences in infectivity of viruses generated from different cell lines is
still unclear, host cellular factors might be involved in the assembly
or budding steps in the generation of infectious particles.

APPLICATION IN THE STUDY OF ENTRY MECHANISMS OF
JEV
Japanese encephalitis virus, a mosquito-borne zoonotic pathogen,
is the leading cause of viral encephalitis in humans, with ∼50,000
cases reported annually worldwide. JEV is an enveloped virus
belonging to the family Flaviviridae and the genus Flavivirus,
which also includes Dengue virus, West Nile virus, Yellow fever
virus, and Tick-borne encephalitis virus (Gubler et al., 2007).
The genome consists of a single-stranded positive-sense RNA of
approximately 11 kb, encoding a single large polyprotein, which
is cleaved by host- and virus-encoded proteases into three struc-
tural (C, PrM, and E) and non-structural (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3,
NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) proteins. The envelope protein (E) is a
53-kDa glycoprotein, which is a major component of the virion
surface and has been found to be associated with all the biological
properties of the virus, such as attachment to cellular receptors,
penetration, fusion with the endosomal membrane, host cell range
and cell tropism, and neutralization to antibodies. Although a
number of cellular components that interacted with E protein,
such as heat shock cognate protein 70 (Ren et al., 2007), heat
shock protein 70 (Das et al., 2009), vimentin (Das et al., 2011),
glycosaminoglycans (Su et al., 2001; Lee and Lobigs, 2002), and
laminin (Boonsanay and Smith, 2007), have been shown to par-
ticipate in JEV binding or penetration, the precise mechanisms
remain largely unknown. The pseudotype and recombinant VSV
systems have offered us useful tools to focus on the study of entry
mechanisms of JEV E proteins by using control viruses harbor-
ing an appropriate protein on identical particles. Both pseudotype
(JEVpv) and recombinant (JEVrv) VSV bearing the JEV E pro-
tein exhibited high infectivity for the target cells, and JEVrv, but
not JEVpv, was able to propagate and form foci, as did authentic
JEV (Tani et al., 2010). Both JEVpv and JEVrv were neutral-
ized by anti-JEV E antibodies. Treatment of cells with inhibitors
for vacuolar ATPase and clathrin-mediated endocytosis reduced
the infectivity of JEVpv, suggesting that JEVpv enters cells via
pH- and clathrin-dependent endocytic pathways. Treatment of
the JEVpv and JEVrv with cholesterol drastically reduced the
infectivity, as previously reported on authentic JEV (Lee et al.,
2008). In contrast, depletion of cholesterol from the viruses by
treatment with methyl β-cyclodextrin enhanced the infectivity.
Furthermore, treatment of cells with sphingomyelinase (SMase),
which hydrolyzes membrane-bound sphingomyelin to ceramide,
drastically enhanced infection with JEVpv and JEVrv (Tani et al.,
2010). These enhancements were inhibited by treatment with an
SMase inhibitor or C6-ceramide. Involvement of ceramide in the
entry of JEV was conﬁrmed by co-precipitation of the JEV E pro-
tein with labeled-ceramide (Tani et al., 2010). In our study, it was

demonstrated that cellular lipid components such as cholesterol
and ceramide play crucial roles in the entry of JEV. Modiﬁca-
tion of sphingolipids on the plasma membrane of the cells might
be a novel target for the development of antivirals against JEV
infection.

APPLICATION IN THE STUDY OF COMPLEMENT RESISTANCE
OF BACULOVIRUS GP64
Baculovirus vectors have been shown to exhibit not only a high-
level of gene expression in insect cells but also efﬁcient gene
transduction into a wide variety of mammalian cells with lower
cytotoxicity (Hofmann et al., 1995; Boyce and Bucher, 1996; Shoji
et al., 1997). In contrast, the complement systems of animals have
been deﬁned to represent a potent primary barrier to in vivo appli-
cation of baculovirus vectors produced in insect cells (Hofmann
and Strauss, 1998; Tani et al., 2001, 2003). However, pseudotype
viruses based on retroviruses or lentiviruses bearing baculovirus
envelope protein GP64 have recently been shown to exhibit efﬁ-
cient gene transduction into mouse organs for long periods com-
pared with those bearing the VSV G protein, which is commonly
used for pseudotyping (Kumar et al., 2003; Schauber et al., 2004;
Kang et al., 2005; Sinn et al., 2005, 2008). It was considered that
serum resistance of the pseudotype viruses bearing GP64 pro-
tein is caused by differences between insect and mammalian cells,
because pseudotype retroviruses or lentiviruses were generated
from mammalian cells, and in contrast, baculovirus was gener-
ated from insect cells. Therefore, we generated recombinant VSV
bearing GP64 protein in both insect and mammalian cells and
examined the role of the GP64 on resistance to inactivation by
human or guinea-pig sera (Kaname et al., 2010). Recombinant
VSVs generated in human cell lines exhibited the incorporation of
human decay accelerating factor (DAF) in virions and were resis-
tant to serum inactivation, whereas those generated in insect cell
lines exhibited no incorporation of human DAF and were sensitive
to complement inactivation. Recombinant baculoviruses gener-
ated in insect cells expressing human DAF or carrying the human
DAF gene exhibited resistance to complement inactivation, sug-
gesting that acquisition of resistance to human complement by the
incorporation of DAF with baculovirus GP64 represents a step in
the development of novel viral vectors for improved gene therapy.

APPLICATION IN THE STUDY OF VIRAL ENTRY AND
NEUTRALIZATION TEST OF ARENAVIRUSES
Viral hemorrhagic fever viruses, such as members of the Arenaviri-
dae family, including Lassa virus, Junin virus, Machupo virus,
and Chapare virus, cause fulminating disease characterized by
acute fever followed by generalized hemorrhagic syndrome that
is associated with 90% mortality in the severe forms.

Because these viruses cannot be handled under BSL-2 or -
3 containment facilities, pseudotype viruses bearing each GPC
envelope protein of various arenaviruses, such as Lassa virus,
Junin virus, Machupo virus, Sabia virus, Chapare virus, Gua-
narito virus, and Lujo virus, were generated as surrogate mod-
els for the study of viral infection or neutralization. All of the
pseudotype viruses exhibited high susceptibility to various cell
lines and were neutralized by sera from patients infected with
each virus. Reduction of the infectivity of the pseudotype virus

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 272 | 4

Tani et al.

Development and applications of VSV vectors

in the cells treated with various entry inhibitors depended on the
species of pseudotype virus, suggesting that several entry mech-
anisms were involved in the infection of arenaviruses (Tani et
al., unpublished data). In studies on serological diagnosis of are-
naviruses, cross reaction occurred among species of arenaviruses
in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay or immunoﬂuorescence
assay, whereas neutralization tests using pseudotype viruses exhib-
ited a speciﬁc reaction with each species of virus (Nakauchi et al.,
2009; Iha et al., unpublished data). Although Old or New World
arenaviruses have been shown to utilize α-dystroglycan or human
transferrin receptor 1, respectively, as one of the cellular receptors,
infectivities of the pseudotype viruses have not been consistent
with the expression levels of the receptor molecules in our pre-
liminary studies. The infection of pseudotype viruses was not
completely inhibited by soluble protein or antibodies of recep-
tor molecules, suggesting that another receptor molecule(s) might
be involved in the entry of these viruses. Although further char-
acterization of the pseudotype viruses bearing GPC envelope
proteins of arenaviruses will be needed, these viruses are thought
to mimic the functional properties of wild type arenaviruses and
are suitable for the study of entry mechanisms, including investi-
gation of novel cellular receptor(s), neutralization tests, or vaccine
development.

CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
Up to the present, various viral vectors aimed at gene transfer
or therapy have been developed and applied in biological and

medical research ﬁelds. Pseudotype or recombinant VSV are useful
tools as alternative viruses to study entry mechanisms, identiﬁca-
tion of novel cellular receptors, screening antiviral libraries, or
development of serological diagnosis for various kinds of viruses,
especially unmanageable BSL-3 or -4 viruses. These viruses have
also been applied in targeting vectors to speciﬁc cells. VSV vectors
with monoclonal antibodies against speciﬁc oncogenic proteins
or viral receptor molecule(s) incorporated on virion surface have
been targeted speciﬁcally to cells expressing oncogenic proteins or
infected cells expressing the viral envelope proteins, respectively,
without any inﬂuences on normal or uninfected cells. This raises
the possibility of the elimination of cancer cells or chronic viral
infections by using acute VSV infection. Genetically engineered
VSVs encoding suicide cassettes or immune response genes have
also been generated as more speciﬁc, safer, and effective agents for
cancer therapies. Further studies and applications of VSV vectors
will provide us not only with useful tools for virological stud-
ies but also various beneﬁts for biological sciences and medical
research.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by grants-in-aid from the Min-
istry of Health, Labour and Welfare; the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology; the 21st Century Center
of Excellence Program of Japan; the Global Center of Excel-
lence Program; and the Foundation for Biomedical Research and
Innovation, Japan.

REFERENCES
Bartosch, B., Dubuisson, J., and Cos-
set, F. L. (2003). Infectious hepati-
tis C virus pseudo-particles contain-
ing functional E1-E2 envelope pro-
tein complexes. J. Exp. Med. 197,
633–642.

Blanchard, E., Belouzard, S., Goues-
lain, L., Wakita, T., Dubuisson,
J., Wychowski, C., and Rouillé, Y.
(2006). Hepatitis C virus entry
depends on clathrin-mediated endo-
cytosis. J. Virol. 80, 6964–6972.

Boonsanay, V., and Smith, D. R.
(2007). Entry into and production
of the Japanese encephalitis virus
from C6/36 cells. Intervirology 50,
85–92.

Boritz, E., Gerlach, J., Johnson, J. E.,
and Rose, J. K. (1999). Replication-
competent
rhabdoviruses with
human immunodeﬁciency
virus
type 1 coats and green ﬂuorescent
protein: entry by a pH-independent
pathway. J. Virol. 73, 6937–6945.

Boyce, F. M., and Bucher, N. L.
(1996). Baculovirus-mediated gene
transfer
into mammalian cells.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93,
2348–2352.

Cerny, A., and Chisari, F. V. (1999).
Pathogenesis of chronic hepatitis C:
immunological features of hepatic

injury and viral persistence. Hepa-
tology 30, 595–601.

Cobleigh, M. A., Buonocore, L.,
J. K.,
Uprichard, S. L., Rose,
(2010). A
and Robek, M. D.
vesicular
virus-based
stomatitis
hepatitis B virus vaccine vector
provides protection against chal-
lenge in a single dose. J. Virol. 84,
7513–7522.

Das, S., Laxminarayana, S. V., Chandra,
N., Ravi, V., and Desai, A. (2009).
Heat shock protein 70 on Neuro2a
cells is a putative receptor for Japan-
ese encephalitis virus. Virology 385,
47–57.

Das, S., Ravi, V., and Desai, A. (2011).
Japanese encephalitis virus interacts
with vimentin to facilitate its entry
into porcine kidney cell line. Virus
Res. 160, 404–408.

and Morikawa, S.
a novel

Fukushi, S., Mizutani, T., Saijo, M.,
I., Taguchi, F., Tashiro,
Kurane,
(2006).
M.,
vesicu-
Evaluation of
stomatitis virus pseudotype-
lar
based assay for detection of neu-
to
tralizing
SARS-CoV.
78,
1509–1512.

responses
J. Med. Virol.

antibody

Fukushi, S., Mizutani, T., Saijo, M., Mat-
suyama, S., Miyajima, N., Taguchi,
I., and
F.,

Itamura, S., Kurane,

Morikawa, S. (2005). Vesicular stom-
atitis virus pseudotyped with severe
acute respiratory syndrome coron-
avirus spike protein. J. Gen. Virol. 86,
2269–2274.

Garbutt, M., Liebscher, R., Wahl-Jensen,
V.,
Jones, S., Möller, P., Wag-
ner, R., Volchkov, V., Klenk, H.
D., Feldmann, H., and Ströher, U.
(2004). Properties of replication-
competent vesicular stomatitis virus
vectors expressing glycoproteins of
ﬁloviruses and arenaviruses. J. Virol.
78, 5458–5465.

Gubler, D., Kuno, G., and Markoff,
L. (2007). “Flaviviruses, 1153-1252,”
in Fields Virology, 5th Edn, Vol. 1,
eds D. M. Knipe and P. M. How-
ley (Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-
Williams & Wilkins), 1153–1252.

Hofmann, C., Sandig, V.,

(1995).

Jennings,
G., Rudolph, M., Schlag, P., and
Strauss, M.
Efﬁcient
gene transfer into human hepa-
tocytes by baculovirus
vectors.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92,
10099–10103.

Hofmann, C., and Strauss, M. (1998).
Baculovirus-mediated gene transfer
in the presence of human serum or
blood facilities by inhibition of the
complement system. Gene Ther. 5,
531–536.

Hsu, M., Zhang, J., Flint, M., Logvinoff,
C., Cheng-Mayer, C., Rice, C. M., and
McKeating, J. A. (2003). Hepatitis
C virus glycoproteins mediate pH-
dependent cell entry of pseudotyped
retroviral particles. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 100, 7271–7276.

Huang, A. S., Palma, E. L., Hewlett, N.,
and Roizman, R. (1974). Pseudo-
type formation between enveloped
RNA and DNA viruses. Nature 252,
743–745.

Ishii, K., Murakami, K., Hmwe, S. S.,
Zhang, B., Li, J., Shirakura, M.,
Morikawa, K., Suzuki, R., Miya-
mura, T., Wakita, T., and Suzuki,
T. (2008). Trans-encapsidation of
hepatitis C virus subgenomic repli-
con RNA with viral structure pro-
teins. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Com-
mun. 371, 446–450.

Iyer, A. V., Pahar, B., Boudreaux, M. J.,
Wakamatsu, N., Roy, A. F., Choul-
jenko, V. N., Baghian, A., Apetrei,
C., Marx, P. A., and Kousoulas,
K. G. (2009). Recombinant vesic-
ular
stomatitis virus-based West
Nile vaccine elicits strong humoral
and cellular immune responses and
protects mice against lethal chal-
lenge with the virulent West Nile
virus strain LSU-AR01. Vaccine 27,
893–903.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 272 | 5

Tani et al.

Development and applications of VSV vectors

Kahn, J. S., Roberts, A., Weibel, C.,
Buonocore, L., and Rose,
J. K.
(2001). Replication-competent or
attenuated, nonpropagating vesicu-
lar stomatitis viruses expressing res-
piratory syncytial virus (RSV) anti-
gens protect mice against RSV chal-
lenge. J. Virol. 75, 11079–11087.

Kaku, Y., Noguchi, A., Marsh, G. A.,
McEachern, J. A., Okutani, A., Hotta,
K., Bazartseren, B., Fukushi, S.,
Broder, C. C., Yamada, A., Inoue,
S., and Wang, L. F. (2009). A neu-
tralization test for speciﬁc detec-
tion of Nipah virus antibodies
using pseudotyped vesicular stom-
atitis virus expressing green ﬂuores-
cent protein. J. Virol. Methods. 160,
7–13.

Kaname, Y., Tani, H., Kataoka, C.,
Shiokawa, M., Taguwa, S., Abe, T.,
Moriishi, K., Kinoshita, T., and Mat-
suura,Y. (2010). Acquisition of com-
plement resistance through incorpo-
ration of CD55/decay-accelerating
factor
into viral particles bear-
ing baculovirus GP64. J. Virol. 84,
3210–3219.

Kang, Y., Xie, L., Tran, D. T., Stein, C.
S., Hickey, M., Davidson, B. L., and
McCray, P. B. Jr. (2005). Persistent
expression of factor VIII in vivo fol-
lowing nonprimate lentiviral gene
transfer. Blood 106, 1552–1558.

Kumar, M., Bradow, B. P., and Zimmer-
berg, J. (2003). Large-scale produc-
tion of pseudotyped lentiviral vec-
tors using baculovirus GP64. Hum.
Gene Ther. 14, 67–77.

Lagging, L. M., Meyer, K., Owens, R. J.,
and Ray, R. (1998). Functional role
of hepatitis C virus chimeric glyco-
proteins in the infectivity of pseudo-
typed virus. J. Virol. 72, 3539–3546.
Lee, C. J., Lin, H. R., Liao, C. L., and Lin,
Y. L. (2008). Cholesterol effectively
blocks entry of ﬂavivirus. J. Virol. 82,
6470–6480.

Lee, E., and Lobigs, M. (2002). Mech-
anism of virulence attenuation of
glycosaminoglycan-binding variants
of Japanese encephalitis virus and
Murray Valley encephalitis virus. J.
Virol. 76, 4901–4911.

Lee, B. H., Yoshimatsu, K., Araki, K.,
Okumura, M., Nakamura, I., and
Arikawa, J. (2006). A pseudotype
vesicular stomatitis virus containing
Hantaan virus envelope glycopro-
teins G1 and G2 as an alternative to
hantavirus vaccine in mice. Vaccine
24, 2928–2934.

Lohmann, V., Körner, F., Koch, J., Her-
ian, U., Theilmann, L., and Barten-
schlager, R. (1999). Replication of
subgenomic hepatitis C virus RNAs
in a hepatoma cell line. Science 285,
110–113.

Ma, Y., and Li,

J.

(2011). Vesicu-
lar stomatitis virus as a vector to
deliver virus-like particles of human
norovirus: a new vaccine candidate
against an important noncultivable
virus. J. Virol. 85, 2942–2952.

Matsuura, Y., Tani, H., Suzuki, K.,
Kimura-Someya, T., Suzuki, R.,
Aizaki, H., Ishii, K., Moriishi, K.,
Robison, C. S., Whitt, M. A., and
Miyamura, T. (2001). Characteriza-
tion of pseudotype VSV possess-
ing HCV envelope proteins. Virology
286, 263–275.

Muik, A., Kneiske, I., Werbizki, M., Wil-
ﬂingseder, D., Giroglou, T., Ebert,
O., Kraft, A., Dietrich, U., Zim-
mer, G., Momma, S., and von Laer,
D.
(2011). Pseudotyping vesicu-
lar stomatitis virus with lympho-
cytic choriomeningitis virus gly-
coproteins enhances infectivity for
glioma cells and minimizes neu-
rotropism. J. Virol. 85, 5679–5684.

Nakauchi, M., Fukushi, S., Saijo,
M., Mizutani, T., Ure, A. E.,
Romanowski, V., Kurane, I., and
Morikawa, S. (2009). Characteriza-
tion of monoclonal antibodies to
Junin virus nucleocapsid protein
and application to the diagnosis of
hemorrhagic fever caused by South
American arenaviruses. Clin. Vaccine
Immunol. 16, 1132–1138.

Okuma, K., Matsuura, Y., Tatsuo,
H.,
Inagaki, Y., Nakamura, M.,
Yamamoto, N., and Yanagi,Y. (2001).
Analysis of the molecules involved
in human T-cell leukemia virus type
1 entry by a vesicular stomatitis
virus pseudotype bearing its enve-
lope glycoproteins. J. Gen. Virol. 82,
821–830.

Perez, M., Watanabe, M., Whitt, M. A.,
and de la Torre, J. C. (2001). N-
terminal domain of Borna disease
virus G (p56) protein is sufﬁcient for
virus receptor recognition and cell
entry. J. Virol. 75, 7078–7085.

Publicover, J., Ramsburg, E., and Rose,
J. K. (2005). A single-cycle vaccine
vector based on vesicular stomatitis
virus can induce immune responses
comparable to those generated by
a replication-competent vector. J.
Virol. 79, 13231–13238.

Ren, J., Ding, T., Zhang, W., Song, J.,
and Ma, W. (2007). Does Japanese
encephalitis virus share the same cel-
lular receptor with other mosquito-
borne ﬂaviviruses on the C6/36 mos-
quito cells? Virol. J. 4, 83.

Roberts, A., Kretzschmar, E., Perkins,
A. S., Forman, J., Price, R., Buono-
core, L., Kawaoka, Y., and Rose,
J. K.
(1998). Vaccination with
a recombinant vesicular stomati-
tis virus expressing an inﬂuenza

virus hemagglutinin provides com-
plete protection from inﬂuenza virus
challenge. J. Virol. 72, 4704–4711.

Roberts, A., Reuter, J. D., Wilson, J. H.,
Baldwin, S., and Rose, J. K. (2004).
Complete protection from papil-
lomavirus challenge after a single
vaccination with a vesicular stom-
atitis virus vector expressing high
levels of L1 protein. J. Virol. 78,
3196–3199.

Saha, M. N., Tanaka, A., Jinno-Oue,
A., Shimizu, N., Tamura, K., Shina-
gawa, M., Chiba, J., and Hoshino,
H. (2005). Formation of vesicular
stomatitis virus pseudotypes bearing
surface proteins of hepatitis B virus.
J. Virol. 79, 12566–12574.

Lentiviral
with

Schauber, C. A., Tuerk, M. J., Pacheco,
C. D., Escarpe, P. A., and Veres,
vectors
G.
(2004).
pseudotyped
baculovirus
gp64 efﬁciently transduce mouse
cells in vivo and show tropism
restriction against hematopoietic
cell types in vitro. Gene Ther. 11,
266–275.

Schnell, M. J., Buonocore, L., Kret-
zschmar, E., Johnson, E., and Rose,
J. K. (1996). Foreign glycoproteins
expressed from recombinant vesic-
ular stomatitis viruses are incor-
porated efﬁciently into virus parti-
cles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93,
11359–11365.

Shoji, I., Aizaki, H., Tani, H., Ishii, K.,
Chiba, T., Saito, I., Miyamura, T.,
and Matsuura, Y. (1997). Efﬁcient
gene transfer into various mam-
malian cells, including non-hepatic
cells, by baculovirus vectors. J. Gen.
Virol. 78, 2657–2664.

Sinn, P. L., Arias, A. C., Brogden,
Jr.
can
nasal
blocking
J. Virol. 82,

K. A., and McCray, P. B.
Lentivirus
(2008).
readministered
be
epithelia
without
immune responses.
10684–10692.

vector

to

Sinn, P. L., Burnight, E. R., Hickey, M.
A., Blissard, G. W., and McCray, P.
B. Jr. (2005). Persistent gene expres-
sion in mouse nasal epithelia follow-
ing feline immunodeﬁciency virus-
based vector gene transfer. J. Virol.
79, 12818–12827.

Bartenschlager,

Steinmann, E., Brohm, C., Kallis,
S.,
and
Pietschmann, T. (2008). Efﬁcient
trans-encapsidation of hepatitis C
virus RNAs into infectious virus-like
particles. J. Virol. 82, 7034–7046.

R.,

Su, C. M., Liao, C. L., Lee, Y. L.,
and Lin, Y. L.
(2001). Highly
sulfated forms of heparin sulfate
are involved in Japanese encephali-
tis virus infection. Virology 286,
206–215.

Takada, A., Robison, C., Goto, H.,
Sanchez, A., Murti, K. G., Whitt, M.
A., and Kawaoka, Y. (1997). A sys-
tem for functional analysis of Ebola
virus glycoprotein. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA. 94, 14764–14769.

Tani, H., Komoda,Y., Matsuo, E., Suzuki,
K., Hamamoto, I., Yamashita, T.,
Moriishi, K., Fujiyama, K., Kanto,
T., Hayashi, N., Owsianka, A.,
Patel, A. H., Whitt, M. A., and
Matsuura, Y. (2007). Replication-
competent
recombinant vesicular
stomatitis virus encoding hepatitis C
virus envelope proteins. J. Virol. 81,
8601–8612.

Tani, H., Limn, C. K., Yap, C. C., Onishi,
M., Nozaki, M., Nishimune, Y., Oka-
hashi, N., Kitagawa, Y., Watanabe,
R., Mochizuki, R., Moriishi, K., and
Matsuura, Y. (2003). In vitro and
in vivo gene delivery by recom-
binant baculoviruses. J. Virol. 77,
9799–9808.

Tani, H., Nishijima, M., Ushijima, H.,
Miyamura, T., and Matsuura, Y.
(2001). Characterization of cell-
surface determinants important for
baculovirus infection. Virology 279,
343–353.

Tani, H., Shiokawa, M., Kaname, Y.,
Kambara, H., Mori, Y., Abe, T.,
Moriishi, K., and Matsuura, Y.
(2010). Involvement of ceramide
Japanese
in the propagation of
encephalitis virus.
J. Virol. 84,
2798–2807.

Tatsuo, H., Okuma, K., Tanaka, K., Ono,
N., Minagawa, H., Takade, A., Mat-
suura, Y., and Yanagi, Y. (2000).
Virus entry is a major determinant
of cell tropism of Edmonston and
wild-type strains of measles virus as
revealed by vesicular stomatitis virus
pseudotypes bearing their envelope
proteins. J. Virol. 74, 4139–4145.

Theodore, D., and Fried, M. W. (2000).
Natural history and disease mani-
festations of hepatitis C infection.
Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 242,
43–54.

Vela, E. M., Zhang, L., Colpitts, T. M.,
Davey, R. A., and Aronson, J. F.
(2007). Arenavirus entry occurs
through a cholesterol-dependent,
non-caveolar,
clathrin-mediated
endocytic mechanism. Virology 369,
1–11.

Whitt, M. A. (2010). Generation of
VSV pseudotypes using recom-
binant ΔG-VSV for
studies on
virus entry, identiﬁcation of entry
inhibitors, and immune responses
to vaccines. J. Virol. Methods 169,
365–374.

Witte, O. N.,

(1977). Mechanism of
tion

pseudotypes

and Baltimore, D.
forma-
between

of

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 272 | 6

Tani et al.

Development and applications of VSV vectors

stomatitis

vesicular
and
murine leukemia virus. Cell 11,
505–511.

virus

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any

commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 09 December 2011; paper
pending published: 18 December 2011;
accepted: 21 December 2011; published
online: 18 January 2012.

Citation: Tani H, Morikawa S and Mat-
suura Y (2012) Development and appli-
cations of VSV vectors based on cell
tropism. Front. Microbio. 2:272. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2011.00272
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Virology, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.

Copyright  2012 Tani, Morikawa and
Matsuura. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution Non Com-
mercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 272 | 7

