HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY ARTICLE
published: 03 February 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00008

The deep subsurface biosphere in igneous ocean crust:
frontier habitats for microbiological exploration

Katrina J. Edwards 1*, Andrew T. Fisher 2 and C. Geoffrey Wheat 3

1 Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
2 Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA
3 Global Undersea Research Unit, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, CA, USA

Edited by:
Andreas Teske, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA
Reviewed by:
John Stolz, Duquesne University, USA
Jens Kallmeyer, University of
Potsdam, Germany
*Correspondence:
Katrina J. Edwards, Department of
Biological Sciences, Division of
Marine Environmental Biology, 3616
Trousdale Blvd 91030, AHF 203, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.
e-mail: kje@usc.edu

We discuss ridge ﬂank environments in the ocean crust as habitats for subseaﬂoor microbial
life. Oceanic ridge ﬂanks, areas far from the magmatic and tectonic inﬂuence of seaﬂoor
spreading, comprise one of the largest and least explored microbial habitats on the planet.
We describe the nature of selected ridge ﬂank crustal environments, and present a frame-
work for delineating a continuum of conditions and processes that are likely to be important
for deﬁning subseaﬂoor microbial "provinces."The basis for this framework is three govern-
ing conditions that help to determine the nature of subseaﬂoor biomes: crustal age, extent
of ﬂuid ﬂow, and thermal state. We present a brief overview of subseaﬂoor conditions,
within the context of these three characteristics, for ﬁve ﬁeld sites where microbial stud-
ies have been done, are underway, or have been proposed. Technical challenges remain
and likely will limit progress in studies of microbial ridge ﬂank ecosystems, which is why
it is vital to select and design future studies so as to leverage as much general under-
standing as possible from work focused at a small number of sites. A characterization
framework such that as presented in this paper, perhaps including alternative or additional
physical or chemical characteristics, is essential for achieving the greatest beneﬁt from
multidisciplinary microbial investigations of oceanic ridge ﬂanks.

Keywords: microbiology, deep subsurface, ocean crust, basalt, ecology, provinces, marine

INTRODUCTION
Of all the potentially habitable deep subsurface environments on
Earth, the igneous ocean crust is one most intriguing, being spa-
tially extensive, voluminous, and (in many places) hospitable for
development and maintenance of life. Yet, igneous crust remains
among the least studied and most poorly understood of Earth’s
major biological habitats (Shrenk et al., 2009). Most studies on
subseaﬂoor crustal microbiology have focused on mid-ocean ridge
(MOR) seaﬂoor spreading areas. In contrast, much of the remain-
ing 300,000 km3 (∼2.3× 1018 m3 of pore ﬂuid volume; Orcutt
et al., 2011b) of potentially habitable igneous ocean crust is virtu-
ally unexplored for microbiology. This deep subseaﬂoor biosphere,
developed and maintained as part of ridge ﬂank hydrothermal
(RFH) systems, represents a relatively unexplored frontier for
scientiﬁc discovery.

Researchers are pursuing fundamental questions concerning
ridge ﬂank crustal microbiology, including: what is the activity
of life within ridge ﬂanks? How are evolutionary forces expressed
in these settings? What are the physical and chemical limits for
survival and reproduction in the subseaﬂoor? What is the biogeog-
raphy of life in the subsurface and what are the most important
dispersal mechanisms? What are the inﬂuences of subseaﬂoor
microbiology on global biogeochemical processes?

Ocean crust has existed through much of Earth’s history, long
before there were continents, and has been exposed to a range of
chemical and thermal conditions that overlap with those found
today. Therefore, the ocean crust is one of the oldest biomes on

the planet; understanding how life developed to occupy and sur-
vive in this biome will help to answer fundamental questions about
evolution and persistence of microbial communities on Earth. The
ocean crust is large, and the ﬂow of water, heat, and solutes between
the crust and ocean rivals those from riverine sources (Mackenzie,
1992; Stein and Stein, 1994; Elderﬁeld and Schultz, 1996; Wheat
et al., 2003).

Elucidating the nature and function of ocean crustal microbial
ecosystems is critical to understanding the global-scale storage
and transfer of carbon, nutrients, and life-supporting metals over
geological time. This understanding has implications for the early
Earth, modern Earth, and perhaps other planetary bodies where
there are mixing and reactions between rock, water, carbon, and
heat (e.g., Cody et al., 2000; Chyba and Phillips, 2002).

Most geobiological research is conducted on continents, where
environments and samples are readily accessible in the surface
world. In the oceans, most studies occur in the water column,
shallow sediments along continental margins, and near the sur-
face of seaﬂoor spreading centers. These are some of the easiest
marine sites to locate and sample, although in general marine
sites are more challenging to access than are sites on land. There
are comparatively few studies of mineral–microbe interactions in
RFH areas, even though hydrothermal systems in these areas rep-
resent an enormous fraction of the subseaﬂoor microbial realm
where mineral–microbe interactions are likely to play a critical
role in biogeochemical processes and ecosystem function. Our
understanding of the Earth as a geobiological system suffers if one

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 8 | 1

Edwards et al.

The deep subsurface biosphere in igneous ocean crust

of the most voluminous parts of this biome remains so under
sampled.

There is an opportunity to accelerate the pace of microbial
exploration, discovery, and experimentation in the ocean crust,
in association with scientiﬁc ocean drilling. The initial science
plan for the Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP; 2003–
2013; IODP, 2003), includes a major emphasis on the microbial
biosphere and related studies of crustal formation, marine hydro-
geology, biogeochemistry, and rock alteration. Ocean drilling has
been profoundly important in developing new technology, link-
ing multidisciplinary research projects, and providing access to
samples and data that cannot be recovered in any other way. The
science plan for the successor to IODP, the International Ocean
Discovery Program (2013–2023; IODP, 2011), also includes a
prominent focus on subseaﬂoor microbiology. Yet ﬁelding a major
drilling effort involves considerable planning, engineering devel-
opment, and funding, a lengthy process often requiring 5 years or
more. Without rapid action, few new expeditions focusing on sub-
seaﬂoor microbiology will be completed during the next phase of
scientiﬁc ocean drilling.

Advances and research in the subsurface biome are not lim-
ited by scientiﬁc drilling operations; much can also be learned
from sampling materials with submersibles and remotely oper-
ated vehicles (ROVs) at sites where crustal ﬂuids seep from the
seaﬂoor. Nevertheless, it is highly unlikely that researchers will
develop enough ridge ﬂank drilling and submersible studies to
provide a statistically robust global data set from RFH systems;
the extent of ridge ﬂank biomes is simply too vast, and the com-
plexity and cost of ﬁelding dozens of ﬁeld programs is too great.
Instead, strategies are needed to plan for ridge ﬂank studies of
subseaﬂoor microbiology and related disciplines by identifying
critical parameters and processes that occur across a wide range
of natural conditions. Many of the key parameters are under-
stood based on theoretical considerations, laboratory studies, and
(limited) in situ work completed to date. The delineation of
microbiological “provinces” in the igneous ocean crust, based on
consideration of “geologically and geographically coherent regions
of the subseaﬂoor that may serve as potential microbial habi-
tats” (Schrenk et al., 2009), provides an important framework
for identifying targets and planning for efﬁcient and successful
sampling.

In the present study, we apply this process- and province-based
approach to identifying conditions that deﬁne the scientiﬁcally
compelling potential habitats in oceanic ridge ﬂanks. Based on
delineation of key parameters, one can select a modest number of
ﬁeld areas where rapid progress can be achieved. Sites and systems
selected on the basis of their locations within a parameter space
of ridge ﬂank processes can subsequently be used to develop (and
eventually test) fully coupled models of deep subsurface micro-
bial life. Initial ﬁeld studies can also help to determine where
gaps in understanding may persist, and help with identiﬁcation
of essential needs for ﬁeld surveys, tools, and experiments.

In the next section of this paper, we explore some of the key
physical and chemical parameters that should have a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the development and maintenance of subseaﬂoor
microbiological systems, focusing on those parameters that are
most readily measured on the basis of regional surveys. We use

a subset of these parameters to delineate a range of physical and
chemical conditions, and describe selected ﬁeld sites that occupy
relatively narrow ranges of these parameters. We also identify
where there are remaining gaps in this representation of ridge
ﬂank microbial provinces. The present study focuses on volcanic-
hosted (“hard rock”) biomes within deep-sea ridge ﬂanks, but
similar approaches are readily developed for other settings (deep-
sea sedimentary environments, very young seaﬂoor near spreading
centers, continental shelves, etc.) and sets of parameters (produc-
tivity in the overlying water, water depth, proximity to continents,
etc.).

THERMAL, GEOCHEMICAL, HYDROLOGICAL, AND
GEOLOGICAL REGIMES
Most new oceanic crust forms where tectonic plates separate at
divergent boundaries, resulting in partial melting of ultramaﬁc
mantle rocks to form basaltic magma. This process occurs under
a wide range of spreading rates and tectonic regimes, yet results
(to a ﬁrst order) in a remarkably consistent ocean crustal stratig-
raphy, as originally deﬁned from study of ophiolites (Raitt, 1963;
Moores and Vine, 1971; Shor et al., 1971; Cann, 1974). Extrusive
volcanic rocks having a basaltic composition generally form the
upper 500–1000 m of ocean crust, and are underlain by 5–6 km
of intrusive maﬁc rocks (basalt, gabbro). There are common vari-
ations in this typical crustal structure, particularly where plates
spread at slow rates (≤3 cm/year). At very low spreading rates,
plate divergence is diffuse, and the seaﬂoor lacks a readily iden-
tiﬁable spreading center. In these and in other areas, the ocean
crust is frequently faulted and delaminated almost as quickly as
it is formed, exposing deeper crustal levels at the seaﬂoor. This
has important biogeochemical implications for associated micro-
bial ecosystems. Additional deviations in crustal structure occur at
fracture zones and around seamounts, where additional tectonic
and volcanic processes are active.

The nature of processes and conditions at depth below seaﬂoor
spreading centers remain poorly known and is a subject of debate
within the scientiﬁc community. For example, geophysical and
geochemical studies from some sites have been interpreted to indi-
cate that relatively cool conditions may extend completely through
the crust close to seaﬂoor spreading centers, with rapid circulation
of cool seawater into the upper mantle, extracting a large frac-
tion of crustal heat (e.g., Dunn et al., 2000; VanTongeren et al.,
2008; Spinelli and Harris, 2011). In contrast, comprehensive water
column plume studies along spreading centers suggest that the
advective heat output from hydrothermal circulation can account
for the cooling of only the upper 1–2 km of the crust (Baker, 2007),
and crustal alteration studies on some settings reveal a lack of evi-
dence for the penetration of cool ﬂuids into gabbros of the lower
crust (e.g., Dunn et al., 2000; Humphris and Cann, 2000; Coogan
et al., 2007). Secondary ﬂuid circulation near spreading centers,
penetrating only a short distance below the seaﬂoor, could result
in sustained cool conditions in the upper crust, even where and
when heat extraction by deeply circulating ﬂuids is incomplete.
In aggregate, there is compelling evidence from many sources that
at least the upper 1–2 km of ocean crust is cooled efﬁciently by
circulating ﬂuids at and near many seaﬂoor spreading centers, and
cool temperatures may predominate in the crust in these regions,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Extreme Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 8 | 2

Edwards et al.

The deep subsurface biosphere in igneous ocean crust

except in the immediately vicinity of recently emplaced magma or
at high-temperature hydrothermal upﬂow zones.

The thermal state of the upper crust as it moves away from
seaﬂoor spreading centers is highly variable, depending on factors
such as the nature and rate of sedimentation, extent and frequency
of faulting, and the occurrence of off axis volcanism. The latter is
often not widely appreciated, but recent studies suggest that the
seaﬂoor is dotted with 106–107 seamounts having an elevation of
100 m or more above the surrounding basaltic crust (Hillier and
Watts, 2007; Wessel et al., 2010). These features facilitate hydroge-
ologic exchange between the crust and ocean for millions of years
(Fisher and Wheat, 2010).

√
Standard lithospheric (conductive) cooling models generally
suggest that crustal heat output decreases as 1/
age (e.g., Parsons
and Sclater, 1977), but in practice conditions differ considerably
between sites having similar ages. On a global basis, the throughput
of RFH ﬂuid is similar to the discharge of the global river system
into the ocean; thus a volume equivalent to that of the global ocean
is passed through the crust about once every 105–106 years (e.g.,
Mottl and Wheat, 1994; Johnson and Pruis, 2003; Wheat et al.,
2003). This is a very short residence time for the ocean in the crust
when considered over the duration of Earth history. In addition,
based on consideration of the volume of pore space available in
the volcanic ocean crust, and the global rate of ﬂuid throughput,
the global residence time of ﬂuids in the crust is relatively short,
only 103–104 years, about the same as the residence time of deep
water in the northern Paciﬁc Ocean.

High-temperature hydrothermal sites at seaﬂoor spreading
centers and other areas of active volcanism provide some of the
most dramatic visual, chemical, thermal, and biologic expressions
of ﬂuid ﬂow from the volcanic ocean crust. High-temperature vent
ﬂuids differ in composition from seawater in numerous impor-
tant ways. These ﬂuids tend to be depleted in magnesium and
sulfate, rich in dissolved metals and calcium, and contain reduced
forms of nitrogen, carbon, sulfur, and hydrogen. During circula-
tion, high-temperature ﬂuids may reach temperatures in excess
of 350–400˚C, sterilizing the entrained seawater. However, when
this ﬂuid mixes with cool oxygenated bottom seawater, microbial
growth can be rampant, for example producing “snow blower”
events, where large amounts of ﬂocculent bioﬁlm materials are
ﬂushed from the seaﬂoor (Haymond et al., 1993).

Another source for reduced chemical species in crustal ﬂuids
is sediment that overlies the volcanic crust. Microbial processes in
sediment commonly lead to reducing pore ﬂuids, which exchange
diffusively with the underlying volcanic crustal reservoir (Elder-
ﬁeld et al., 1999; Wheat et al., 2000). Diffusive ﬂuxes from the
sediment can be the dominant control for the composition of
some dissolved species in crustal ﬂuids, resulting in a distinctly
altered seawater composition.

However, in many cases the composition of ﬂuids in many RFH
systems may be only subtly different from that of bottom seawa-
ter. Within low temperature RFH systems, which are kept cool by
the vigor of ﬂuid exchange between the crust and ocean, crustal
ﬂuids will remain cool and oxic if the advective ﬂux through the
crust exceeds the aggregate of downward diffusive ﬂuxes from
overlying sediment and reaction with basement volcanic rocks.
Relatively low temperatures in such systems minimize the amount

and type of reduced nitrogen, carbon, sulfur, and hydrogen avail-
able in ﬂuids for microbes within the basaltic crust, and tend to
slow inorganic exchange. On average, the residence time of ﬂu-
ids within the crust on ridge ﬂanks is orders of magnitude longer
than that of MOR crustal ﬂuids (Kadko and Moore, 1988; Fisher,
2003). In some cases, this can permit signiﬁcant changes in the
composition of ridge ﬂank crustal ﬂuids, even where reactions are
kinetically slow.

Cool RFH systems have a profound inﬂuence on heat loss from
the crust. And despite having a composition that is subtly dif-
ferent from bottom seawater, such systems can have a signiﬁcant
impact on the composition of the crust and seawater because the
ﬂows are so large. The magnitude of RFH ﬂows is determined
mainly by the efﬁciency of ﬂuid circulation in removing crustal
heat, relative to conduction. Lithospheric heat loss drives ﬂuid
ﬂow on ridge ﬂanks, leading to differences between pressures at
the base of recharging and discharging columns of ﬂuid within the
crust. The ﬂowing system effectively functions as a “hydrothermal
siphon” (Fisher et al., 2003a; Hutnak et al., 2006; Fisher and Wheat,
2010; Figure 1). Circulating ﬂuids are warmed (relative to bottom
water) and expand, such that where discharge occurs, the column

FIGURE 1 | Schematic illustrations of the causes and impacts of ridge
ﬂank hydrothermal circulation. In this example, seamounts or other
basement outcrops play a key role in guiding ﬂuid ﬂow into and out of the
crust, between areas that are blanketed with marine sediment. Within
recharging and discharging volcanic rock outcrops, ﬂuid temperatures (T ﬂuid)
and densities (r ﬂuid) remain relatively constant so long as vertical transport
(descent and ascent) is rapid. The difference between ﬂuid pressures (P ﬂuid)
at the base of recharging and discharging columns of ﬂuid (C). ΔP, is the
primary driving force for ridge ﬂank hydrothermal circulation. This pressure
difference is available to move ﬂuid laterally within the reactive basement
aquifer, mining heat, reacting with the crust, and providing nutrients and/or
energy to microbial communities living in pore spaces. Seaﬂoor heat ﬂow is
generally higher adjacent to discharging outcrops, and lower adjacent to
recharging outcrops. Between outcrops, heat ﬂow may be equal to or less
than conductive plate cooling values, depending on the regional efﬁciency
of lithospheric heat extraction.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 8 | 3

Edwards et al.

The deep subsurface biosphere in igneous ocean crust

of ﬂuid rising through the crust has a density that is comparatively
low. In contrast, the density of cold bottom seawater entering the
crust is comparatively high. So long as there is a good hydrologic
connection between recharging and discharging ﬂuids, with the
intervening crust having high permeability (ease of ﬂow), ﬂuids
will continue to ﬂow because of the density (and associated pres-
sure) contrast. In addition, such systems will ﬂow at a rate that
is optimized to remove as much heat from the crust as possible,
which often means circulating a large volume of slightly warmed
(and slightly altered) ﬂuid rather than a smaller volume of hotter
(and more altered) ﬂuid.

MODEL MICROBIAL PROVINCES
On the basis of the preceding discussion concerning thermal,
chemical, hydrological, and geological regimes, we can delineate a
modest number of end-member microbial provinces in the vol-
canic ocean crust (Figure 2) Description of key physical, thermal,
and chemical conditions for these biomes is helpful in deﬁn-
ing where attention could be placed in the coming decades so
as to focus time and resources on locations that can have broad
applicability and can inﬂuence our understanding of subseaﬂoor
microbial processes in general. This approach is different from
trying to deﬁne a global “average” set of conditions. In a highly
heterogeneous environment like the volcanic ocean crust, “aver-
age” conditions may actually be rare. Or, like many natural stream
systems, it may be end-member conditions (high ﬂow, low ﬂow)
that dominate system morphology and the nature of ecosystems.

FIGURE 2 | Cartoon illustrating how ridge ﬂank hydrothermal ﬁeld
areas discussed in this paper might vary in terms of three key physical
and chemical parameters: age of basement rocks, magnitude of ﬂuid
ﬂow through the crust, and then thermal state of the basement
aquifer (which indicates the likely extent of water–rock interaction).
Information used to construct this ﬁgure is listed in Table 1). The height of
individual dots indicates basement age, whereas position on the horizontal
space indicates ﬂuid and thermal states. The South Paciﬁc Gyre sites span a
range of parameters (height of dots indicates range of basement ages, in
addition to ﬂuid and thermal state). There are two main parts of the eastern
ﬂank of the Juan de Fuca Ridge, indicated by the swath between two dots.
Properties of many areas associated with mid-ocean ridges (MORs) are
indicative of young basement age, a wide range of temperatures, and
additional variability in ﬂuid throughput, as shown.

We propose that three primary factors be considered in selec-
tion of characteristic biomes: volcanic crustal age, typical ﬂuid
temperature, and the throughput of water (extent of water–rock
interaction; Figure 2). Numerous other factors might be selected
that are equally illustrative (for example, concentrations of nutri-
ents or dissolved ions, inorganic and organic carbon content in
ﬂuids, rock type, spreading rate of crustal formation, or ﬂuid
residence time). However, appropriate values for many of these
parameters are poorly known on a regional basis, challenging to
determine in practice, or may serve as proxies for more direct
biological controls in speciﬁc ﬁeld areas.

Plotted in this three-dimensional space are selected locations
where subseaﬂoor microbiological work has been completed to
date, and where future studies are planned or have been proposed.
Characteristics of these sites are summarized in Table 1. We are
particularly interested in using this framework to deﬁne pairs or
sets of sites that share some characteristics, but differ in one or
more key aspects, as this will allow the strongest delineation of
what factors control the development and maintenance of micro-
bial communities. Once these factors are identiﬁed, results from
work at a small number of carefully selected ﬁeld sites can be
extrapolated more broadly, both spatially and temporally. The lat-
ter is especially important when one considers that subseaﬂoor
biomes evolve with time (as the seaﬂoor spreads and ages, lithos-
pheric heat ﬂow declines, and sediment accumulates on top of
volcanic rocks), such that researchers working in some settings will
be challenged to detangle multiple generations of legacy microbial
processes.

EASTERN FLANK OF THE JUAN DE FUCA RIDGE
There is only one site on Earth where a complete hydrologic ﬂow
path through a seaﬂoor hydrothermal system has been delineated
with conﬁdence: within 3.5–3.6 million years old crust on the east-
ern ﬂank of the Juan de Fuca Ridge (JFR; Wheat et al., 2000; Fisher
et al., 2003a; Hutnak et al., 2006). In this area, ﬂuids enter Grizzly
Bare outcrop, an inactive seamount, traverse more than 50 km to
the northeast, then exit the seaﬂoor through Baby Bare outcrop,
with ﬂuid travel time that is likely to be on the order of a few
tens of years to a few hundred years. Fluids moving through this

Table 1 | Summary of selected characteristics for sites discussed in
this paper.

Site

Basement age
(million years)

Fluid
throughput

Thermal state
(W–R reaction)

Juan de Fuca ﬂank

0.7–3.6

North Pond
Dorado outcrop
South Paciﬁc Gyre
Madeira Abyssal plain ∼100

8
23
15–100

Cool (low) to
High to
warm (high)
moderate
Cool (low)
High
Cool (low)
High
High to low Cool (low)
Low?

Warm (high)

Site characteristics are based on studies cited in the next of the paper. Two
hydrothermal regimes are discussed for the eastern ﬂank of the Juan de Fuca
Ridge, a younger (cooler) area closer to the active spreading center, and an older
(warmer) region farther from the spreading center.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Extreme Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 8 | 4

Edwards et al.

The deep subsurface biosphere in igneous ocean crust

part of the RFH system undergo extensive alteration, and ﬂuid
temperatures in the crust reach ∼65˚C before seeping from the
seaﬂoor. The only natural seeps that have been sampled from a
RFH system were collected on Baby Bare outcrop (Mottl et al.,
1998; Wheat and Mottl, 2000). Subsequently a lance was deployed
to penetrate thin sediment and create an artiﬁcial vent, allowing
collection of ﬂuids for microbial characterization (Huber et al.,
2006).

To the west of this area, on younger crust, sediment cover is
discontinuous, there is greater basement exposure, and RFH sys-
tems are generally cooler (Davis et al., 1992; Wheat and Mottl,
1994; Elderﬁeld et al., 1999). This cooler RFH system may be more
characteristic of RFH systems on average, with lower temperatures
and greater ﬂuid throughput, but because there are more places
where ﬂuids could enter and exit the crust in this area, ﬂow paths
are poorly constrained.

A transect of eight sites was drilled across 0.9–3.6 Ma seaﬂoor
in 1996 (Ocean Drilling Program Leg 168), allowing sample col-
lection and installation of ﬁrst generation subseaﬂoor borehole
observatories (CORKs) within uppermost ocean crust (Davis et al.,
1997). No microbial work was planned when these systems were
designed or installed, but samples for microbial characterization
were collected later from one of the CORKs installed near Baby
Bare outcrop (in Hole 1026B), where ﬂuids are warm and reducing
(Cowen et al., 2003). IODP Expedition 301 returned to this area
in 2004 to drill and sample deeper in basement, replace the Hole
1026B borehole observatory, and establish two new ones, each
instrumented with novel downhole microbial colonization exper-
iments (Orcutt et al., 2011a; Smith et al., 2011). A later generation
of CORKs was installed during IODP Expedition 327 in 2010,
including additional microbial samplers, enrichment experiments,
and colonization substrate (Fisher et al., 2011).

CORKs installed in this area during ODP Leg 168 and IODP
Expedition 301 have produced valuable ﬂuid and microbial sam-
ples indicating the nature of linked geochemical and microbiolog-
ical conditions in basement (e.g., Cowen et al., 2003; Wheat et al.,
2004, 2010; Orcutt et al., 2011a; Smith et al., 2011). Fluids and
microbial samples collected at depth in two holes have compo-
sitions resulting from reducing conditions in basement. CORKs
deployed during IODP Expedition 327 should provide even bet-
ter samples of endemic microbial communities from the crust,
because the newer observatories were designed and constructed
with materials so as to be more compatible with microbiologi-
cal investigations. With respect to the continuum of physical and
chemical conditions highlighted earlier, the JFR ﬂank sites span a
range of thermal states (cool to warm) and magnitude of ﬂuid ﬂow
(diffusion to advection dominated), but all are within relatively
young seaﬂoor (Figure 2; Table 1).

NORTH POND
North Pond is located in the mid-Atlantic at 22˚N on the west-
ern ﬂank of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. North Pond is an isolated
northeast-trending sediment pond bounded by 1-km high base-
ment ridges and a range of sediment thicknesses up to 300 m
thick at the southernmost part of the basin. This was a drilling
target during DSDP Leg 45 (Site 395) to examine crustal proper-
ties to characterize the geology of young oceanic crust. Here the

crust is relatively young (8 million years) with vigorous crustal
ﬂuid circulation that allows warming of circulating ﬂuids to only
10–15˚C before they are discharged from the crust. There have
been numerous return visits to this area since the initial deep-sea
drilling, with the most recent work occurring on IODP Exp 336 to
install borehole observatories and experiments and core sediment
and volcanic rocks, with a focus on subseaﬂoor microbial systems.
Samples and data collected during a heat ﬂow and sediment
coring expedition in 2009 suggest a crustal ﬂuid having consider-
able dissolved oxygen and seawater-like concentrations for most
major and trace ions and nutrients, indicating a short residence
time for ﬂuids within basaltic basement. Because temperatures are
low, sluggish abiotic rates of reaction favor alteration by kinetically
enhanced biotic reactions. These reactions could support micro-
bial communities that alter the crust directly. North Pond was
selected for new drilling and CORK installation during IODP Exp
336 in part because of the contrasts it provides with the eastern
ﬂank of the JFR (Figure 2; Table 1).

Hydrologically, North Pond is characteristic of areas where vol-
canic crustal rocks are exposed across large areas, and continuous
cover by sediment is the exception rather than the rule (Langseth
et al., 1984, 1992). Drilling, coring, logging, and limited borehole
experiments suggest that the upper crust in this area is highly
porous and permeable (Hickman et al., 1984; Becker, 1990; Gable
et al., 1992; Bartetzko et al., 2001). There is extensive, vigorous
ﬂuid circulation in the crust of this area, likely more circulation
per unit of basement rock than observed where ﬂuids are hotter
and more altered on the eastern ﬂank of the JDF, but delineating
ﬂuid ﬂow pathways from recharge to discharge around North Pond
is challenging. The North Pond microbial province is indicative
of low temperature and advection dominated conditions, within
relatively young ocean crust (Table 1).

DORADO OUTCROP
Dorado outcrop is located on the eastern ﬂank of the East Paciﬁc
Rise (EPR) spreading center on the Cocos Plate, off-shore of the
Nicoya Peninsula of Costa Rica. Here the crust is about 23 million
years old (Barckhausen et al., 2001). Surveys using swath-mapping,
multi-channel seismic reﬂection data, and multi-penetration heat
ﬂow measurements identiﬁed basement outcrops and delineated
thermal anomalies with respect to global lithospheric cooling
models and regional heat loss (Fisher et al., 2003b; Hutnak et al.,
2007). These surveys revealed that a large part of the Cocos Plate is
anomalously cool, having upper basement temperatures of 5–30˚C
below thick sediments, consistent with rapid and extensive shal-
low ﬂuid circulation through the crust. Comparison of regional
seaﬂoor heat ﬂow data to lithospheric model predictions indicates
that a seaﬂoor area of 14,500 km2 loses ∼1 GW of heat, requir-
ing RFH ﬂuid throughput of 4–80 m3/s (Hutnak et al., 2008). This
three to four orders of magnitude more ﬂuid than ﬂows from Baby
Bare outcrop, and is at the extreme end of what occurs globally on
ridge ﬂanks. Most of this ﬂuid enters and exits the crust through a
small number of basement outcrops. Dorado outcrop was identi-
ﬁed as a location of rapid hydrothermal discharge, and Tengosed
Seamount, 20 km away, is the closest likely conduit for hydrother-
mal recharge (Fisher et al., 2003b; Hutnak et al., 2008; Wheat and
Fisher, 2008).

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 8 | 5

Edwards et al.

The deep subsurface biosphere in igneous ocean crust

Regional basement chemical and thermal conditions around
Dorado outcrop are similar to those observed in North Pond, and
probably are typical of a large fraction of the global RFH systems.
In contrast to North Pond, potential ﬂuid entry and exit points
around Dorado outcrop are constrained by regionally thick sedi-
ments, which makes delineation of ﬂow paths more feasible. Fluid
circulation rates and residence times in the volcanic crust around
Dorado outcrop are probably similar to those around North Pond,
and at the western end of the JFR ﬂank transect, but the age
of basement is three to ﬁve times older at the Dorado outcrop
(Table 1).

Studies around Dorado outcrop could allow for assessment of
how large ﬂuxes of seawater circulation through very permeable
pathways alter crust over time. No microbial studies of basement
samples have been completed to date near Dorado outcrop, pre-
senting opportunity for low temperature RFH exploration and dis-
covery. A sampling survey is currently planned for 2013, with the
primary goal of recovering pristine hydrothermal ﬂuid discharging
from Dorado outcrop.

SOUTH PACIFIC GYRE
The South Paciﬁc Gyre (SPG) is characterized by a region with low
surface chlorophyll-a concentrations, a measure of plankton pro-
ductivity. Low surface productivity results in low sediment organic
matter compositions, low sedimentation, and low microbial activ-
ity. The region spans much of the Paciﬁc Ocean from 20˚S to
30˚S and was sampled on IODP Exp 329 at seven sites having
crustal ages of 15–100 million years in locations having 18–131 m
of sediment above volcanic crustal rocks. Heat ﬂow from SPG
sites younger than 65 million years is generally less than values
predicted by conductive lithospheric cooling models, consistent
with global datasets, suggesting that a fraction of heat is extracted
advectively from the crust (Expedition 329 Scientists, 2011). Heat
ﬂow data from older SPG sites are consistent with more sluggish
ﬂuid ﬂow and little or no heat extraction by ﬂuids. Throughout
the region, temperatures in upper basaltic crust are close to 10˚C.
The SPG region includes features that may be characteristic of
several microbial provinces (Figure 2). On younger crust, where
ﬂuid ﬂow is most vigorous, RFH systems will be similar to those
of North Pond and Dorado outcrop; however, the low microbial
activity at SPG sites should limit the sedimentary inﬂuence on
basalt hosted microbial communities. On older SPC crust, where
ﬂuid ﬂow within the crust is limited, thin sediment keeps the
temperature in basement relatively low, providing an interest-
ing contrast to both old sites and younger sites where basement
temperatures are greater. Sedimentary inﬂuences on basaltic base-
ment conditions (e.g., C, Fe, Mn, sulfate) should be minimal in
the SPG region. Given the organic matter-starved region of the
SPG, metabolic activity may be enhanced by water radiolysis and
hydrogen may be the most signiﬁcant electron donor for microbial
respiration.

MADEIRA ABYSSAL PLAIN
The Madeira Abyssal plain (MAP) comprises a region of ∼105 km2
in the Canary Basin, west of the Canary Islands, north Atlantic
Ocean (Searle, 1987). The MAP is the deepest part of the Canary
Basin, with typical water depth of 5400 m, although the tops of

large seamounts to the east (notably parts of the Meteor Seamount
chain) extend to within 300 m of the sea surface. The crustal age
in the MAP area is about 106 Ma, consistent with slow seaﬂoor
spreading at 1.5 cm/year (Noel, 1985; Searle, 1987). Sediment cover
is regionally thick and extensive, both because of the age of the
plate and because turbidites have poured into the Canary Basin
from continental areas the east, but there are basement outcrops
associated with abyssal hill topography, presumably from off axis
volcanism.

There are two strong indicators of sustained hydrothermal
circulation through old MAP seaﬂoor: thermal and chemical.
Variations in heat ﬂow correlate with basement relief and are
consistent with ﬂuid circulation at rates of 0.3–3 m/year, requir-
ing relatively high upper basement permeabilities (Fisher and Von
Herzen, 2005). Geochemical data collected during sedimentolog-
ical studies associated with ODP Leg 157 (Schmincke et al., 1995)
show pore water gradients that are reversed at depth, as has been
interpreted elsewhere to indicate the passage of relatively young
and unreacted ﬂuids through the upper crust (e.g., Baker et al.,
1991; Wheat and Mottl, 1994; Elderﬁeld et al., 1999).

No microbiological work has been completed in this area to
date, but it is an intriguing site for such investigations for sev-
eral reasons. This is one of the oldest seaﬂoor locations where
hydrothermal circulation is thought to occur (Von Herzen, 2004).
Basement outcrops are relatively widely spaced, limiting the num-
ber of ﬂuid entry and exit points from the crust. Although
sediment in this area is comparatively thick, upper basement tem-
peratures are projected to be only 10–30˚C because lithospheric
heat ﬂow is so low in old crust. This range of temperatures overlaps
with those inferred for the western end of the JFR ﬂank area, North
Pond, and Dorado outcrop, but MAP ﬂuids pass through crust
that is much older. The upper crustal volcanic rocks in the MAP
area may have seen >100 million years of continued hydrothermal
circulation.

The thick accumulations of volcanic and continentally derived
sediment in this area are likely to be relatively rich in organic car-
bon. Diffusive exchange between sediment and upper basement
ﬂuids could provide an important source of carbon, or could be
insigniﬁcant at present because circulation has continued for 100
million years, depleting basal sediment of microbially important
substrates. Sample collection from the MAP area offers the intrigu-
ing possibility of recovering microbial material that has been
physically (and perhaps genetically) isolated for tens of millions of
years, but under physical and chemical conditions consistent with
younger sites. Rock samples from the MAP area could similarly
provide important information on the nature of long-term, inte-
grated rock alteration patterns in association with both inorganic
and microbial processes, linking physical, chemical, and microbial
controls.

ADDITIONAL CONTROLS ON OCEAN CRUSTAL MICROBIOLOGY
The ﬁve ﬁeld areas identiﬁed above span a range of crustal ages
and magnitudes of ﬂuid ﬂow that should comprise and intrigu-
ing suite of ﬁeld sites for comparative microbial studies in RFH
systems (Table 1). However, even among these sites, a compar-
atively narrow array of basement temperatures is represented
(∼5–65˚C; Figure 2). There are clear gaps in the representation

Frontiers in Microbiology | Extreme Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 8 | 6

Edwards et al.

The deep subsurface biosphere in igneous ocean crust

of end-member characteristics that we highlight with these sites,
particularly those involving rapid ﬂuid ﬂow and high-temperature
conditions, or sluggish to no ﬂuid ﬂow and cooler temperatures.
The former is likely to be found at MORs (as marked in Figure 2)
and in other settings where volcanism occurs (e.g., around vol-
canically active seamounts). Conditions of sluggish to no ﬂuid
ﬂow and cooler temperatures in basement are likely to be rare in
nature, occurring perhaps where long-term ﬂuid circulation has
clogged ﬂuid pathways through the crust, but the sedimentation
rate has remained low, limiting the extent of crustal burial and
thermal insulation.

Many additional or alternative physical and chemical parame-
ters could be used to deﬁne other characteristics that control RFH
microbial environments. For example, some areas have an abun-
dant source of organic carbon in overlying sediment (generally
close to continental sources or in areas of sustained upwelling
and associated primary productivity, for, e.g., Guaymas basin),
whereas others are more carbon limited (e.g., North Pond). A
similar approach could be taken with respect to limiting nutrients
and microbial energy sources, for example, contrasting upwelling
regimes with open ocean sites. There are also likely to be dif-
ferences associated with sediment type (e.g., carbonate vs. clay
content), thickness, and the related spacing of basement out-
crops that enhance ﬂuid entry and subsequent discharge from
the crust. Other factors that could be considered include spread-
ing rate and mechanisms of crustal construction. For example,
there are signiﬁcant differences in the relative importance of fault-
ing between slow and fast spreading centers, the former being
associated with extensive faulting and ridge ﬂank dissection com-
pared to the latter. One could similarly consider the spacing
and amplitude of abyssal hill topography, or other aspects of
crustal tectonic fabric. The selection of deﬁning characteristics
for end-member microbial provinces is, by necessity, somewhat
arbitrary. That said, it makes sense to select parameters that
can be mapped and delineated relatively easily using conven-
tional (regional) survey techniques, so that a modest number
of ﬁeld sites can be selected for more intensive (expensive, dif-
ﬁcult, time consuming) study. Whatever parameters are chosen
for comparative purposes, the approach outlined in this study
can be beneﬁcial for understanding why crustal microbial sys-
tems occur as they do, and what strategies have been developed
within these systems for survival across long periods of geological
time.

TECHNOLOGY
The preceding discussion of RFH provinces suggests that there are
a number of targets available for microbial studies. Yet locating
positions of seawater input to, and ﬂuid egress from, RFH systems
remains challenging. At MORs, focused venting of hydrothermal
ﬂuids generates chemical, thermal, and microbial plumes that can
be traced from the water column back to seaﬂoor vents many kilo-
meters away. In contrast, on ridge ﬂanks such plumes may rise only
meters to tens of meters, and will be difﬁcult to distinguish from
bottom water even under ideal survey conditions. Most RFH sites
have been discovered using combined geophysical and geochem-
ical methods (seismic data, heat ﬂow measurements, and pore
water composition from sediment gravity cores). Submersible or

ROV operations are then required to identify and sample sites of
focused ﬂuid ﬂow.

The research community needs to sample multiple sites that
are representative of overlapping biomes, to quantify the phys-
ical, chemical, and hydrologic conditions that control micro-
bial development. Given the vastness of the seaﬂoor, and the
need to nest detailed studies within coarser surveys, technical
advances in survey tools are required. For example, long-range,
autonomous gliders with seismic sensors (chirp sonar) are needed
to survey large expanses near basaltic outcrops. Such surveys cou-
pled with systematic heat ﬂow surveys are required to assess
the vigor of local and regional ﬂuid circulation in the crust.
Autonomous vehicles are also needed that can acquire high-
quality bathymetric maps and sample the water column to identify
RFH plumes. The latter will require considerable improvement
to sensor capabilities to allow detection of subtle chemical and
microbial plume characteristics that are the most promising for
remote plume detection. Although some, but certainly not all, of
these sampling capabilities are present in existing AUVs; how-
ever, power consumption limits dive time to ∼12 h. Thus, to
survey even a small portion of the ridge ﬂanks would require a
ﬂeet of AUVs each conducting a portion of the overall mission
(Figure 3).

Once sites of ﬂuid seepage from basaltic crust are located,
sampling for and in situ measurements of microbiological char-
acterization can commence. There are additional technological

FIGURE 3 | Duane Thompson and Doug Conlin prepare a benthic
imaging AUV. The two other AUVs are an upper water column vehicle and
a mapping vehicle. Although the nose and tail cones are identical, the
payload of each AUV is speciﬁcally designed for a particular mission. No
AUV in existence has the combined components to tackle the initial mission
of searching for RFH venting and detecting chemical and microbial
characteristics of the venting ﬂuid. Such a vehicle would require signiﬁcant
power for its sonars and must be able to rechargeable its batteries to
explore the vastness of the ridge ﬂanks where hundreds of thousands of
small outcrops exist. Small outcrops tend to be sites where ﬂuids seep
from the crust and are not detected by satellite gravimetry measurements.
Long-range vehicles (e.g., gliders) exist but are underpowered for such a
mission. Vehicles and sonars with appropriate capabilities exist but are
limited to an 12-h dive and lack the suite of sensors required for detecting
chemical and microbial signatures of RFH venting. Copyright MBARI 2010.
Photo by Todd Walsh.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 8 | 7

Edwards et al.

The deep subsurface biosphere in igneous ocean crust

challenges pertaining to sample contamination and preservation.
In situ systems capable of pumping ﬂuids into multiple sterile bags
and ﬁlters have been established (Butterﬁeld et al., 2004; Cowen
et al., 2012), but remain developmental and require signiﬁcant
technical expertise to operate. Simpler syringe-style samplers have
been deployed for single 50–100 ml discrete samples that can be
used in concert with a ﬁlter or in situ preservation (Fisher et al.,
2012). Presently, the only deep-sea in situ microbial measurements
are those from the environmental processing system (ESP; Scholin
et al., 2009) and deep ultra-violet ﬂuorescent technologies such as
the Deep Exploration Biosphere Investigative tool (DEBI-t; based
on technology adapted from Bhartia et al., 2010), both presently
impractical for wide-spread use.

Because of the limited number of known sites of focused ﬂuid
seepage from RFH systems, studies of microbial community and
processes have looked toward analyzing materials from deep-ocean
drilling. At present, molecular techniques are challenging to apply
directly to recovered igneous materials, because of poor and biased
recovery (10–30% overall in upper volcanic crust, generally favor-
ing more massive rocks), contamination during drilling, and low
cell counts and analytical interference with the crustal matrix. A
few studies have been successful to date working with recovered
volcanic materials (Mason et al., 2010; Santelli et al., 2010). Ana-
lytical advances in this area will greatly increase productivity on
future deep-ocean drilling operations.

Because of these sampling recovery and analytical issues, an
alternative approach to studying microbial processes in the ocean
crust are through the development and use of borehole observato-
ries (CORKs; Davis et al., 1997). On the basis of initial microbial
studies harbored in situ within a borehole (Orcutt et al., 2011a;
Smith et al., 2011), CORK observatories have been modiﬁed and
deployed to enhance the return of microbial data while minimizing
artifacts. For example, on IODP Exp 336 three new CORKs were
deployed, some with multiple sampling horizons and each using
materials that minimize additional carbon sources and potential
REDOX reactions (coated steel, ﬁberglass, and high density plas-
tic; Edwards et al., 2010). To examine reaction pathways in situ,
transects of drill holes and CORK observatories are required in
order to intersect hydrological units of interest within the volcanic
crust.

Improvements and versatility are incorporated in each new
CORK system. The ﬁrst generation of CORK observatories were
often successful on initial deployment, but were not designed to
facilitate collection of high-quality borehole ﬂuid and microbial
samples nor house in situ experiments. Some of these CORK
systems remain operational more than two decades after deploy-
ment, although others have failed over time. Later generations
of CORKs, including those that isolate multiple depth intervals,
contain redundant seal systems, and were designed for installa-
tion deep within unstable boreholes, are generally more difﬁcult
to deploy. Approximately half to two thirds of modern CORKs
are successfully installed as intended. Technical challenges can be
addressed, but this requires extensive planning, long lead times,
attention, and considerable ﬁnancial resources. Ultimately the
number of CORK observatories that will be deployed in the next
10–20 years for microbial studies is going to be limited, perhaps
10–20 in total. This makes it essential to select sites in the context

of the microbial province concept, so that results from each system
can be used to leverage other studies.

Additional technical advances are needed for in situ samplers,
sensors, and experiments. Presently systems for deployment within
boreholes well below the seaﬂoor have been limited to designs
that use osmotic-powered pumps (Wheat et al., 2011). While such
designs offer a variety of sampling and experimental possibilities,
the borehole environment does not prelude electrically powered
sensors. Several such sensors have been deployed for geophysi-
cal study (e.g., Kopf et al., 2011) and only a downhole dissolved
oxygen sensor exists for microbial characterization. In contrast,
seaﬂoor samplers and sensors can tap into hydrologic horizons of
interest through the use of an umbilical – stainless steel or hard-
ened Teﬂon coated tubing with a valve at the wellhead and open to
the formation at depth. The present technology includes a pump
system that pulls ﬂuid up the umbilical to the seaﬂoor and pushes
borehole ﬂuids past a variety of sensors and into samplers (Cowen
et al., 2012). Here, bringing the laboratory to the seaﬂoor and
conducting manipulative (e.g., rate and enrichment) experiments
are critical next steps to further our understanding of RFH micro-
bial environments. For example, near term technological advances
for wellhead sampling and sensing operations include mass spec-
trometry and fast ﬂow osmotic pumps for continuous sampling
of borehole ﬂuids via the umbilical. Other technological advances
could include a ﬂow cytometer or other visual-based (light or laser)
systems for microbial detection or characterization (e.g., DEBI-t).
As in the past, present studies in borehole observatories will evolve
future instrumentation needs.

Unfortunately, opportunities to deploy CORK observatories
are likely to remain limited because of ongoing ﬁscal, scheduling,
and technical challenges. Hardware and downhole science materi-
als for a single borehole observatory can cost as much as $1 million
US, depending on complexity. Plans often need to be developed
over a period of several years given long lead times for delivery of
key components, and the need to facilitate multiple experimental
and observational goals (geophysical, hydrologic, biogeochemical,
microbial). Even with rigorous planning, deployment is frequently
difﬁcult. Following deployment, there remain ongoing technolog-
ical, logistical, and ﬁscal challenges for maintaining CORKs, mon-
itoring borehole conditions, and conducting experiments. Ship
time and submersibles or ROVs are required for nearly all observa-
tory work (the exception is a CORK that is tied to a cabled network,
e.g., Neptune). Given the nature of microbiological analysis, which
requires physical samples, all microbiological observatory work
requires that researchers physically access the borehole.

There are ∼30 “legacy” boreholes from past deep-ocean sci-
entiﬁc drilling expeditions that have been drilled into basement
and cased through the sediment. Presumably these boreholes are
open to basaltic crust and could be sampled with wire-line sens-
ing and sampling systems that need to be developed or through
a modiﬁed borehole observatory design (CORK). At the writing
of this manuscript, IODP Hole U1383B is one such candidate
borehole. It has a reentry cone and is cased through the sediment
section with open borehole into basalt below the casing. In the
spring of 2012, researchers will deploy a long-term observatory
in this borehole. The ROV Jason II will deploy the new well-
head and downhole sampler–sensor–experiment string to monitor

Frontiers in Microbiology | Extreme Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 8 | 8

Edwards et al.

The deep subsurface biosphere in igneous ocean crust

the chemical composition of ocean crustal ﬂuids and microbial
communities and to conduct microbial enrichment experiments.
Similar deployments are possible at other legacy boreholes, which
would help to expend sampling and monitoring across a wider
range of physical and chemical conditions.

CONCLUSION
We have described the overall nature of RFH systems, and dis-
cussed a means for characterizing these systems based on determi-
nation of fundamental physical and chemical characteristics. We
illustrated this approach through presentation of example RFH
systems that occupy speciﬁc regions on a plot of RFH parameter
space (Figure 2; Table 1), helping to deﬁne a range of microbial
provinces found below the ocean on a global basis. We also dis-
cussed some of the technological hurdles associated with studying
these systems that must be overcome in the next few decades.

The framework we propose for understanding geological, geo-
chemical, and hydrological links to ocean crustal microbial systems
can be used to guide future site selection. We acknowledge that
numerous additional factors may be important in determining
the nature of crustal microbial ecosystems, including the avail-
ability of nutrients, carbon, and energy sources. While these and
other factors certainly are important, they generally do not lend
themselves well to evaluation based on regional surveys, and so

have limited applicability in terms of identifying key locations
for future studies. This may change with advances in technology
and improved availability of established tools, and additional sites
will be identiﬁed serendipitously during surveys planned for other
purposes.

This is truly an “age of exploration” for microbiological study
of RFH systems, and many more aspects of them and new sites
will surely be identiﬁed in the future, hopefully guided by strate-
gies that maximize return on knowledge that can be applied on a
global basis, rather than understanding of individual sites in iso-
lation. Big picture projects require large teams of researchers from
multiple disciplines to come together to properly plan and coor-
dinate complex programs, and this requires taking a long-term
view. But worked completed and discoveries made to date show
that patience, persistence, and vision can pay off over time.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the US National Science Founda-
tion grants OCE 0939564 (to Katrina J. Edwards with subawards
to Andrew T. Fisher, C. Geoffrey Wheat), OCE-0727952 (Andrew
T. Fisher), OCE-1031808 (Andrew T. Fisher), OCE-1130146 (C.
Geoffrey Wheat), and 1030061 (C. Geoffrey Wheat), by US Sci-
ence Support Program for IODP projects T327A7 and T327B7
(Andrew T. Fisher). This is C-DEBI contribution #1XX.

REFERENCES
Baker, E. T. (2007). Hydrothermal cool-
ing of midocean ridge axes: do mea-
sured and modeled heat ﬂuxes agree.
Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 263, 140–150.
Baker, P., Stout, P., Kastner, M., and
Elderﬁeld, H. (1991). Large-scale lat-
eral advection of seawater through
oceanic crust in the central equator-
ial Paciﬁc. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 105,
522–533.

Barckhausen, U., Renaro, C., von Huene,
R., Cande, S. C., and Roeser, H. A.
(2001). Revised tectonic boundaries
in the Cocos Plate off Costa Rica:
implications for the segmentation of
the convergent margin and for plate
tectonic models. J. Geophys. Res. 106,
19,207–19,220.

Bartetzko, A., Pezard, P., Goldberg, D.,
Sun, Y.-F., and Becker, K. (2001).
Volcanic stratigraphy of DSDP/ODP
Hole 395A: an interpretation using
well-logging data. Mar. Geophys. Res.
22, 111–127.

Becker, K. (1990).“Measurements of the
permeability of the upper oceanic
crust at Hole 395A, ODP Leg 109,”
in Proceedings of Ocean Drilling Pro-
gram, Scientiﬁc Results, eds R. Det-
rick, J. Honnorez,W. B. Bryan, and T.
Juteau (College Station, TX: Ocean
Drilling Program), 213–222.

Bhartia, R., Salas, E. C., Hug, W. F., Reid,
R. D., Lane, D. J., Edwards, K. J., and
Nealson, K. H. (2010). Label-free
bacterial imaging with deep UV laser
induced native ﬂuorescence. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 76, 7231–7237.

www.frontiersin.org

Butterﬁeld, D. A., Roe, K. K., Lilley, M.
D., Huber, J., Baross, J. A., Embley, R.
W., and Massoth, G. J. (2004). “Mix-
ing reaction and microbial activity
in sub-seaﬂoor revealed by tempo-
ral and spatial variation in diffuse
ﬂow vents at axial volcano,” in The
Subseaﬂoor Biosphere at Mid-Ocean
Ridges, eds R. W. Wilcock, E. F.
DeLong, D. P. Kelley, J. A. Baross, and
C. Cary (Washington, DC: American
Geophysical Union), 269–289.

Cann, J. R. (1974). A layered model for
oceanic crust developed. Geophys. J.
R. Astron. Soc. 39, 169–187.

Chyba, C. F., and Phillips, C. B. (2002).
Europa as an abode for life. Orig. Life
Evol. Biosph. 32, 47–67.

Cody, G. D., Boctor, N. Z., Filley,
T. R., Hazen, R. M., Scott,
J.
H., Sharma, A., and Yoder, H. S.
Jr. (2000). Primordial carbonylated
iron-sulfur compounds and the syn-
thesis of pyruvate. Science 289,
1377–1340.

Coogan, L. A., Jenkins, G. R., and
Wison, R. N. (2007). Contrasting
cooling rates in the lower oceanic
crust at fast- and slow-spreading
ridges revealed by geospeedometry.
J. Petrol. 48, 3311–2231.

Cowen, J. P., Copson, D. A., Jolly, J.,
Hsieh, C.-C., Lin, H.-T., Glazer, B. T.,
and Wheat, C. G. (2012). Advanced
instrument system for real-time and
time-series microbial geochemical
sampling of
the deep (basaltic)
crustal biosphere. Deep Sea Res. Part
I Oceanogr. Res. Pap. 61, 43–56.

Cowen, J. P., Giovannoni, S. J., Kenig,
F., Johnson, H. P., Butterﬁeld, D.,
Rappé, M. S., Hutnak, M., and Lam,
P. (2003). Fluids from ageing ocean
crust that support microbial
life.
Science 299, 120–123.

Davis, E. E., Chapman, D. S., Mottl,
M. J., Bentkowski, W. J., Dadey,
K., Forster, C., Harris, R., Nagi-
hara, S., Rohr, K., Wheat, G., and
Whiticar, M. (1992). FlankFlux: an
experiment to study the nature of
hydrothermal circulation in young
oceanic crust. Can. J. Earth Sci. 29,
925–952.

Davis, E. E., Fisher, A. T., and Firth, J.
(1997). Proceedings of Ocean Drilling
Program Initial Reports, Vol. 168
(College Station, TX: Ocean Drilling
Program), 470.

Dunn, R. A., Toomey, D. R., and
Solomon, S. C.
(2000). Three-
dimentional seismic structure and
physical properties of the crust and
shallow mantle beneath the East
N. J. Geophys.
Paciﬁc Rise at 9°30
Res. 105, 23537–23555.

(cid:4)

Edwards, K. J., Bach, W., and Klaus,
A. (2010). Integrated Ocean Drilling
Program Prospectus, Expedition 336.
College Station: IODP.

ridge

Elderﬁeld, H., and Schultz, A. (1996).
Mid-ocean
hydrothermal
ﬂuxes and the chemical composi-
tion of the ocean. Annu. Rev. Earth
Planet. Sci. 24, 191–224.

Elderﬁeld, H., Wheat, C. G., Mottl, M.
J., Monnin, C., and Spiro, B. (1999).
Fluid and geochemical
transport

through oceanic crust: a transect
across the eastern ﬂank of the Juan
de Fuca Ridge. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.
172, 151–165.
Expedition 327

Scientists.

(2010).
The Hydrogeologic Architecture
of Basaltic Oceanic Crust: Com-
partmentalization,
Anisotropy,
and Crustal-Scale
Microbiology,
Properties on the Eastern Flank
Juan de Fuca Ridge, Eastern
of
Paciﬁc Ocean.
Integrated Ocean
Drilling Program Expedition 327
Preliminary Report, College Station.
doi:10.2204/iodp.pr.327.2010

Expedition 329

Scientists.

Paciﬁc Gyre

(2011).
Subseaﬂoor
South
Life.
Integrated Ocean Drilling
Program Expedition 329 Prelim-
inary Report, College
Station.
doi:10.2204/iodp.pr.329.2011

Fisher, A. T. (2003). “Geophysical con-
straints on hydrothermal circula-
tion: observations and models,” in
Energy and Mass Transfer in Sub-
marine Hydrothermal Systems, eds P.
Halbach, V. Tunnicliffe, and J. Hein
(Berlin: Dahlem University Press),
29–52.

L.,

Fisher, A. T., Davis, E. E., Hutnak, M.,
Spiess, V., Zühlsdorff, L., Cherkaoui,
A., Christiansen,
Edwards,
K., Macdonald, R., Villinger, H.,
Mottl, M. J., Wheat, C. G., and
Becker, K. (2003a). Hydrothermal
recharge and discharge across 50
km guided by seamounts on a
young ridge ﬂank. Nature 421,
618–621.

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 8 | 9

Edwards et al.

The deep subsurface biosphere in igneous ocean crust

Fisher, A. T., Stein, C. A., Harris, R.
N., Wang, K., Silver, E. A., Pfender,
M., Hutnak, M., Cherkaoui, A.,
Bodzin, R., and Villinger, H. (2003b).
Abrupt thermal transition reveals
hydrothermal boundary and role of
seamounts within the Cocos Plate.
Geophys. Res. Lett. 30, 1550.

Fisher, A. T., Tsuki, T., Petronotis, K.,
Wheat, C. G., Becker, K., Clark,
J. F., Cowen, J., Edwards, K.
J.,
and the IODP Expedition 327 and
Atlantis Expedition AT18-07 Ship-
board Parties. (2012). Installing and
servicing borehole crustal obser-
vatories to run three-dimensional
cross-hole perturbation and moni-
toring experiments on the eastern
ﬂank of the Juan de Fuca Ridge:
IODP Expedition 327 and Atlantis
Expedition AT18-07.
Sci. Drill.
13 (in press).

Fisher, A. T., Wheat, C. G., Becker, K.,
Cowen, J., Orcutt, B., Hulme, S.,
Inderbitzen, K., Haddad, A., Petti-
grew, T. L., Davis, E. E., Jannasch, H.,
Grigar, K., Aduddell, R., Meldrum,
R., Macdonald, R., and Edwards,
K. J. (2011). “Design, deployment,
and status of borehole observatory
systems used for single-hole and
cross-hole experiments, IODP Expe-
dition 327, eastern ﬂank of
the
Juan de Fuca Ridge,” in Proceed-
ings of Integrated Ocean Drilling Pro-
gram 327, eds A. T. Fisher, T. Tsuji,
and K. Petronotis (Tokyo: IODP).
doi:10.2204/iodp.proc.327.107.2011
Fisher, A. T., and Von Herzen, R.
(2005). Models of hydrothermal cir-
culation within 106 Ma seaﬂoor:
constraints on the vigor of ﬂuid
circualtion and crustal proper-
ties below the Madeira Abyssal
Plain. Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst. 6.
doi:10.1029/2005GC001013

Fisher, A. T., and Wheat, C. G. (2010).
Seamounts as conduits for mas-
sive ﬂuid, heat, and solute ﬂuxes
on ridge ﬂanks. Oceanography 23,
74–87.

Gable, R., Morin, R. H., and Becker, K.
(1992). Geothermal state of DSDP
Holes 333A, 395A and 534A: results
from the dianaut program. Geophys.
Res. Lett. 19, 505–508.

Haymond, R. M., Fornari, D. J., Von
Damm, K. L., Lilley, M. D., Perﬁt,
M. R., Edmond, J. M., Shanks, W.
C., Lutz, R. A., Grebmeier, J. M.,
Carbotte, S., Wright, D., McLaugh-
lin, E., Smith, M., Beedle, N., and
Olson, E. (1993). Volcanic erup-
tion of the mid-ocean ridge along
the East Paciﬁc Rise crest at 9˚45–
N: direct submersible observa-
52
tions of seaﬂoor phenomena associ-
ated with an eruption event in April

(cid:4)

1991. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 119,
85–101.

Hickman, S. H., Langseth, M. G., and
Svitek, J. F. (1984). “Initial reports,”
in Deep Sea Drilling Project, Vol. 78B,
eds R. D. Hyndman and M. H. Sal-
isbury (Washington, DC: U. S. Govt.
Printing Ofﬁce), 699–708.

Hillier, J. K., and Watts, A. B. (2007).
Global distribution of seamounts
bathymetry
from
data. Geophys. Res.
34.
doi:10.1029/2007GL029874

ship-track

Lett.

Humphris, S. E., and Cann,

Huber, J. A., Johnson, H. P., Butter-
ﬁeld, D. A., and Baross, J. A. (2006).
Microbial life in ridge ﬂank crustal
ﬂuids. Environ. Microbiol. 8, 88–99.
J. R.
(2000). Constraints on the energy
and chemical balances of the mod-
ern TAG and ancient Cyprus seaﬂoor
sulﬁde deposits. J. Geophys. Res. 105,
428477–428488.

Hutnak, M., Fisher, A. T., Harris, R.,
Stein, C., Wang, K., Spinelli, G.,
Schindler, M., Villinger, H., and Sil-
ver, E. (2008). Large heat and ﬂuid
ﬂuxes driven through mid-plate out-
crops on ocean crust. Nat. Geosci. 1,
611–614.

Hutnak, M., Fisher, A. T., Stein, C.
A., Harris, R., Wang, K., Silver, E.,
Spinelli, G., Pfender, M., Villinger,
H., Pisani, P. C., Deshon, H., and
MacKnight, B. (2007). “The ther-
mal
state of 18-24 Ma upper
lithosphere subducting below the
Nicoya Peninsula, northern Costa
Rica margin,” in MARGINS Theoret-
ical Institute: SIEZE Volume, eds T.
Dixon, C. Moore, E. Silver, S. Stein,
K. Furlong, and K. Brown (New
York: Columbia University Press),
86–122.

Hutnak, M., Fisher, A. T., Zühlsdorff, L.,
Spiess, V., Stauffer, P., and Gable, C.
W. (2006). Hydrothermal recharge
and discharge guided by basement
outcrops on 0.7–3.6 Ma seaﬂoor
east of
the Juan de Fuca Ridge:
observations and numerical mod-
els. Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst. 7.
doi:10.1029/2006GC001242

IODP. (2003). Earth, Oceans, and Life.

IODP.

IODP. (2011). Discovering Earth’s Hid-
den Frontiers Through Scientiﬁc
Ocean Drilling. MD: IODP.

Johnson, H. P., and Pruis, M. J. (2003).
Fluxes of ﬂuid and heat
from
the oceanic crustal reservoir. Earth
Planet. Sci. Lett. 216, 565–574.

Kadko, D., and Moore, W. (1988).
Radiochemical constraints on the
crustal residence time of subma-
rine hydrothermal ﬂuids: endeavour
ridge. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 52,
659–668.

Kopf, A., Saffer, D. M., Davis, E.,
Hammerschmidt, S., LaBonte, A.,
Meldrum, R., Toczko, S., Lauer,
R., Heesemann, M., Macdonald, R.,
Wheat, C. G.,
Jannasch, H. W.,
Edwards, K., Orcutt, B., Haddad, A.,
Villinger, H., Araki, E., Kitada, K.,
Kimura, T., and Kido, Y. (2011).
“The SmartPlug and GeniusPlug:
simple retrievable observatory sys-
tems
for NanTroSEIZE borehole
monitoring,” in Proceedings of the
Integrated Ocean Drilling Program,
Vol. 322, eds A. Kopf, E. Araki,
S. Toczko (College Station: IODP).
doi:10.2204/iodp.proc.332.105.2011
Langseth, M. G., Becker, K.,Von Herzen,
R. P., and Schultheiss, P. (1992). Heat
and ﬂuid ﬂux through sediment on
the western ﬂank of the Mid-Atlantic
Ridge: a hydrogeological study of
North Pond. Geophys. Res. Lett. 19,
517–520.

Langseth, M. G., Hyndman, K., Becker,
R. D., Hickman, S. H., and Salis-
bury, M. H. (1984). “The hydro-
geological regime of isolated sedi-
ment ponds in mid-oceanic ridges,”
in Initial Reports Deep Sea Drilling
Projects, eds R. H. Hyndman and
M. H. Salisbury (Washington, DC:
U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce),
825–837.

Mackenzie, F. T. (1992). Chemical Mass
Balance Between Rivers and Oceans.
Encyclopedia of Earth System Science.
New York: Academic Press.

Mason, O. U., Di Meo-Savoie, C., Van
Nostrand, J. D., Zhou, J., Fisk, M. R.,
and Giovannoni, S. J. (2010). First
investigation of the microbiology of
the deepest layer of ocean crust. PLoS
ONE 5, e15399. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0015399

Moores, E. M., and Vine, F. J. (1971).
The Troodos massif, Cyprus, and
other ophiolites as oceanic crust:
evaluations and implications. Proc.
R. Soc. Lond. A Math. Phys. Sci. 268,
443–466.
Mottl, M.

J., and Wheat, C. G.
(1994). Hydrothermal circulation
through mid-ocean ridge ﬂanks:
ﬂuxes of heat and magnesium.
Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta
58,
2225–2237.

Mottl, M. J., Wheat, C. G., Baker, N.,
Davis, E. E., Feely, R. A., Grehan, A.,
Kadko, D., Lilley, M., Massoth, G.,
Moyer, C., and Sansone, F. (1998).
Warm springs discovered on 3.5 Ma
oceanic crust, eastern ﬂank of the
Juan de Fuca Ridge. Geology 26,
51–54.

Noel, M. (1985). Heat ﬂow, sediment
faulting and porewater advection in
the Madeira Abyssal Plain. Earth
planet. Sci. Lett. 73, 398–406.

Orcutt, B. N., Bach, W., Becker, K.,
Fisher, A. T., Hentscher, M., Toner, B.
M., Wheat, C. G., and Edwards, K. J.
(2011a). Colonization of subsurface
microbial observatories deployed in
young ocean crust.
ISME J. 5,
692–703.

Orcutt, B. N., Sylvan, J. B., Knab, N. J.,
and Edwards, K. J. (2011b). Micro-
bial ecology of the dark ocean above,
at and below the seaﬂoor. Microbiol.
Mol. Biol. Rev. 75, 361–422.

Parsons, B., and Sclater, J. G. (1977).
An analysis of the variation of ocean
ﬂoor bathymetry and heat ﬂow with
age. J. Geophys. Res. 82, 803–829.

Raitt, R. W. (1963). “The crustal rocks,”
in The Sea, Vol. 3, The Earth Beneath
the Sea, ed. M. N. Hill (New York:
Wiley-Interscience), 85–102.

Santelli, C. M., Bach, W., Banerjee, N.
R., and Edwards, K. J. (2010). Tap-
ping the subsurface ocean crust bios-
phere:
low biomass and drilling-
related contamination calls
for
improved quality controls. Geomi-
crobiol. J. 27, 158–169.

Schmincke, H.-U., Weaver, P. P. E., Firth,
J. V., and Shipboard Scientiﬁc Party.
(1995). Leg 157, Vol. 157. College
Station, TX: Ocean Drilling Pro-
gram, 841.

Scholin, C. G., Doucette, S., Jensen, S.,
Roman, B., Pargett, D., Marin, R.
I., Preston, C., Jones, W., Feldman,
J., Everlove, C., Harris, A., Alvarado,
N., Massion, E., Birch, J., Greenﬁeld,
D., Vrijenhoek, R., Mikulski, C., and
Jones, K. (2009). Remote detection
of marine microbes, small inverte-
brates, harmful algae and biotox-
ins using the environmental sample
processor (ESP). Oceanography 22,
158–167.

Schrenk, M. O., Huber,

J. A., and
Edwards, K.
(2009). Micro-
bial provinces in the subseaﬂoor.
Oceanography 2, 85–110.

J.

Searle, R. C. (1987). “Regional setting
and geophysical characterization of
the Great Meteor East area in the
Maderia Abyssal Plain,” in Geology
and Geochemistry of Abyssal Plains,
eds P. P. E. Weaver and J. Thomson
(London: The Geological Society of
London), 49–70.

Shor, G. G. Jr., Menard, W. H., and
Raitt, R. W. (1971). “Structure of
the Paciﬁc basin,” in The Sea, Vol.
4, New Concepts of Sea Floor Evolu-
tion, ed A. E. Maxwell (New York:
Wiley-Interscience), 3–27.

Shrenk, M. O., Huber,

J. A., and
Edwards, K.
(2009). Micro-
bial provinces in the subseaﬂoor.
Oceanography 2, 279–304.

J.

Smith, A., Popa, R., Fisk, M., Nielsen,
M., Wheat, C. G., Jannasch, H.,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Extreme Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 8 | 10

Edwards et al.

The deep subsurface biosphere in igneous ocean crust

Fisher, A. T., Becker, K., Siev-
ert, S. M., and Flores, G. (2011).
In situ enrichment of ocean crust
microbes on igneous minerals and
glasses using an osmotic ﬂow-
through device. Geochem. Geophys.
Geosyst. 12, Q06007.

Spinelli, G. A., and Harris, R. N. (2011).
Effects of the legacy of axial cool-
ing on partioning of hydrother-
mal heat extraction from oceanic
lithosphere. J. Geophys. Res. 116.
doi:10.1029/2011JB008248

Stein, C. A., and Stein, S. (1994).
Constraints on hydrothermal heat
ﬂux through the oceanic lithosphere
from global heat ﬂow. J. Geophys.
Res. 99, 3081–3095.

VanTongeren, J. A., Kelemen, P. B.,
and Hanghoi, K. (2008). Cooling
rates in the lower crust of
the
Oman ophiolite: Ca in olivine, revis-
ited. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 267,
69–82.

Von Herzen, R. P. (2004). “Geothermal
evidence for continuing hydrother-
mal circulation in older (>60 Ma)
ocean crust,” in Hydrogeology of
the Oceanic Lithosphere, eds. E. E.
Davis, and H. Elderﬁeld (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press),
414–450.

Wessel, P., Sandwell, D. T., and Kim, S.-S.
(2010). The global seamount census.
Oceanography 23, 24–33.

J., and Monnin, C.

Wheat, C. G., Elderﬁeld, H., Mottl,
(2000).
M.
Chemical
composition of base-
ment ﬂuids within an oceanic
ridge ﬂank: implications for along-
strike and across-strike hydrother-
mal circulation. J. Geophys. Res. 105,
13437–13447.

Wheat, C. G., and Fisher, A. T.
low-temperature
(2008). Massive,
hydrothermal ﬂow from a basaltic
outcrop on 23 Ma seaﬂoor of
the Cocos Plate: chemical con-
straints and implications. Geochem.
Geophys. Geosyst.
9, Q12O14.
doi:10.1029/2008GC002136

(2010). Subseaﬂoor

Wheat, C. G., Jannasch, H., Fisher, A. T.,
Becker, K., Sharkey, J., and Hulme,
S.
seawater-
basalt-microbe reactions: continu-
ous sampling of borehole ﬂuids in a
ridge ﬂank environment. Geochem.
Geophys. Geosyst. 11, Q07011. doi:
10.1029/2010GC003057.

Wheat, C. G.,

Jannasch, H. W.,
Kastner, M., Hulme, S., Cowen,
J., Edwards, K., Orcutt, B. N.,
and Glazer, B.
“Fluid
sampling from oceanic borehole

(2011).

observatories: design and methods
for CORK activities (1990–2010),”
in Proceedings of the IODP, Expedi-
tion 327, eds A. T. Fisher, T. Tsuji,
and K. Petronotis (Tokyo: Integrated
Ocean Drilling Program Man-
agement International, Inc.), doi:
10.2204/iodp.proc.327.109.2011

Wheat, C. G., Jannasch, H. W., Kast-
ner, M., Plant, J. N., DeCarlo, E., and
Lebon, G. T. (2004). Venting forma-
tion ﬂuids from deep-sea boreholes
in a ridge ﬂank setting: ODP Sites
1025 and 1026. Geochem. Geophys.
Geosyst. 5, Q08007.

Wheat, C. G., McManus, J., Mottl, M. J.,
and Giambalvo, E. (2003). Oceanic
phosphorous imbalence: the magni-
tude of the ridge-ﬂank hydrothermal
sink. Geophys. Res. Lett. 30, OCE5.1–
OCE5.4.

Wheat, C. G., and Mottl, M.

J.
(1994). Hydrothermal circulation,
Juan de Fuca Ridge eastern ﬂank:
factors controlling basement water
composition. J. Geophys. Res. 99,
3067–3080.

Wheat, C. G., and Mottl, M.

J.
(2000). Composition of pore and
spring waters from baby bare: global
implications of geochemical ﬂuxes
from a ridge ﬂank hydrothermal

system. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta
64, 629–642.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 04 November 2011; paper
pending published: 23 November 2011;
accepted: 05 January 2012; published
online: 03 February 2012.
Citation: Edwards KJ, Fisher AT and
Wheat CG (2012) The deep subsur-
face biosphere in igneous ocean crust:
frontier habitats
for microbiological
exploration. Front. Microbio. 3:8. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00008
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Extreme Microbiology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Edwards, Fisher
is an open-access
and Wheat . This
article distributed under
terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

the

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 8 | 11

