REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 15 March 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00089

Iron-based microbial ecosystem on and below the
seaﬂoor: a case study of hydrothermal ﬁelds of the
Southern MarianaTrough

Shingo Kato1,2, Kentaro Nakamura3,Tomohiro Toki 4, Jun-ichiro Ishibashi 5, Urumu Tsunogai 6,
Akinori Hirota7, Moriya Ohkuma1 and Akihiko Yamagishi 2*

1 Japan Collection of Microorganisms, RIKEN BioResource Center, Wako, Saitama, Japan
2 Department of Molecular Biology, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Science, Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan
3 Precambrian Ecosystem Laboratory, Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology, Yokosuka, Kanagawa, Japan
4 Department of Chemistry, Biology, and Marine Science, Faculty of Science, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa, Japan
5 Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Faculty of Science, Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan
6 Department of Natural History Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan
7 Volcanic Activity Research Group, Institute of Geology and Geoinformation, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan

Edited by:
David Emerson, Bigelow Laboratory
for Ocean Sciences, USA
Reviewed by:
Benjamin Kocar, Stanford University,
USA
Craig Lee Moyer, Western
Washington University, USA
*Correspondence:
Akihiko Yamagishi, Department of
Molecular Biology, Tokyo University of
Pharmacy and Life Science, 1432-1
Horinouchi, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-0392,
Japan.
e-mail: yamagish@toyaku.ac.jp

Microbial community structures in deep-sea hydrothermal vents ﬁelds are constrained by
available energy yields provided by inorganic redox reactions, which are in turn controlled
by chemical composition of hydrothermal ﬂuids. In the past two decades, geochemical and
microbiological studies have been conducted in deep-sea hydrothermal vents at three geo-
graphically different areas of the Southern Mariana Trough (SMT). A variety of geochemical
data of hydrothermal ﬂuids and an unparalleled microbiological dataset of various sam-
ples (i.e., sulﬁde structures of active vents, iron-rich mats, borehole ﬂuids, and ambient
seawater) are available for comparative analyses. Here, we summarize the geochemical
and microbiological characteristics in the SMT and assess the relationship between the
microbial community structures and the ﬂuid geochemistry in the SMT by thermodynamic
modeling. In the high temperature vent ﬂuids, aerobic sulﬁde-oxidation has the poten-
tial to yield large amounts of bioavailable energy in the vent ﬂuids, which is consistent
with the detection of species related to sulﬁde-oxidizing bacteria (such as Thiomicrospira
in the Gammaproteobacteria and Sulfurimonas in the Epsilonproteobacteria). Conversely,
the bioavailable energy yield from aerobic iron-oxidation reactions in the low-temperature
ﬂuids collected from man-made boreholes and several natural vents were comparable
to or higher than those from sulﬁde-oxidation. This is also consistent with the detection
of species related to iron-oxidizing bacteria (Mariprofundus in the Zetaproteobacteria) in
such low-temperature samples. The results of combination of microbiological, geochemi-
cal, and thermodynamic analyses in the SMT provide novel insights into the presence and
signiﬁcance of iron-based microbial ecosystems in deep-sea hydrothermal ﬁelds.

Keywords: deep-sea hydrothermal vent ﬁeld, shallow sub-seaﬂoor microbial ecosystem, chemolithoautotrophs,
iron-oxidizing bacteria, thermodynamic modeling

INTRODUCTION
Microbial ecosystems require energy for maintenance and prosper-
ity. On land and in the sea surface, solar power is the main energy
source. In the “photosynthetic ecosystem,” photoautotrophs (e.g.,
plants and cyanobacteria) are the primary producers that ﬁx inor-
ganic carbon and transform it into organic carbon using solar
energy. The resulting organic carbon supports the growth of var-
ious organisms as carbon and energy sources. In contrast, there
are microbial ecosystems that are sustained by chemical energy
derived from inorganic redox reactions between electron donors
(such as H2, H2S, Fe2+
, and CH4) and acceptors (such as O2,
−
3 , Fe3+
NO
4 , and CO2). Chemolithoautotrophs ﬁx inorganic
carbon using the chemical energy, sustaining “Chemosynthetic
ecosystems” as primary producers. It is known that chemosyn-
thetic ecosystems are widely distributed on land (e.g., acid mines,

, SO2−

hot springs, and deep subsurface) and in oceans (e.g., cold
seeps, hydrothermal vents, and potentially enormous sub-seaﬂoor
aquifers). Recently, much attention has been paid to deep-sea
hydrothermal vents and sub-seaﬂoor aquifers that are potential
habitats harboring extensive chemosynthetic ecosystems sustained
by a variety of chemolithoautotrophs (reviewed in Orcutt et al.,
2011). Although the precise picture of the potentially enormous
sub-seaﬂoor biosphere is still not well understood, the elucida-
tion of the distribution, function, activity, and productivity of
the deep-sea chemosynthetic ecosystems is important for better
understanding not only of the extent and limit of the biosphere on
Earth but also the global cycling of elements related to biological
activities.

Deep-sea hydrothermal vent ﬁelds were initially found in
the late 1970s. To date, over 200 deep-sea hydrothermal ﬁelds

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 1

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

have been found in various areas, mainly on mid-ocean
ridges, arc volcanoes, back-arc basins, and hot-spot volca-
noes (http://www.interridge.org/irvents/). The hydrothermal ﬂu-
ids contain a variety of electron donors that serve as energy sources
for the life thriving there. The chemical disequilibria, which
occur in deep-sea hydrothermal environments by rapid mixing
of reduced hydrothermal ﬂuids with oxygenated cold seawater,
could provide energy sources for the growth of the chemolithoau-
totrophs (McCollom and Shock, 1997; Takai and Nakamura, 2010;
Amend et al., 2011). In fact, the presence of hydrogen-, sulﬁde-,
and methane-oxidizers was conﬁrmed soon after the discovery
of the vent ﬁeld (Jannasch and Mottl, 1985). Subsequent studies
have revealed the ecology of the chemolithoautotrophs inhabiting
the deep-sea hydrothermal vent ﬁelds, which include mesophiles
to hyperthermophiles belonging to the Epsilonproteobacteria,
Gammaproteobacteria, and Archaea (Nakagawa and Takai, 2008).
In contrast to hydrogen-, sulﬁde-, and methane-oxidizers,
our knowledge of iron-oxidizers, especially mesophilic and neu-
trophilic bacteria,
in deep-sea hydrothermal ﬁelds has been
quite limited and was reported only recently. The ﬁrst neu-
trophilic, mesophilic, and iron-oxidizing chemolithoautotrophic
marine bacterium, Mariprofundus ferrooxydans, which belongs to
the Zetaproteobacteria, was isolated from iron-rich mats in the
hydrothermal ﬁelds of the Loihi Seamount (Emerson et al., 2007),
and the genome sequence of M. ferrooxydans was recently reported
(Singer et al., 2011). This isolate produces unique helical-stalks
consisting of organic compounds and iron oxides (Chan et al.,
2011). It is thus reasonable to consider that the iron-oxidizers
play a signiﬁcant role in the generation of massive iron-rich mats
on the seaﬂoor (Emerson and Moyer, 2002). Diverse 16S rRNA
gene sequences afﬁliated in the Zetaproteobacteria have been
recovered from iron-rich mats from various marine hydrother-
mal ﬁelds (McAllister et al., 2011). In some cases, members of
the Zetaproteobacteria dominate the communities in the iron-rich
mats (Kato et al., 2009a) and in the sub-seaﬂoor warm ﬂuids (Kato
et al., 2009b), although the physiology of these phylotypes in the
Zetaproteobacteria is still unclear because few isolates have been
reported. Considering the domination of the Zetaproteobacteria
and the abundance of the unique stalk structures in the seaﬂoor
massive iron oxide mats, it is very likely that the Zetaproteobacteria
contain many iron-oxidizing chemolithoautotrophic species, sus-
taining the iron-based microbial ecosystem present in the iron-rich
mats.

In the deep-sea hydrothermal vent ﬁelds, sulﬁde deposits (like
mounds and chimneys) are usually present and sulﬁde- and
hydrogen-oxidizers have been detected in these deposits and vent-
ing ﬂuids. The detection of sulﬁde- and hydrogen-oxidizers in
these habitats is consistent with the high potential of bioavailable
energy from sulﬁde- and hydrogen-oxidation reactions in chemi-
cal conditions of the habitats (Takai and Nakamura, 2010; Amend
et al., 2011). In contrast, iron-rich mats are not always observed
in deep-sea hydrothermal vent ﬁelds, and the Zetaproteobacter-
ial phylotypes (putative iron-oxidizers) were relatively abundant,
compared to the known sulﬁde- and hydrogen-oxidizers, only in
the iron-rich mats and crustal ﬂuids (Kato et al., 2009a,b). A com-
prehensive and comparative analysis is needed to answer the fol-
lowing question: what is the critical factor(s) for the appearance of

iron-based microbial ecosystems. This information is important in
order to understand global carbon and iron cycling because iron-
based microbial ecosystems are potentially present in enormous
sub-seaﬂoor aquifers, which would be the largest chemosynthetic
ecosystem on Earth (Bach and Edwards, 2003; Edwards et al.,
2003).

The Southern Mariana Trough (SMT; Figure A1A in Appen-
dix) is one of the most suitable ﬁelds in which assess the factors
leading to the appearance of iron-based microbial ecosystems.
In the SMT, there are variable temperature habitats, from black
and clear smoker sulﬁde chimneys (up to ∼340˚C) to iron-
rich mats with shimmering (∼110˚C; Figure 1), in an area of
5 km× 5 km (Figure A1B in Appendix). Furthermore, there are
several boreholes that were drilled using a shallow-seaﬂoor drilling
instrument, Benthic Multi-coring System (BMS; Marumo et al.,
2008). Analysis of the collected ﬂuids from the boreholes can pro-
vide valuable information about the geochemical conditions and
microbiological activities of the sub-seaﬂoor aquifers. Davis and
Moyer (2008) ﬁrst reported the presence of the Zetaproteobac-
teria in iron-rich mats in the SMT. Sequentially, comprehensive
microbiological analyses of the various samples from the SMT
hydrothermal ﬁelds have been done (Kato et al., 2009a,b, 2010).
Here we summarize the variation of microbial communities in the
SMT as shown by culture-independent molecular microbiologi-
cal analyses, and discuss how these community structures were
constructed. In addition, the bioavailable energy yields based on
thermodynamic calculations were applied to discuss the geochem-
ical factors leading to the appearance of the iron-based microbial
ecosystem.

GEOLOGICAL SETTINGS AND FLUID GEOCHEMISTRY
The SMT is a spreading back-arc basin that is located at the south-
ern extension of the Izu–Bonin arc, western Paciﬁc (Figure A1A in
Appendix; Fryer, 1995; Ishibashi and Urabe, 1995). Hydrothermal
activity hosted by basaltic rocks (Kakegawa et al., 2008) was found
on the back-arc spreading ridge (Snail site) and on the off-ridge

FIGURE 1 | On-site observation of the seaﬂoor in the SMT. Photos
were taken by Shinkai 6500 (JAMSTEC, Japan) in 2010. (A) A black
smoker chimney at the Archaean site, (B) a black smoker chimney at the
Pika site, (C) diffuse ﬂows from crack of pillow lavas at the Snail site, (D)
iron-rich mats at the Snail site, and (E) a casing pipe inserted into a
borehole at the Snail site.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 2

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

seamounts (Pika and Archaean sites) in the SMT (Figure A1B
in Appendix; Wheat et al., 2003; Ishibashi et al., 2004, 2006).
In the Pika and Archaean sites, sulﬁde chimneys venting high
temperature ﬂuids (up to >300˚C) were found (Figures 1A,B).
Low-temperature diffusing and shimmering ﬂuids (<150˚C) were
also observed in both sites. In the Snail site, diffuse ﬂows or
shimmering with relatively low-temperature hydrothermal ﬂuids
(<120˚C) from the fractures of pillow lavas (basalts; Figure 1C)
and iron-rich mats (containing Fe, Si, and Mn; Figure 1D) were
also observed (Wheat et al., 2003; Kato et al., 2009a), although
chimney-like sulﬁde structures and associated high temperature
hydrothermal venting have not been found.

Boreholes were created on the seaﬂoor at the Snail and Pika
sites using BMS (Marumo et al., 2008). These boreholes were cased
with titanium pipes (Figure 1E). During ﬂuid sampling from the
boreholes, the casing pipes minimize the contamination from the
seaﬂoor materials into the crustal ﬂuids.

Preliminarily analyses of the geochemical composition of
hydrothermal ﬂuids collected in the SMT hydrothermal ﬁelds in
2003, 2004, and 2005 have been reported (Wheat et al., 2003;
Ishibashi et al., 2004, 2006). Furthermore, we collected hydrother-
mal ﬂuids from natural vents and boreholes in the SMT in 2010
and analyzed the ﬂuid geochemistry as previously described (Takai
et al., 2008; Toki et al., 2008). The geochemistry of the ﬂuids is sum-
marized in Table A1 in Appendix. Concentrations of O2, CO2,
CH4, and H2 in deep seawater were referred from the previous
publication (McCollom, 2007). It should be noted that a signif-
icant difference in the ratio of Fe to H2S was observed among
the vent samples collected from the Snail site (Figure 2). These
samples were divided into Fe-type (high Fe/H2S) and H2S-type
(low Fe/H2S) and their geochemical data are shown in separate
columns in Table A1 in Appendix.

The concentrations of Cl, Si, H2S, and Fe are plotted against
its Mg concentration (Figure 3). These so-called magnesium
diagrams are conventionally used to estimate the hydrothermal
end-member composition of a high temperature ﬂuid from the
deep-sea hydrothermal system (Von Damm et al., 1985). The
collected ﬂuid sample is often conceived to be simple mixture

FIGURE 2 | The ratio of Fe to H2S in ﬂuid samples.

FIGURE 3 | Mgdiagrams against Cl, Si, H 2S, and Fe for ﬂuid samples.
(A) Cl–Mg, (B) Si–Mg, (C) H2S–Mg, and (D) Fe–Mg diagrams are shown.
NV and BH indicate natural vents and borehole ﬂuids, respectively.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 3

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

between the hydrothermal end-member (completely depleted in
Mg) and seawater (Mg concentration is rather high as 50 mM). For
conservative chemical species in mixing between the hydrothermal
end-member and seawater, plots of the collected samples should
be aligned along a simple linear trend.

Chloride is predominant anion of hydrothermal ﬂuid and sea-
water, which is a representative for such conservative species. In
Cl–Mg diagram (Figure 3A), plots of the collected samples from
the Pika and Archaean sites show clearly different trends. Sub-
stantial deviation of Cl concentration of hydrothermal ﬂuid from
that of seawater is attributed to sub-seaﬂoor phase separation
(e.g., Takai et al., 2008). Based on the data of high temperature
(>150˚C) ﬂuids, Cl-enriched signature of the Pika ﬂuid can be
classiﬁed as vapor-lost (i.e., the gases such as H2, H2S, and CH4
are poor) hydrothermal ﬂuid. In contrast, Cl-depleted signature of
the Archaean ﬂuid can be classiﬁed as vapor-rich (i.e., the gases are
enriched) hydrothermal ﬂuid. In the Archaean site, the collected
sample of low-temperature (<150˚C) shimmering was enriched
in H2 and CH4 (Table A1 in Appendix), which is in accordance
with occurrence of vapor-rich hydrothermal ﬂuid in this site.

Si concentration of hydrothermal ﬂuid is known as controlled
by ﬂuid-mineral equilibrium at the ﬂuid reservoir (Von Damm
et al., 1991). The Si–Mg diagram (Figure 3B) suggests Si concen-
trations of the hydrothermal ﬂuid end-members for three sites are
commonly as high as 16 mM, which corresponds to equilibrium at
high temperature condition above 300˚C. This result is reasonable
for the Pika and Archaean ﬂuids, since such high temperature ﬂuid
vents have been observed in these sites. Similar to these two sites, a
high temperature ﬂuid reservoir would exist below the seaﬂoor in
the Snail Site. In fact, the ﬁrst report for the Snail site mentioned
that ﬂuid temperature was as high as 250˚C (Wheat et al., 2003).
Signiﬁcantly high H2S and Fe concentrations were observed
for the samples collected from high temperature ﬂuid vents in
both Pika and Archaean sites (Table A1 in Appendix). Based
on analogy to the high temperature ﬂuids found at hydrother-
mal ﬁelds in Lau Basin, low pH signature of the ﬂuid could be
responsible for enrichment in these species (Takai et al., 2008). In
contrast, H2S and Fe concentrations of the low-temperature ﬂuid

samples are noticeably lower than the mixing line between high
temperature ﬂuids and seawater (Figures 3C,D). It is likely that
iron-sulﬁde mineral precipitation occurred during sub-seaﬂoor
mixing, causing the decrease of H2S and Fe concentrations in the
low-temperature ﬂuids. For the Snail site, it is difﬁcult to estimate
original H2S and Fe concentrations in the ﬂuid reservoir, since no
high temperature ﬂuid venting was observed. However, it is rea-
sonable to expect similar range to other two sites, since common Si
concentration among three sites suggest existence of a high tem-
perature ﬂuid reservoir. If it is the case, the observed Fe and H2S
concentrations of the samples collected from low-temperature
shimmering can be interpreted as affected by mineral precipi-
tation during sub-seaﬂoor mixing between the high temperature
ﬂuid and seawater.

BACTERIAL COMMUNITY STRUCTURES
The microbial community structures in various habitats (e.g., sul-
ﬁde structures of active vents, iron-rich mats, borehole ﬂuids, and
ambient seawater; Figure 1) in the SMT have been investigated
using culture-independent molecular microbiological methods
(PCR clone library construction and DNA sequencing, ﬂuores-
cence in situ hybridization (FISH) and quantitative real-time PCR;
Kato et al., 2009a,b, 2010). The bacterial community structures in
the habitats have been determined by 16S rRNA gene clone library
analysis as described in our previous reports (Kato et al., 2009a,b,
2010). The microbiological data used in the present paper are
originated from the previous reports. The relatively abundant tax-
onomic groups in the libraries for each habitat are summarized
in Table 1. It should be noted that the abundance of the phylo-
types in the libraries does not indicate their real abundance in the
communities but only the relative abundance due to the inherent
biases of PCR-based analyses (Wintzingerode et al., 1997).

In the sulﬁde structures of active vents, phylotypes belonging
to the Aquiﬁcae or Epsilonproteobacteria were abundant in the
libraries. The detection frequencies in the libraries were up to 44%
of the total clone numbers. Members of the Aquiﬁcae included
thermophilic hydrogen-oxidizers, such as Persephonella hydro-
geniphila. Members of the Epsilonproteobacteria have a variety

Table 1 | Abundant taxonomic groups in the bacterial clone libraries for each habitat.

Habitat

Site

Temp range
of venting
ﬂuids (˚C)

Relative abundant
group (potential
chemolithoautotrophs)

Active sulﬁde
structure

Snail, Pika, Archaean

19–341

Deep seawater
Borehole ﬂuid

Snail, Pika, Archaean
Snail, Pika

2–3
6–40

Iron-rich mat

Snail

33–116

Aquiﬁcae (e.g., Persephonella),
Epsilonproteobacteria (e.g.,
Hydrogenimonas and Sulfurimonas)
Gammaproteobacteria (SUP05 group)
Zetaproteobacteria (Mariprofundus),
Epsilonproteobacteria (e.g.,
Sulfurimonas), Gammaproteobacteria
(Thiomicrospira)
Zetaproteobacteria (Mariprofundus),
Gammaproteobacteria (e.g.,
Methylomonas and Methylobacter )

*Based on the physiological characteristics inferred from the phylogeny of the phylotypes.

Potential electron
donor*

Growth temperature*

Hydrogen, sulﬁde Moderate–

Hyperthermophiles

Sulﬁde
Iron, sulﬁde

Psychrophiles (?)
Mesophiles

Iron, methane

Mesophiles

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 4

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

of metabolic and physiological characteristics: hydrogen- and
sulﬁde-oxidation, microaerobic and anaerobic, and mesophilic
to thermophilic. However, no iron-utilizing bacteria have been
reported in the two taxonomic groups. The microbial community
structures of these sulﬁde structures of active vents in the SMT
were similar to those of each habitat in other deep-sea hydrother-
mal areas including other back-arc basins, arc volcanoes, and
mid-ocean ridges (Takai et al., 2006).

The abundant phylotypes in the libraries from the seawater
samples were different from those of the sulﬁde structures of active
vents. The phylotypes related to SUP05 group and SAR11 cluster
dominated in the libraries from the seawater samples. The SUP05
group belonging to the Gammaproteobacteria predominated in
the hydrothermal plume of the Suiyo Seamount (Sunamura et al.,
2004) and may include sulﬁde-oxidizing chemolithoautotrophs as
suggested by metagenomic analysis (Walsh et al., 2009). The bot-
tom seawater samples collected in the SMT are likely to be mixed
with hydrothermal plumes.

The microbial community structures of the iron-rich mats and
borehole ﬂuids were distinguished from those in the chimneys
and seawater. The phylotypes belonging to the Zetaproteobacte-
ria were abundant (up to 50% of the total clone numbers) in the
libraries from the iron-rich mats and borehole ﬂuids. Quantitative
PCR or FISH analysis indicated that the Zetaproteobacteria phy-
lotypes accounted for up to 32% of the total cell numbers in the
communities of these samples. In addition, the phylotypes related
to sulﬁde-oxidizers, such as Thiomicrospira in the Gammapro-
teobacteria and Sulfurimonas in the Epsilonproteobacteria, were
also detected in the libraries from the borehole ﬂuids. However,
such phylotypes were not detected in the iron-rich mats. In con-
trast, the phylotypes related to Methylomonas and Methylophaga
(including methano/methylotrophs) in the Gammaproteobacte-
ria were relatively abundant in the libraries from the iron-rich
mats. Davis and Moyer (2008) have also provided 16S rRNA
gene data from iron-rich mats in Snail site. They also detected
the phylotypes related to Zetaproteobacteria and Gammapro-
teobacterial methano/methylotrophs, which is consistent with our
results.

Based on the microbiological data that we reported previously
(Kato et al., 2009a,b, 2010), the bacterial community structures in
each habitat (i.e., active sulﬁde structures, iron-rich mats, bore-
hole ﬂuids and ambient seawater) in the SMT were compared
by principal coordination analysis (PCoA) using Fast UniFrac
(Hamady et al., 2009). Although Davis and Moyer (2008) have
also provided 16S rRNA gene data from iron-rich mats in Snail
site, we did not include their data in the comparative analy-
sis to minimize methodological biases accompanied by different
experimental procedures (e.g., DNA extraction and PCR). The
distribution pattern of the communities for each sample corre-
sponded well to their habitat types (Figure 4). The differences in
the habitat types resulted in the differences in the abundant phy-
lotypes in the libraries (Table 1). The physiology of the phylotypes
cannot be determined from their phylogeny, but only inferred
from the closest cultured species (Table 1). If we assume that
the inferred metabolic functions of these phylotypes are correct,
the observed differences in the microbial community structures
among the habitats can be attributed to the presence/absence of

each chemolithoautotroph (i.e., hydrogen-, sulﬁde-, methane-, or
iron-oxidizer). In principle, the distribution pattern in PCoA is
greatly inﬂuenced by the presence/absence of phylotypes that are
phylogenetically distant from one another.

ARCHAEAL COMMUNITY STRUCTURES
In addition to the bacterial communities, diverse archaeal commu-
nities were also detected in the habitats in the hydrothermal ﬁelds
of the SMT (Kato et al., 2009a,b, 2010). The abundant archaeal
taxonomic groups were different among the habitats (Table 2)
like the bacterial communities. A large number of the recov-
ered phylotypes were afﬁliated with uncultured clone groups,
such as the miscellaneous crenarchaeotic group (MCG), terres-
trial hot spring crenarchaeota (THSC), pSL12-related group, and
Marine Benthic Group E (MBGE). Although the physiologies of
these uncultured phylotypes is still unclear, some of them have
been inferred from metagenomic and functional gene analyses,
and the geochemical characteristics of the environments where
they were detected: for example, the MCG includes anaero-
bic chemoorganotrophs (Teske and Sørensen, 2008), the pSL12-
related group includes ammonia-oxidizers (Mincer et al., 2007),
and MBGE includes iron-oxidizers (Takai and Nakamura, 2010),
respectively.

In the sulﬁde structures of active vents, phylotypes related to
Archaeoglobi, Thermoprotei, and THSC were abundant in the
libraries. The total detection frequencies of the three groups in
the libraries were over 40%. Members of the Archaeoglobi and
Thermoprotei include (hyper)thermophilic hydrogen-oxidizing
anaerobes. No isolates of THSC have been reported. Only Marine
Group I (MGI) phylotypes were detected in the libraries from the
seawater samples. MGI members are common archaeal inhabi-
tants in oceans (Fuhrman et al., 1992) and the group includes
an ammonia-oxidizing chemolithoautotrophic isolate (Könneke
et al., 2005). Like the bacterial community structures, the archaeal
community structures of these sulﬁde structures and seawater
samples were totally similar to those of each habitat in other
deep-sea hydrothermal areas including other back-arc basins, arc
volcanoes, and mid-ocean ridges (Takai et al., 2006).

All archaeal phylotypes recovered from the iron-rich mats
and borehole ﬂuids were classiﬁed in uncultured clone groups,
such the MBGE, MCG, and pSL12-related group. These uncul-
tured groups have been recovered from other deep-sea environ-
ments. For example, the MBGE phylotypes were ﬁrst reported
from deep-sea sediments (Vetriani et al., 1999) and were detected
in iron-rich habitats (Suzuki et al., 2004; Takai, 2008). The
MCG phylotypes are one of
the widely distributed groups
of Archaea in deep-sea environments (Teske and Sørensen,
2008). Interestingly, a MCG phylotype (NCBI accession num-
ber, AB213054) was closely related to those detected in crustal
ﬂuids from the IODP borehole 1026B (AY181048; Cowen et al.,
2003) and from the inserting pipes at the Baby Bare seamount
(AY704375; Huber et al., 2006). This MCG phylotype is poten-
tially an indigenous archaeal member in sub-seaﬂoor crustal
aquifers.

Archaeal communities have often been ignored in microbiolog-
ical analysis of iron-rich mats. However, the archaeal abundance in
the communities of the SMT is not so small (over 10%) and should

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 5

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

FIGURE 4 | Comparison of the bacterial community structures in the
SMT habitats by principal coordination analysis. The used microbiological
data are originated from our previous reports (Kato et al., 2009a,b, 2010). The
principal coordination analysis was performed using Fast UniFrac (Hamady
et al., 2009). Each axis (PC1-3) indicates the ﬁrst, second, and third principal
coordinates. The percentages in the axis labels represent the percentages of
variation explained by the principal coordinates. AFhm1 and 2, sulﬁde mound
venting 107˚C ﬂuid at the Snail site; AAcs1-3, clear smoker chimney venting
117˚C ﬂuid at the Archaean site; APbsc1-4, black smoker chimney venting

270˚C ﬂuid at the Pika site; APcsc1-4, clear smoker chimney venting 19˚C ﬂuid
at the Pika site; IPltcB, G, and O, inactive chimney at Pika site; IYdcB, and G,
inactive chimney at the Y site; Pasw, and Fasw, ambient seawater at the Pika
and Snail sites, respectively; Fapm1 and F2apm, borehole ﬂuids at the Snail
site collected in 2004 and 2005, respectively; Papm3, borehole ﬂuids at the
Pika site; Fnv, natural vent ﬂuid at the Snail site; YS16 and YS18, iron-rich mats
at the Kaiko and Snail sites, respectively. The data from the Y and Kaiko sites
are not mentioned in the present paper (please, see Kato et al., 2009a, 2010
for details).

Table 2 | Abundant taxonomic groups in the archaeal clone libraries for each habitat.

Habitat

Site

Temp range
of venting
ﬂuids (˚C)

Relative abundant
group (potential
chemolithoautotrophs)

Potential electron
donor*

Growth
temperature*

Active sulﬁde structure
Deep seawater
Borehole ﬂuid
Iron-rich mat

Snail, Pika, Archaean
Snail, Pika, Archaean
Snail, Pika
Snail

19–341
2–3
6–40
33–116

Archaeoglobi, Thermoprotei
MGI
MBGE, MGI, pSL12-related
MBGE, MGI, pSL12-related

Hydrogen
Ammonia
Iron (?), ammonia
Iron (?), ammonia

(Hyper)thermophiles
Psychrophiles
Mesophiles (?)
Mesophiles (?)

*Based on the physiological characteristics inferred from the phylogeny of the phylotypes.

not be ignored (Davis and Moyer, 2008; Kato et al., 2009a). It is pos-
sible that archaeal communities play signiﬁcant role in elemental
cycling of Fe, N, and C in iron-rich deep-sea environments, and in
the maintenance of the microbial ecosystems. Further cultivation
efforts are needed to determine the physiology of these uncultured
archaeal groups and to understand their signiﬁcance in micro-
bial ecosystems and elemental cycling in deep-sea hydrothermal
systems.

GEOCHEMICAL CONSTRAINTS SHAPING MICROBIAL
COMMUNITY STRUCTURES
It has been proposed that ﬂuid geochemistry constrains microbial
community structures in deep-sea hydrothermal ﬁelds (McCol-
lom and Shock, 1997). The available chemical energy for
chemolithotrophs can be calculated thermodynamically for each
metabolic reaction based on the geochemistry of hydrothermal
ﬂuids. To assess the relationship between microbial community

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 6

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

structures and geochemical composition of hydrothermal ﬂuids in
the SMT, we calculated the bioavailable energy yields of metabolic
reactions (aerobic hydrogen-, methane-, sulﬁde-, ammonia- or
iron-oxidation, methanogenesis, sulfate-, iron- or nitrate-reducing
hydrogen-oxidation, and anaerobic methane-oxidation) for each
type of hydrothermal ﬂuid, and compared them to the inferred
metabolic ability for each taxonomic group from their phylogeny
(Tables 1 and 2).

The procedure for the thermodynamic calculation was pre-
viously described in detail (Takai and Nakamura, 2010). In
brief, the amounts of chemical energy potentially available for
chemolithotrophic metabolisms in hydrothermal ﬂuid were deter-
mined by calculating the Gibbs free energy of each of the meta-
bolic reactions. The overall Gibbs free energy of reaction can be
calculated using the equation:
ΔGr = ΔGr

◦ + RT ln Q

(1)

where ΔGr is the Gibbs free energy of reaction, ΔGr˚ is the stan-
dard state Gibbs free energy of reaction, R is the universal gas
constant, T is the temperature in Kelvin, and Q is the activity
quotient of the compounds involved in the reaction. The Q term
takes into account the contribution of the ﬂuid composition to
the Gibbs energy of each reaction. Chemical compositions of the
hydrothermal ﬂuids used for the calculation are (i) the measured
data of the low-temperature ﬂuids sampled and (ii) the calculated
values for low-temperature ﬂuids by mixing between end-member
hydrothermal ﬂuids and seawater. The mixing calculations were
performed with the aid of the computer program EQ3/6, Version
8.0 (Wolery and Jarek, 2003). The thermodynamic database for
the EQ3/6 operations and the values of the standard Gibbs energy
for the chemolithotrophic metabolic reactions (ΔGr˚) were gen-
erated using the SUPCRT92 code (Johnson et al., 1992) with a
customized database.

For reproducing the conditions inside of sulﬁde structures of
active vents, the bioavailable energy yields for the temperature
range between 3 and 125˚C were calculated (Figure A2 in Appen-
dix) using the geochemical data of high temperature hydrothermal
ﬂuids venting at the Pika and Archaean sites. We could not calcu-
late the bioavailable energy yields for the Snail site because of
lack of data for high temperature vent ﬂuids in that site. In the
calculation, simple mixing between hydrothermal ﬂuid and sea-
water without any redox and mineral precipitation reactions was
assumed (Takai and Nakamura, 2010). The results of the geochem-
ical model calculations show that aerobic sulﬁde-oxidation yields
the highest bioavailable energy under all temperature conditions
(Figure A2 in Appendix). This suggests that sulﬁde-oxidizers using
−
O2 and NO
3 as electron acceptors can dominate in sulﬁde struc-
tures of active vents at both the Pika and Archaean sites. Indeed,
phylotypes related to the Epsilonproteobacteria including aerobic
sulﬁde-oxidizing chemolithoautotrophs (e.g., Sulfurimonas) were
dominant in the libraries from the active chimneys from the Pika
and Archaean sites (Table 1). This implies that the high-potentials
of the energy availability from sulﬁde-oxidation reactions affect
the relative abundance of these sulﬁde-oxidizing chemolithoau-
totrophs in bacterial communities in sulﬁde structures of active

vents. The geochemical modeling results also suggest that iron-
oxidation reactions produce the second largest amount of bioavail-
able energy. In the active chimney samples, however, none of the
known iron-oxidizing chemolithoautotrophs was detected. This
may suggest that the uncultured phylotypes detected in the sulﬁde
structures contain unknown iron-oxidizers.

To assess the geochemical conditions of the relatively low-
temperature (<150˚C) ﬂuids for chemolithoautotrophic microor-
ganisms at the Pika, Archaean and Snail sites, the bioavailable
energy yields were also calculated using the observed chemical data
of the low-temperature shimmering ﬂuids from the vent sites. The
calculated bioavailable energy yields show that sulﬁde-oxidation
reactions can produce higher bioavailable energy than other meta-
bolic reactions (Figures 5A,E,F,H), except the Archaean site where
hydrogen- and methane-oxidizing reactions yield higher bioavail-
able energy than sulﬁde-oxidation reactions (Figure 5G). The
results are generally consistent with those estimated for vent ﬂuids
from active sulﬁde structures (Figure A2 in Appendix). Regard-
ing the 75–115˚C vent ﬂuids of the Archaean site (Figure 5G), the
bioavailable energy yields from aerobic and anaerobic hydrogen-
oxidation reactions are slightly higher than those values estimated
for active sulﬁde structures (Figure A2 in Appendix) due to
relatively high H2 concentrations of the low-temperature shim-
mering ﬂuids (comparable to high temperature ﬂuids). Although
the hydrogen concentration of the Archaean vent ﬂuids would
be variable and fortuitously ﬂuctuating by phase separation and
subsequent sub-seaﬂoor mixing, the geochemical modeling result
is generally consistent with microbiological observations that
putative (hyper)thermophilic hydrogen-oxidizing chemolithoau-
totrophs belonging to both domains Bacteria (e.g., Hydrogeni-
monas) and Archaea (e.g., Archaeoglobi) were detected in the
Archaean site.

It should be noted that the bioavailable energy yields for
iron-oxidation in the borehole ﬂuid and high Fe/H2S vent ﬂu-
ids (i.e., “Fe-type ﬂuids”) in the Snail site may be comparable to
or higher than those for sulﬁde-oxidation (Figures 5B,D). The
result is quite different from those estimated by a simple mix-
ing model of high temperature hydrothermal ﬂuids and seawater
(Figure A2 in Appendix) and those calculated using the observed
chemical data of the other low-temperature shimmering ﬂuids
(Figures 5A,C,E–H). This leads us to propose that there are habi-
tats of iron-oxidizers where bioavailable energy yields from iron-
oxidation reactions may be preferable for chemolithoautotrophs
compared to those from sulﬁde-oxidation reactions. Indeed, the
phylotypes related to the Zetaproteobacteria including an iron-
oxidizing chemolithoautotroph (M. ferrooxydans) were abundant
in the iron-rich mats accompanied by Fe-type vent ﬂuids and
the borehole ﬂuids in the SMT (Table 1; Kato et al., 2009a,b).
This microbiological result is consistent with the geochemical–
thermodynamic result showing the presence of habitats with rel-
atively high bioavailable energy yields for iron-oxidation in the
Snail site. The same putative iron-oxidizers were also detected in
borehole ﬂuid from the Pika site. Although H2S and H2 concen-
tration data for the Pika borehole ﬂuid are not available and thus
bioavailable energy yields for hydrogen- and sulﬁde-oxidation
reactions cannot be calculated, Fe-rich, and H2S-depleted ﬂuids
similar to that observed in the Snail site are expected for the Pika

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 7

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

borehole. Massive iron-rich mats harboring the Zetaproteobac-
teria were found in other hydrothermal ﬁelds, such as on arc
volcanoes (Forget et al., 2010), hot-spot volcanoes (Rassa et al.,
2009), and mid-ocean ridges (Davis et al., 2009). Furthermore,
the phylotypes related to the Zetaproteobacteria were detected in
the basaltic oceanic rocks (Santelli et al., 2008). Bach and Edwards
(2003) have suggested that oxidation of reduced iron contained
in the basaltic oceanic crust can provide energy for chemosyn-
thetic ecosystems, which is corresponding to ∼2× 1011 g cellular
carbon/year as estimated by thermodynamic calculation. More
detailed geochemical–microbiological characterization will pro-
vide insight into the relationship between the bioavailable energy
yields by iron-oxidation and the abundance and distribution of
the Zetaproteobacteria on and below the seaﬂoor.

As shown above, assuming that the vent ﬂuids were sim-
ply generated by mixing of end-member hydrothermal ﬂu-
ids with seawater, sulﬁde-oxidation yields the high energy for
chemolithotrophs at all temperature ranges in the SMT hydrother-
mal ﬁelds (Figure A2 in Appendix). However, in fact, our ther-
modynamic calculations using the actual geochemical data indi-
cate the presence of habitats in the Snail site where relatively
high energy yields are available from iron-oxidation rather than
sulﬁde- and hydrogen-oxidation. This discrepancy between the
observation and theoretical expectation may result in part from
incomplete modeling of the geochemical composition of the vent-
ing ﬂuids as mentioned previously (Amend et al., 2011); for
example, residence time, mineral depositions, and/or microbial
metabolisms can inﬂuence the geochemistry of actual vent ﬂuids,
especially for low-temperature shimmering ﬂuids that are likely
to migrate in the crust at a slow rate. In the Snail site, many
diffuse ﬂows from cracks of the seaﬂoor basalts were observed
(Figure 1C), while no black smoker chimneys were found. In
addition, pyrites (FeS2) were found in the fractures and vesicles of
the sub-seaﬂoor basalts collected by drilling (Kato et al., 2009b).
These facts suggest that upwelling hydrothermal ﬂuids are grad-
ually mixed and cooled in the shallow sub-seaﬂoor environments
pervaded with the penetrating seawater and then iron and sulﬁde
in the ﬂuids are precipitated as pyrite. Depending on the end-
member concentrations of Fe and H2S, the sub-seaﬂoor mixing,
and subsequent pyrite precipitation may result in the presence
of high Fe/H2S low-temperature ﬂuids. However, so far we have
not determined the end-member concentrations of iron and sul-
ﬁde because of lack of high temperature vent ﬂuids in the Snail
site. Further investigations are needed to assess the model of the
generation of the Fe-type ﬂuids.

It is remarkable that ammonia-oxidation yields the highest
bioavailable energy for the borehole ﬂuid in the Snail site followed
by iron-oxidation (Figure 5B), although the bioavailable energy
yields for the borehole ﬂuid in the Pika site could not be calcu-
lated due to incomplete geochemical data (Table A1 in Appendix).
Archaea accounted for 27–58% of the total cell number in the bore-
hole ﬂuids (Kato et al., 2009b), and putative ammonia-oxidizers,
such as MGI and pSL12-related group, were detected in the bore-
hole ﬂuids (Table 2). This may be comparable to or higher than
the result that Zetaproteobacteria accounted for 6–32% in the
borehole ﬂuids (Kato et al., 2009b) and is consistent with the ther-
modynamic calculation results: considerable numbers of putative

FIGURE 5 | Bioavailable energy yields for metabolic redox reactions for
each sample type. For the Snail site, the energy yields result from (A)
15–116˚C natural vent, (B) 3–40˚C borehole, (C) H2S-type, and (D) Fe-type
ﬂuids. For the Pika site, the energy yields result from (E) 100˚C natural vent
and (F) 3–50˚C natural vent ﬂuids. For the Archaean site, the energy yields
result from (G) 75–117˚C natural vent and (H) 30˚C natural vent ﬂuids. The
bioavailable energy yields for (E) 100˚C natural vent in the Pika site and for
(H) 30˚C natural vent in the Archaean site were calculated using the
geochemical data estimated from a simple mixing model of hydrothermal
ﬂuids and seawater.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 8

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

ammonia-oxidizers as well as putative iron-oxidizers are expected
to be present in the borehole ﬂuids.

MODEL OF THE APPEARANCE OF THE MICROBIAL
COMMUNITY STRUCTURES IN THE SMT
Considering the inferred metabolic functions of the abundant
phylotypes in each library from the samples as described above
(Tables 1 and 2), it seems that the microbial community struc-
tures observed in the SMT hydrothermal ﬁelds are constrained by
the energy availability of the ﬂuids. We propose a model for the
appearance of the microbial community structures in the SMT
based on the results of microbiological, geochemical, and ther-
modynamic analyses (Figure 6). Although this model is mainly
based on the results from the Snail site, our results from the Pika
and Archaean sites can partially ﬁt this model (e.g., the detec-
tion of putative sulﬁde-oxidizers in the active sulﬁde structures
in the Pika and Archaean sites and that of putative iron- and
ammonia-oxidizers in the borehole ﬂuids in Pika site).

Upwelling high temperature hydrothermal ﬂuids discharged
from vents rapidly react with seawater, and lead to the precipitation
of metal sulﬁdes, which results in the formation of the chimney- or
mound-like structures on the seaﬂoor. Sequentially, hydrothermal
ﬂuids are mixed with seawater within the wall of the sulﬁde struc-
tures, which leads to the occurrence of steep chemical disequilibria.
In such environments, hydrogen, and sulﬁde-oxidation reactions

yield high bioavailable energy, and accordingly hydrogen-oxidizers
and sulﬁde-oxidizers may be relatively abundant in the microbial
communities.

In contrast, a portion of the upwelling hydrothermal ﬂuids
can permeate into porous basaltic pillow lava. The hydrother-
mal ﬂuids may be gradually mixed and cooled in the shallow
sub-seaﬂoor environments pervaded with the penetrating seawa-
ter and then iron and sulﬁde in the ﬂuids may be precipitated
as pyrite. This sub-seaﬂoor process would generate “Fe-type ﬂu-
ids.” In the Fe-type ﬂuids, iron-oxidation yields high bioavailable
energy, and accordingly, iron-oxidizers can dominate in the micro-
bial communities as observed in the borehole ﬂuids and iron-rich
mats.

CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVE
In this paper, we summarized the microbial community struc-
tures in various habitats in the SMT. These ﬁndings highlight
the uniqueness of the microbial communities in each habitat. On
the whole, the results of thermodynamic calculations using the
actual geochemical data are consistent with the presence/absence
of each chemolithoautotroph in the microbial communities. The
high bioavailable energy yield of iron-oxidation in the bore-
hole and several vent ﬂuids may be related to the appearance of
microbial communities with abundant Zetaproteobacteria (puta-
tive iron-oxidizing chemolithoautotrophs), i.e., the iron-based

FIGURE 6 | A model for the appearance of the microbial community structures in each habitat in the SMT. This model is based on the microbiological and
geochemical characteristics in the Snail site.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 9

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

ecosystem, in such environments. Based on the microbiological–
geochemical–thermodynamic results, a model for the appear-
ance of the microbial community structures in the SMT is pro-
posed. It should be noted that the molecular microbiological
methods we used mainly targeted DNA extracted from envi-
ronmental samples and have some shortcomings (Wintzingerode
et al., 1997). Firstly, we cannot determine whether the detected
phylotypes are active in the environments or not. RNA-based
analysis (such as reverse transcript PCR and FISH) can identify
active members thriving in environments. Secondly, the phys-
iologies of the phylotypes cannot be directly determined from
the phylogeny. We believe that the diverse phylotypes in the
Zetaproteobacteria include iron-oxidizing chemolithoautotrophs,
although this must be veriﬁed by culture-dependent analyses.
As shown here, the thermodynamic modeling by simple mix-
ing of hydrothermal ﬂuids with seawater is a powerful tool
for predicting the microbial community structures in active

chimneys where the mixing of hydrothermal ﬂuids with sea-
water occurs immediately (Takai and Nakamura, 2010; Amend
et al., 2011). Further careful calculations accompanied by other
factors such as mineral precipitation will provide more help-
ful information for understanding the mechanisms shaping the
microbial community structures in global deep-sea hydrothermal
systems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all of the crew, the operation team and scientists joining
the YK03-05, TN167A, YK05-09, YK10-10, and YK10-13 cruises
for their cooperation. This research was funded by the Ministry
of Education, Culture, Science, and Technology (MEXT), Japan,
through a special coordination fund (Project TAIGA: Trans-crustal
Advection and In situ biogeochemical processes of Global sub-
seaﬂoor Aquifer) and partly by the RIKEN Special Postdoctoral
Researchers Program.

REFERENCES
Amend,

J. P., McCollom, T. M.,
Hentscher, M., and Bach, W. (2011).
Catabolic and anabolic energy for
chemolithoautotrophs in deep-sea
hydrothermal systems hosted in dif-
ferent rock types. Geochim. Cos-
mochim. Acta 75, 5736–5748.

Bach, W., and Edwards, K. J. (2003).
Iron and sulﬁde oxidation within
the basaltic ocean crust: implications
for chemolithoautotrophic micro-
bial biomass production. Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta 67, 3871–3887.

Chan, C. S., Fakra, S. C., Emerson, D.,
Fleming, E. J., and Edwards, K. J.
(2011). Lithotrophic iron-oxidizing
bacteria produce organic stalks to
control mineral growth:
implica-
tions for biosignature formation.
ISME J. 5, 717–727.

Cowen, J., Giovannoni, S., Kenig, F.,
Johnson, H., Butterﬁeld, D., Rappé,
M., Hutnak, M., and Lam, P. (2003).
Fluids from aging ocean crust that
support microbial life. Science 299,
120–123.

Davis, R., and Moyer, C.

(2008).
Extreme spatial and temporal vari-
ability of hydrothermal microbial
mat communities along the Mari-
ana island arc and Southern Mariana
back-arc system. J. Geophys. Res. 113,
B08S15.

Davis, R. E., Stakes, D. S., Wheat, C.
G., and Moyer, C. L. (2009). Bac-
terial variability within an iron-
silica-manganese-rich hydrothermal
mound located off-axis at the Cleft
Segment,
Juan de Fuca Ridge.
Geomicrobiol. J. 26, 570–580.

Edwards, K. J., Bach, W., and Rogers,
D. R. (2003). Geomicrobiology of
the ocean crust: a role for chemoau-
totrophic Fe-bacteria. Biol. Bull. 204,
180–185.

Emerson, D., and Moyer, C. L. (2002).
Neutrophilic Fe-oxidizing bacteria

are abundant at the Loihi seamount
hydrothermal vents and play a major
role in Fe oxide deposition. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 68, 3085–3093.

Emerson, D., Rentz,

J. A., Lilburn,
T. G., Davis, R. E., Aldrich, H.,
Chan, C., and Moyer, C. L. (2007).
A novel
lineage of proteobacteria
involved in formation of marine
Fe-oxidizing microbial mat com-
munities. PLoS ONE 2,
e667.
doi:610.1371/journal.pone.0000667
Forget, N. L., Murdock, S. A., and
Juniper, S. K. (2010). Bacterial diver-
sity in Fe-rich hydrothermal sed-
iments at
two South Tonga Arc
submarine volcanoes. Geobiology 8,
417–432.

Fryer, P. (1995). “Geology of the Mari-
ana Trough,” in Backarc Basins: Tec-
tonics and Magmatism, ed. B. Taylor
(New York: Plenum Press), 237–279.
Fuhrman, M., McCallum, K., Davis, A.
A. (1992). Novel major archaebac-
terial group from marine plankton.
Nature 356, 148–149.

Hamady, M., Lozupone, C., and Knight,
facilitat-
R. (2009). Fast Unifrac:
ing high-throughput phylogenetic
analyses of microbial communities
including analysis of pyrosequenc-
ing and phylochip data. ISME J. 4,
17–27.

Ishibashi,

Huber, J. A., Johnson, H. P., Butter-
ﬁeld, D. A., and Baross, J. A. (2006).
Microbial life in ridge ﬂank crustal
ﬂuids. Environ. Microbiol. 8, 88–99.
J., Suzuki, R., Yamanaka,
T., Toki, T., Kimura, H., Noguchi,
T., and Urabe, T. (2006). Seaﬂoor
hydrothermal activity at off-axial
seamounts of backarc spreading in
Southern Mariana Trough. Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta 70, A279.

Ishibashi, J., and Urabe, T. (1995).
“Hydrothermal activity related to
arc-backarc magmatism in the
western Paciﬁc,” in Backarc Basins:

Tectonics and Magmatism, ed. B.
Taylor (New York: Plenum Press),
451–495.

Ishibashi, J., Yamanaka, T., Kimura, H.,
Hirota, A., Toki, T., Tsunogai, U.,
Gamo, T., Utsumi, M., Roe, K., and
Miyabe, S. (2004). “Geochemistry of
hydrothermal ﬂuids in South Mar-
iana backarc spreading center,” in
American Geophysical Union, Fall
Meeting 2004, San Francisco, abstr.
#V44A-05.

Jannasch, H. W., and Mottl, M.

J.
(1985). Geomicrobiology of deep-
sea hydrothermal vents. Science 229,
717–725.

Johnson, J. W., Oelkers, E. H., and
Helgeson, H. C. (1992). SUPCRT92:
a software package for calculating
the standard molal thermodynamic
properties of minerals, gases, aque-
ous species, and reactions from 1 to
5000 bar and 0 to 1000˚C. Comput.
Geosci. 18, 899–947.

Kakegawa, T., Utsumi, M., and Marumo,
K. (2008). Geochemistry of sulﬁde
chimneys and basement pillow lavas
at the Southern Mariana Trough
(12.55ºN-12.58ºN). Resour. Geol. 58,
249–266.

Kato, S., Kobayashi, C., Kakegawa, T.,
and Yamagishi, A. (2009a). Micro-
bial communities
in iron-silica-
rich microbial mats at deep-sea
hydrothermal ﬁelds of the Southern
Mariana Trough. Environ. Microbiol.
11, 2094–2111.

Kato, S., Yanagawa, K., Sunamura, M.,
Takano,Y., Ishibashi, J., Kakegawa, T.,
Utsumi, M., Yamanaka, T., Toki, T.,
Noguchi, T., Kobayashi, K., Moroi,
A., Kimura, H., Kawarabayasi, Y.,
Marumo, K., Urabe, T., and Yama-
gishi, A. (2009b). Abundance of Zet-
aproteobacteria within crustal ﬂu-
ids in back-arc hydrothermal ﬁelds
of the Southern Mariana Trough.
Environ. Microbiol. 11, 3210–3222.

Kato, S., Takano, Y., Kakegawa, T., Oba,
H., Inoue, K., Kobayashi, C., Utsumi,
M., Marumo, K., Kobayashi, K., Ito,
Y., Ishibashi, J., and Yamagishi, A.
(2010). Biogeography and biodiver-
sity in sulﬁde structures of active and
inactive vents at deep-sea hydrother-
mal ﬁelds of the Southern Mariana
Trough. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76,
2968–2979.

Könneke, M., Bernhard, A. E., De La
Torre, J. R., Walker, C. B., Waterbury,
J. B., and Stahl, D. A. (2005). Iso-
lation of an autotrophic ammonia-
oxidizing marine archaeon. Nature
437, 543–546.

Marumo, K., Urabe, T., Goto,A., Takano,
Y., and Nakaseama, M. (2008). Min-
eralogy and isotope geochemistry of
active submarine hydrothermal ﬁeld
at Suiyo Seamount, Izu–Bonin Arc,
west Paciﬁc Ocean. Resour. Geol. 58,
220–248.

McAllister, S. M., Davis, R. E., McBeth,
J. M., Tebo, B. M., Emerson, D.,
and Moyer, C. L. (2011). Biodi-
versity and emerging biogeography
of the neutrophilic iron-oxidizing
Zetaproteobacteria. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 77, 5445–5457.

McCollom, T. M. (2007). Geochemi-
cal constraints on sources of meta-
bolic energy for chemolithoautotro-
phy in ultramaﬁc-hosted deep-sea
hydrothermal systems. Astrobiology
7, 933–950.

McCollom, T. M., and Shock, E.
L. (1997). Geochemical constraints
on chemolithoautotrophic metabo-
lism by microorganisms in seaﬂoor
hydrothermal
systems. Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta 61, 4375–4391.

Mincer, T. J., Church, M. J., Taylor,
L. T., Preston, C., Karl, D. M.,
and Delong, E. F. (2007). Quanti-
tative distribution of presumptive
archaeal and bacterial nitriﬁers in
Monterey Bay and the North Paciﬁc

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 10

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

Subtropical Gyre. Environ. Micro-
biol. 9, 1162–1175.

Nakagawa, S., and Takai, K. (2008).
Deep-sea vent
chemoautotrophs:
diversity, biochemistry and ecolog-
ical signiﬁcance. FEMS Microbiol.
Ecol. 65, 1–14.

Orcutt, B. N., Sylvan, J. B., Knab, N. J.,
and Edwards, K. J. (2011). Micro-
bial ecology of the dark ocean above,
at, and below the seaﬂoor. Microbiol.
Mol. Biol. Rev. 75, 361–422.

Rassa, A. C., McAllister,

S. M.,
Safran, S. A., and Moyer, C. L.
(2009). Zeta-proteobacteria domi-
nate the colonization and forma-
tion of microbial mats in low-
temperature hydrothermal vents at
Loihi Seamount, Hawaii. Geomicro-
biol. J. 26, 623–638.

Santelli, C. M., Orcutt, B. N., Banning,
E., Bach, W., Moyer, C. L., Sogin, M.
L., Staudigel, H., and Edwards, K. J.
(2008). Abundance and diversity of
microbial life in ocean crust. Nature
453, 653–656.

Singer, E., Emerson, D., Webb, E. A.,
Barco, R. A., Kuenen, J. G., Nel-
son, W. C., Chan, C. S., Comolli,
L. R., Ferriera, S., Johnson, J., Hei-
delberg,
J. F., and Edwards, K.
J. (2011). Mariprofundus ferrooxy-
dans PV-1 the ﬁrst genome of a
marine Fe(II) oxidizing zetapro-
teobacterium. PLoS ONE 6, e25386.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0025386

Sunamura, M., Higashi, Y., Miyako,
C., Ishibashi, J., and Maruyama,
(2004). Two bacteria phylo-
A.
types
in the
Suiyo
hydrothermal
plume. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70,
1190–1198.

are predominant
Seamount

Suzuki, Y., Inagaki, F., Takai, K., Neal-
son, K. H., and Horikoshi, K.
(2004). Microbial diversity in inac-
tive chimney structures from deep-
sea hydrothermal systems. Microb.
Ecol. 47, 186–196.

communities

Takai, K. (2008). Variability in the
and
microbial
hydrothermal ﬂuid chemistry at
the
discovered mariner
hydrothermal ﬁeld, Southern Lau
Basin. J. Geophys. Res. 113.

newly

Takai, K., Nakagawa, S., Reysenbach,
A. L., and Hoek, J. (2006). Micro-
bial ecology of mid-ocean ridges and
back-arc basins. Geophys. Monogr.
166, 185–213.

variability

Takai, K., and Nakamura, K. (2010).
“Compositional, physiological and
metabolic
in micro-
bial communities associated with
deep-sea
geochemically
hydrothermal
in
Geomicrobiology: Molecular
and
Environmental Perspective, eds L.
L. Barton, M. Mandl, and A. Loy
(Dordrecht: Springer), 251–283.

diverse,
vent

ﬂuids,”

Takai, K., Nunoura, T., Ishibashi, J.-
I., Lupton, J., Suzuki, R., Hamasaki,
H., Ueno, Y., Kawagucci, S., Gamo,
T., Suzuki, Y., Hirayama, H., and
Horikoshi, K.
(2008). Variabil-
ity in the microbial communities
and hydrothermal ﬂuid chemistry
at
the newly discovered mariner
hydrothermal ﬁeld, Southern Lau
Basin. J. Geophys. Res. 113, G02031.
Teske, A., and Sørensen, K. B. (2008).
Uncultured archaea in deep marine
subsurface
sediments: have we
caught them all? ISME J. 2, 3–18.

Toki, T., Tsunogai, U.,

Ishibashi,
J., Utsumi, M., and Gamo, T.

(2008). Methane enrichment in low-
temperature hydrothermal ﬂuids
from the Suiyo Seamount in the
Izu-Bonin Arc of
the western
Paciﬁc Ocean. J. Geophys. Res. 113,
B08S13.

Vetriani, C., Jannasch, H. W., Macgregor,
B. J., Stahl, D. A., and Reysenbach,
A.-L. (1999). Population structure
and phylogenetic characterization of
marine benthic archaea in deep-sea
sediments. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
65, 4375–4384.

Von Damm, K. L., Bischoff, J. L., and
Rosenbauer, R. J. (1991). Quartz
solubility in hydrothermal seawater;
an experimental study and equation
describing quartz solubility for up to
0.5 m NaCl solutions. Am. J. Sci.291,
977–1007.

Von Damm, K. L., Edmond, J. M.,
Grant, B., Measures, C. I., Walden,
B., and Weiss, R. F. (1985). Chem-
istry of submarine hydrothermal
solutions at 21ºN, East Paciﬁc
Rise. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 49,
2197–2220.

Walsh, D. A., Zaikova, E., Howes, C. G.,
Song, Y. C., Wright, J. J., Tringe, S.
G., Tortell, P. D., and Hallam, S. J.
(2009). Metagenome of a versatile
chemolithoautotroph from expand-
ing oceanic dead zones. Science 326,
578–582.

Wheat, C. G., Fryer, P., Hulme, S.,
Becker, N., Curtis, A., and Moyer,
C.
(2003). “Hydrothermal vent-
ing in the southern most portion
of
the mariana backarc spread-
ing center at 12.57 degrees N,” in
American Geophysical Union, Fall
Meeting 2004, San Francisco, abstr.
T32A-0920.

Wintzingerode, F., Gobel, U. B., and
Stackebrandt, E. (1997). Determina-
tion of microbial diversity in envi-
ronmental samples: pitfalls of PCR-
based rRNA analysis. FEMS Micro-
biol. Rev. 21, 213–229.

Wolery, T. W., and Jarek, R. L. (2003).
Software User’s Manual. EQ3/6,
Version 8.0. U.S. Department of
Energy Report 10813-UM-8.0-00,
Albuquerque, NM: Sandia National
Laboratories, 376.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 31 October 2011; accepted:
22 February 2012; published online: 15
March 2012.
Citation: Kato S, Nakamura K, Toki
T, Ishibashi J-i, Tsunogai U, Hirota A,
Ohkuma M and Yamagishi A (2012)
Iron-based microbial ecosystem on and
below the seaﬂoor: a case study of
hydrothermal ﬁelds of the Southern Mar-
iana Trough. Front. Microbio. 3:89. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00089
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Microbiological Chemistry, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Kato, Nakamura, Toki,
Ishibashi, Tsunogai, Hirota, Ohkuma
and Yamagishi. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 11

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

APPENDIX
Table A1 | Summary of the geochemical characteristics of ﬂuid samples collected in the SMT.

Sampling site

Snail (2861 m)

Pika (2773 m)

Archaean (2986 m)

Sample type

Borehole

Natural vent

Fe–H2S available*

Borehole

Natural vent

Natural vent

H2S-type

Fe-type

<150˚C

>150˚C

<150˚C

>150˚C

T ave.
(Range; ˚C)
pH
Alk. (meq)
Mg (mM)
Ca (mM)
Sr (μM)
Na (mM)
K (mM)
Li (mM)
B (μM)
C1 (mM)
Br (mM)
SO4 (mM)
Si (mM)
NH4 (μM)
NO3 (μM)
H2S (μM)
Mn (mM)
Fe (μM)
Ba (μM)
O2 (μM)
N2 (μM)
CO2 (mM)
CH4 (μM)
H2 (μM)

25
(3–40)
6.69
2.22
46.2
10.7
85.0
460
10.8
0.046
388
540
0.85
25.3
1.05
14.3
4.4
0.41
0.15
62.4
1.67
286
1630
7.20
0.86
0.10

55
(15–116)
6.65
2.09
45.6
11.2
89.7
455
11.4
0.076
401
545
0.85
25.0
1.60
7.9
13.2
57.1
0.23
57.0
22.1
164
1771
7.76
1.37
6.62

54
(15–81)
5.85
2.16
40.9
12.9
82.4
450
13.0
0.118
353
542
0.83
22.9
2.98
5.2
2.8
229
0.32
19.5
n.d.

41
(18–59)
6.38
1.94
45.5
11.1
91.6
463
11.7
0.081
481
539
0.85
23.9
1.97
7.3
0.0
6.6
0.20
119
33.4

n.d. (164)

n.d.
n.d. (7.76)
n.d. (1.37)

n.d.
3.11
0.22

n.d. (6.62)

10

7.57
2.37
50.0
9.7
83.5
469
9.7
0.028
n.d.
n.d.
0.84
25.7
0.21
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
0.12
115
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.

28
(3–50)
6.59
2.28
49.8
10.2
87.5
460
9.7
0.044
362
548
0.84
26.9
0.49
3.5
25.1
34.6
0.02
82.8
4.60
98
n.d.
8.42
1.46
0.69

265
(230–330)
3.33
−0.95
8.5
34.4
123
457
24.9
0.530
695
576
0.93
3.5
14.2
36.3
6.8
6001
0.99
6494
46.2
18
1099
36.2
14.9
23.8

101
(75–117)
5.61
0.95
41.3
10.7
100
424
13.5
0.158
524
533
n.d.
23.0
3.47
8.4
20.7
572
0.23
244
44.7
16
1358
16.8
20.9
67.8

251
(153–343)
3.60
−0.63
13.3
16.0
102
370
25.6
0.391
984
461
0.77
7.6
12.6
31.1
8.3
4313
0.89
2056
40.2
18
967
16.6
15.8
33.2

Deep
seawater

3

7.73
2.48
50.8
9.6
84.8
457
9.6
0.033
375
542
0.86
27.4
0.17
11.0
33.8
0.04
0.0018
8.9
1.66
100**
n.d.
2.3**
0.0003**
0.0004**

Average values for each sample type at each sampling site, i.e., boreholes, low-temperature (<150˚C) natural vents and high temperature (>150˚C) natural vents are
shown. These data were obtained from the samples collected in 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2010. *The chemical data for the samples of the Snail site with iron and
sulﬁde concentrations, which are shown in italic, were divided into H2S-type (high H2S/Fe) and Fe-type (high Fe/H2S). For thermodynamic calculation, the average
values in parentheses were used. **Concentrations of O2, CO2, CH4, and H2 in deep seawater were obtained previously (McCollom, 2007).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 12

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

FIGURE A1 | (A) Topographic map of the Southern Mariana Trough with (B) an enlarged view of the hydrothermal areas.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 13

Kato et al.

Iron-based microbial ecosystems on and below the seaﬂoor

FIGURE A2 | Thermodynamic model calculation of bioavailable energy.
Simple mixing between hydrothermal ﬂuid and seawater without any redox
and mineral precipitation reactions are assumed in the calculation. The
results of (A) Pika and (B) Archaean sites are shown.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 89 | 14

