ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 05 June 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00192

Heteroduplex formation, mismatch resolution, and genetic
sectoring during homologous recombination in the
hyperthermophilic archaeon Sulfolobus acidocaldarius

Dominic Mao and Dennis W. Grogan*

Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA

Edited by:
Frank T. Robb, University of California
at Riverside, USA
Reviewed by:
Barbara Methé, The J. Craig Venter
Institute, USA
Imke Schroeder, University of
California Los Angeles, USA
Marla Tufﬁn, University of the
Western Cape, South Africa
*Correspondence:
Dennis W. Grogan, Department of
Biological Sciences, University of
Cincinnati, 614 Rieveschl Hall,
ML0006, Clifton Court, Cincinnati, OH
45221-0006, USA.
e-mail: grogandw@ucmail.uc.edu

Hyperthermophilic archaea exhibit certain molecular-genetic features not seen in bacteria
or eukaryotes, and their systems of homologous recombination (HR) remain largely unex-
plored in vivo. We transformed a Sulfolobus acidocaldarius pyrE mutant with short DNAs
that contained multiple non-selected genetic markers within the pyrE gene. From 20 to
40% of the resulting colonies were found to contain two Pyr+ clones with distinct sets of
the non-selected markers. The dual-genotype colonies could not be attributed to multiple
DNAs entering the cells, or to conjugation between transformed and non-transformed cells.
These colonies thus appear to represent genetic sectoring in which regions of heterodu-
plex DNA formed and then segregated after partial resolution of inter-strand differences.
Surprisingly, sectoring was also frequent in cells transformed with single-stranded DNAs.
Oligonucleotides produced more sectored transformants when electroporated as single
strands than as a duplex, although all forms of donor DNA (positive-strand, negative-strand,
and duplex) produced a diversity of genotypes, despite the limited number of markers.The
marker patterns in the recombinants indicate that S. acidocaldarius resolves individual mis-
matches through un-coordinated short-patch excision followed by re-ﬁlling of the resulting
gap. The conversion events that occur during transformation by single-stranded DNA do
not show the strand bias necessary for a system that corrects replication errors effectively;
similar events also occur in pre-formed heteroduplex electroporated into the cells. Although
numerous mechanistic details remain obscure, the results demonstrate that the HR sys-
tem of S. acidocaldarius can generate remarkable genetic diversity from short intervals of
moderately diverged DNAs.

Keywords: linear DNA, genetic transformation, mismatch repair, gene conversion

INTRODUCTION
All cellular organisms can transfer strands between two DNA mol-
ecules of nearly identical sequences in an active process termed
homologous (or generalized) recombination. In addition to pro-
moting genome diversiﬁcation, homologous recombination (HR)
plays various roles that support genome replication and partition-
ing, and these functions seem to account for its ubiquity (Michel
et al., 2001; Burgess, 2004; Kreuzer, 2005). Multiple pathways of
HR have been identiﬁed in model organisms, and HR proteins
have diverged across major phylogenetic groups. Thus, bacteria
and eukaryotic cells use distinct sub-families of ssDNA-binding
proteins (the RecA and Rad51 families, respectively) to promote
strand exchange, and differ further with respect to the helicases,
nucleases, and accessory proteins that interact to catalyze and reg-
ulate the steps before and after this exchange (Kowalczykowski
et al., 1994; Aylon and Kupiec, 2004; Krogh and Symington, 2004).
Consistent with their extremely early divergence from the bacte-
rial and eukaryotic lineages, archaea encode a third, structurally
distinct sub-family of strand-exchange proteins called the RadA
family (Sandler et al., 1999). Although archaea resemble bacte-
ria with respect to certain features of cell and genome structure,

archaeal RadA proteins most closely resemble the Rad51 and Dmc1
proteins of eukaryotes (Sandler et al., 1999).

Homologous recombination affects the structure and diver-
siﬁcation of all microbial genomes, yet its functional properties
in archaea have been investigated for only a few species, primar-
ily extreme halophiles and methanogens. For hyperthermophilic
archaea, HR has become increasingly important as the means of
targeted gene mutation and other forms of genetic engineering,
but it has not been analyzed extensively as a genetic process. Most
quantitative analyses of HR in hyperthermophilic archaea have
been done in Sulfolobus acidocaldarius, due in part to the avail-
ability of natural genetic exchange and various mutants that allow
it to be quantiﬁed. In Sulfolobus spp., 5-ﬂuoro-orotic acid selects
spontaneous pyrE mutants that are uracil auxotrophs, and these
mutants provide a convenient assay of recombination events that
replace the defective sequence in the recipient genome with the
homologous functional sequence.

Detailed analyses of recombinants generated by conjugation
and transformation suggest that HR in S. acidocaldarius trans-
fers multiple, short intervals of input DNA unidirectionally to the
recipient genome (Hansen et al., 2005; Grogan and Rockwood,

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 192 | 1

Mao and Grogan

Homologous recombination in Sulfolobus

2010). This short-patch, gene-conversion mode of HR mimics
bacterial and eukaryotic HR in the absence of functional DNA
mismatch repair proteins (Coic et al., 2000; Barnes and McCulloch,
2007; Lin et al., 2009), and thus remains consistent with the nat-
ural lack of MutSL homologs in hyperthermophilic archaea (White
and Grogan, 2008). A deﬁning feature of this form of HR is that
it occurs within a region of heteroduplex formed between com-
plementary strands of the two parental DNAs (Aylon and Kupiec,
2004). However, the genetic analyses performed to date in S. aci-
docaldarius do not distinguish among three possible alternatives
for a heteroduplex formed between a strand of donor DNA and
the opposite strand of the recipient chromosome (Figure 1).

For example, if the structure shown in Figure 1 were stabilized
by ligation, subsequent DNA replication and cell division would
yield one recombinant cell acquiring donor markers and an unal-
tered recipient cell which, under selective conditions, would not be
recovered (Figure 1A). Alternatively, after ligation, a large region of
the recipient-strand opposite the donor markers may be removed
and the resulting gap re-ﬁlled by DNA polymerase, converting all
the recipient-strand markers to the donor allele (Figure 1B). In
bacteria and eukaryotes, this long-patch excision is a characteris-
tic of the DNA mismatch repair system and promotes the co-repair
of markers in heteroduplex DNA (Coic et al., 2000). Replication
of the resulting duplex would generate two recombinant daugh-
ter cells with the same set of donor markers (Figure 1B). The
third alternative is intermediate between these two extremes and
would generate a unique, detectable result. In this case, the selected
marker, and possibly other markers, are copied to the opposite
strand by conversion, as in Figure 1B, but one or more addi-
tional markers escape this transfer (Figure 1C). Replication of this
modiﬁed heteroduplex would segregate two different genotypes,

FIGURE 1 | Routes of genetic transformation by non-reciprocal events.
All schemes begin with a region of heteroduplex that has formed between
a donor (input) DNA and the recipient genome. The donor DNA bears a
selectable marker (bar in center) and multiple non-selected markers (dark
semi-circles). (A) Incorporation of the donor strand by trimming, gap-ﬁlling,
and ligation leads to one transformed cell and a non-transformed daughter
cell which is lost. (B) Similar incorporation of the donor strand is followed by
a large gap on the opposite strand and re-ﬁlling, thereby copying all donor
markers to the opposite strand (complete conversion) yielding two identical
daughter cells. (C) A smaller gap opposite the donor strand results in partial
conversion and two distinct daughter cells (genetic sectoring).

and because both retain the selected marker, the transformant
colony retains both genotypes. Such genetically sectored colonies
thus imply (i) that a heteroduplex formed during HR and led to
transfer of the selected marker by conversion, and (ii) that the
conversion did not include one or more additional markers.

In the present study, we used transformation by multiply
marked DNA to identify and analyze genetically sectored trans-
formants of S. acidocaldarius. The observed patterns of marker
transfer in these transformants indicate sporadic, localized reso-
lution of individual mismatches in a heteroduplex, thereby gen-
erating extremely diverse recombinants from short intervals of
moderately diverged DNAs.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
STRAINS AND GROWTH CONDITIONS
The Sulfolobus strain used for most experiments was S. acido-
caldarius strain MR31, which was derived from his-2 (histidine-
requiring) mutant DG55 and has an internal deletion of the pyrE
gene removing nt 154–171 (Reilly and Grogan, 2001). The pyrE
gene encodes orotate phosphoribosyltransferase, which is essential
for de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis; a loss-of-function mutation
in pyrE thus generates uracil auxotrophs which are also resistant
to 5-F orotic acid (Grogan and Gunsalus, 1993; Grogan et al.,
2001). For experiments testing the effects of blocking conjugation,
mutant SA1 was used; this strain is isogenic to MR31, and con-
tains, in addition to the 18-bp internal pyrE deletion, a deletion of
most of the upsE gene encoding an ATP-dependent pilus-assembly
protein (Ajon et al., 2011). Cells were cultured at 76–78˚C; liquid
growth and plating conditions were those described previously
(Grogan and Rockwood, 2010).

DONOR DNAs
The multicopy plasmid pSaPyrEv3 carries the wild-type pyrE
sequence (Saci_1597; Chen et al., 2005) modiﬁed with synony-
mous base-pair substitutions (BPS) regularly spaced along the
entire length of the coding sequence (Grogan and Rockwood,
2010). The plasmid does not have a Sulfolobus replication origin
and thus cannot replicate in Sulfolobus. Unless otherwise noted,
full-length marked pyrE DNA for transformation was ampliﬁed
from the pyrEv3 cassette by PCR using primers sspyrEfwd and
sspyrErev (Table 1). The thermocycler program comprised of an
initial denaturation at 95˚C for 3 min followed by 39 cycles of
denaturation at 95˚C for 30 s, annealing at 50˚C, and extension at
72˚C. This was followed by a ﬁnal extension at 72˚C for 3 min.
After PCR and digestions (if any, see below), the amplicons were
puriﬁed using SureClean (Bioline).

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

The PCR primers used to amplify the pyrEv3 cassette also pro-
vided for the speciﬁc digestion of one strand to generate the single-
stranded form. The forward primer (sspyrEfwd) was designed to
-tail with KpnI site (highlighted in red in Table 1)
include a 5
and a 3
-end that anneals to the start of the pyrE (start codon
underlined in Table 1). The reverse primer (sspyrErev) has a cor-
-tail with HinP1I site (highlighted in blue in Table 1)
responding 5
and a 3
-end that anneals to end of the pyrE coding sequence
(stop codon underlined). Digesting the resulting amplicon with
KpnI and HinP1I creates 3
-overhangs respectively. The
amplicon was then treated with ExoIII, which speciﬁcally degrades

- and 5

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 192 | 2

Mao and Grogan

Homologous recombination in Sulfolobus

Table 1 | Oligonucleotides used in this study.

Designation

PCR PRIMERS
sspyrE fwd
sspyrE rev

JRset1 fwd
JRset1 rev
TRANSFORMING
PE AseI+
PE AseI−

LCR PROBES
LCRSaPE90dntop
LCRSaPE90dnbot
LCRSaPE90Atop
LCRSaPE90Tbot
LCRSaPE90Ttop
LCRSaPE90Abot
LCRSaPE117dntop
LCRSaPE117dnbot
LCRSaPE117Ttop
LCRSaPE117Abot
LCRSaPE117Atop
LCRSaPE117Tbot
LCRSaPE192dntop
LCRSaPE192dnbot
LCRSaPE192Gtop
LCRSaPE192Cbot
LCRSaPE192Ttop
LCRSaPE192Abot

Sequence (5(cid:2)–3(cid:2))

TGATGCGGTACCATGGATTTCGTGAAAGCTTTAC
ATACGAAGCGCTATTATTCTAGCTTTTTCCAATG
TTTTTC
ACGCCCTTAAATAAGGTTAG
GGGACATTGAAAGAACTAGA

AACTCCCAATATCATATCAAAATTAATACCTTTTAC
TATGTCGACTGCAGAACTAACGAC
AACTCCCAATATCATATCAAAATTTATACCTTTTAC
TATGTCGACTGCAGAACTAACGAC

GATTTAAGGAAACTCCC
AGGTAATAGGGGCTAAC
GTTAGCCCCTATTACCTA
GGGAGTTTCCTTAAATCT
GTTAGCCCCTATTACCTT
GGGAGTTTCCTTAAATCA
GACATATTTTCATTCGTCG
GGATGGTTGGGGAG
CTCCCCAACCATCCT
CGACGAATGAAAATATGTCA
CTCCCCAACCATCCA
CGACGAATGAAAATATGTCT
GTTACTGGGGGCG
ACTCCCAATATCATATCA
GATATGATATTGGGAGTG
GCCCCCAGTAACC
GATATGATATTGGGAGTT
GCCCCCAGTAACA

The bases in bold are the query bases for LCR probes.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

-overhang strand, because the strand with 3

-overhang is
the 5
not a substrate for the exonuclease (Henikoff, 1984). Any resid-
ual double-stranded amplicons were eliminated by digestion with
SalI, which cuts 5 nt away from the 5
-end of the selectable marker
on the sense strand and 1 nt away from the 3
-end of the selectable
marker on the anti-sense strand. The double-stranded amplicon
cut with SalI did not yield transformants, conﬁrming that this
treatment was effective in eliminating ds DNA.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Oligonucleotides were synthesized and de-salted by Integrated
DNA technologies (IDT), IA, USA and used without further puriﬁ-
cation, as described for our previous studies (Grogan and Sten-
gel, 2008; Grogan and Rockwood, 2010). Synthetic donor DNAs
“markedSaPE43-227top” and “markedSaPE43-227bot” (Table 2)
were designed with regularly spaced non-selected markers as for
the pyrEv3 cassette (Grogan and Rockwood, 2010), except that
only a 185-bp interval (pyrE nt 43 to 227) was represented. These
two ssDNAs were synthesized as high-quality “Ultramers”, and
mass spectra provided by the manufacturer indicate that full-
length product represented the bulk of both preparations. As in
previous studies, no extraneous mutations (i.e., not designed in
the oligonucleotides) were detected in any recombinant.

TRANSFORMATION
S. acidocaldarius was electroporated in a 1-mm cuvette with
a single pulse of 1.25 kV at 2 μF and 1 kΩ. Pre- and post-
electroporation treatments were those described previously (Gro-
gan and Stengel, 2008). The amount of pyrEv3 DNA was 60–
100 ng, and the amount of 185-nt oligo was 10 and 20 pmol.
Electroporations were considered saturating with respect to input
DNA, as indicated by a slight decrease in transformation efﬁciency
at 20 pmol compared to 10 pmol.

+

−4, 10

−5, and 10

ANALYSIS OF TRANSFORMANTS
Up to 24 transformant colonies were picked from independent
electroporations of the DNA preparation, drawn mostly from
10-pmol transformations. (A few colonies from 20-pmol DNA
transformations were included to determine whether frequency
of sectoring varied with amount of DNA, and no such effect was
seen.) In initial studies, isolated S. acidocaldarius Pyr
transfor-
mant colonies were suspended in sterile buffer and serially diluted.
−6) were plated on selective plates
Dilutions (10
and incubated for 5 days. Eight isolated colonies of sibling cells
from each transformant colony were picked and grown in selective
liquid medium for about 2 days. Genomic DNA was extracted and
a 995-bp fragment containing the pyrE loci was ampliﬁed using
primers JRset1fwd and JRset1rev (Table 1). Most of the BPSs intro-
duced into the donor DNAs either create or destroy restriction
enzyme sites relative to the wild-type sequence, enabling scoring
by restriction enzyme digestions and fragment analysis on agarose
gels (Grogan and Rockwood, 2010). Restriction-digestion screen-
ing using four to ﬁve markers equally spaced within the pyrE gene
were carried out to identify sibling strains that differed in diges-
tion patterns. Potential cases of sectoring identiﬁed by restriction
screening were then scored for all polymorphic sites by Sanger
sequencing of the PCR amplicons.

In a later streamlined procedure, the original (non-puriﬁed)
transformant colonies were picked and grown in 3 ml selective
medium. Genomic DNA was extracted from 2 ml of culture
and pyrE was ampliﬁed as described above, while the remaining
cells were stored at room temperature until needed for plat-
ing (see below). A restriction-digestion screen was carried out
on the amplicons to identify samples that showed only partial
cleavage, indicating both endonuclease-sensitive and -resistant
amplicons in the sample. Apparently dual-genotype cultures were
then serially diluted and plated to obtain isolated colonies as
described above. The markers in these “sibling colonies” were
then scored as described above to conﬁrm distinct clones, and
representatives of these sibling clones were then scored at all
remaining sites by Sanger sequencing. The two approaches of
identifying sectored colonies (i) isolating and analyzing sibling
colonies initially from each transformant, vs. (ii) screening non-
puriﬁed transformant colonies followed by conﬁrmation of puri-
ﬁed sibling colonies, yielded comparable efﬁciencies in detect-
ing sectored colonies from cells transformed with the pyrEv3
cassette. Method (ii) was therefore employed for most of the
study, owing to its greater efﬁciency, to simplify and increase
our capacity to screen more samples; only potentially sectored
colonies were subjected to conﬁrmatory tests in puriﬁed sibling
colonies.

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 192 | 3

Mao and Grogan

Homologous recombination in Sulfolobus

Table 2 | Markers in 185-nt transforming DNAs.

WT pyrE nt position

Recipient
(top strand)

MarkedSaPE43-227top

MarkedSaPE43-227bot

63
90
117
144
163, 165, 168
192
207

A
A
T
T
G, T, T
T
T

C
G
A
C
T, C, A
G
A

C
A
C
C
A, C, T
G
G

Restriction
scoringa (top)

Restriction
scoringa (bottom)

Bsu36I
BstNI
LCR
SsiI
NsiI (selectable)
LCR
RsaI

HpyCH4IV
LCR
BspEI
PstI
BspDI (selectable)
HinfI
BsaHI

aThe indicated restriction site is created by the corresponding top or bottom-strand marker. LCR indicates markers scored by ligase chain reaction.

SCORING NON-SELECTED MARKERS
Most of the BPSs introduced into the native pyrE sequence in the
various donor DNAs either create or destroy restriction sites, and
were scored in screening procedures by restriction enzyme diges-
tions of PCR amplicons and fragment analysis on agarose gels,
as described above. For markers derived from pSaPyrEv3, ﬁnal
scoring was by Sanger sequencing of the amplicons. For oligonu-
cleotide transformants, most markers were scored by restriction.
The endonuclease TsoI proved to be unreliable in scoring the
marker incorporated at pyrE nt 192, however, so ligase chain
reaction (LCR; Wiedmann et al., 1994) was used to score this
marker and two other donor alleles that did not alter restric-
tion sites (Table 1). The LCR mixture consisted of approximately
10 ng pyrE DNA, 2 μM of the four probes (Table 1), 1× SYBR
Green, 1× 9˚N™ligase buffer and 5U of 9˚N™(Thermococcus)
DNA ligase (New England Biolabs), in a total volume of 20 μl.
After an initial denaturation at 95˚C for 3 min, the following
two-step cycle was used: denaturation at 95˚C for 30 s and anneal-
ing and ligation at 59.3˚C, for 39 cycles. This was followed by
a ﬁnal annealing and ligation at 59.3˚C for 3 min. A melting
curve of the reaction mixture was obtained from 60 to 95˚C by
plotting decrease in ﬂuorescence per increment of 0.5˚C, and lig-
ation product was identiﬁed as a peak at intermediate T m in the
ﬁrst-derivative curve.

RESULTS
GENETIC EVIDENCE OF HETERODUPLEX SEGREGATION
To investigate whether heteroduplex DNA formed by HR can
be detected in Sulfolobus spp., we electroporated strain MR31
with a pyrE DNA marked by a set of phenotypically silent muta-
+
tions (Grogan and Rockwood, 2010). Each of the resulting Pyr
transformant colonies was then re-suspended in liquid medium,
diluted, and re-plated on selective medium to obtain multiple iso-
lated colonies. Four to eight such sub-clones were then analyzed
with respect to non-selected (silent) pyrE markers, and appar-
ent cases of two genotypes, indicated by differences found at
one or more sites, were conﬁrmed by analysis of all the mark-
ers in each of the two distinct daughter lineages (see Materials and
Methods). About one-fourth (11/42) of the transformant colonies
examined revealed different alleles (base pairs) at one or more
marked sites. Similar to previous observations on clonally puri-
ﬁed transformants (Grogan and Rockwood, 2010), replacement
tracts ranged in length from the entire donor segment down to

four markers (Figure 2). Discontinuity was also observed, as typ-
iﬁed by two replacement tracts separated by a block of recipient
markers (Figure 2).

The recombinants deﬁned several categories of transfer pat-
terns. For example, 9 out of 12 dual-genotype colonies analyzed
were pairs in which each sibling incorporated one tract of donor
markers, and the resulting tracts shared one endpoint (Figure 2).
In four of the colonies, one of the siblings had two separate tracts
of donor markers, and in three of these, the second donor tract
consisted of a single marker (dsPE1, 4, 6). Other conﬁgurations
included a single tract in each sibling that differed at both ends
(dsPE12).

+

To conﬁrm that the two-genotype colonies derived from het-
eroduplex DNA, we ﬁrst considered whether they could result from
two independent recombination events within the same cell. In
principle, two DNAs could enter the same recipient cell and recom-
bine separately with two completed copies of the chromosome, for
example (Bernander and Poplawski, 1997), or with different arms
of a replicating chromosome. In one set of experiments, two dis-
tinctly marked 60-nt DNAs which represent the same strand and
interval of the pyrE gene (PE AseI+ and PE AseI−; Table 1), were
combined to yield an equimolar mixture which was electropo-
rated into recipient cells. A total of 55 Pyr
transformants were
analyzed as unpuriﬁed colonies. The selected marker containing
an AseI site was recovered in 25 transformants and the alternative
allele, without the AseI site, was found in 30. No transformant
colony was observed to retain both of these alleles, indicating
that most transformants under our conditions reﬂect incorpo-
ration of a single DNA molecule. This implied either that only one
DNA enters most cells under these conditions, or that most cells
have only one site competent for incorporating exogenous DNA
at any given time. In addition, we noted that most of the dual-
genotype transformant colonies exhibited a common donor-tract
endpoint in pyrE (Figure 2), despite the eight possible left-hand
endpoints and 21 possible right-hand endpoints available in this
assay. The over-representation of shared endpoints thus argued
that the two genotypes originated from a common recombination
intermediate.

We also considered whether two-genotype colonies could have
resulted from diversiﬁcation of an initial recombinant cell through
a second round of recombination by conjugation with a non-
transformed cell on the selective plate. The efﬁciency of the
DNA transfer step in S. acidocaldarius has not been measured

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 192 | 4

Mao and Grogan

Homologous recombination in Sulfolobus

FIGURE 3 | Effects of blocking conjugation or transforming with
single-stranded DNA. The genotypes of dual-genotype transformants are
shown as for Figure 2. (A) Strain SA1 (conjugation-deﬁcient) transformed
with the double-stranded pyrEv3 cassette. (B) Strain MR31 transformed
with single-stranded pyrEv3 DNA (see Materials and Methods).

functional in the ΔupsE strain, and, therefore, that conjugation is
not necessary to produce this class of transformants.

In addition, the hypothesis of conjugation after recombination
predicts that, on average, the genotype with the fewer donor mark-
ers should be the one generated by conjugation. This reﬂects the
fact that the second recombination event (the one proposed to be
initiated by conjugation) would sometimes occur after an addi-
tional round of genome replication and thus affect one-fourth or
fewer of the clones representing the original HR event. We there-
fore examined the relative abundance of the genotypes in sectored
colonies. Out of six colonies identiﬁed using method (i) (see Mate-
rials and Methods), ﬁve showed greater abundance of genotypes
with fewer donor markers and one colony had equal numbers of
both, contrary to the prediction of diversiﬁcation through conju-
gation. Thus, in all the various control experiments, properties of
the dual-genotype colonies remained consistent with segregation
of two distinct products of a single HR event.

GENETIC SECTORING FROM ssDNA
In the absence of mutants lacking speciﬁc, or even putative, HR
functions, we probed mechanistic features of the HR process by
altering the donor DNA. We ﬁrst tested the ability of ssDNA to
generate genetic sectoring. Multiply marked pyrE amplicons were
digested with exonuclease to remove the top strand; any residual
duplex DNA in the preparation was then inactivated by restric-
tion endonuclease before the DNA was electroporated into cells
(see Materials and Methods). At least 7% of the resulting trans-
formants were sectored (3/43), and the differences deﬁned by the
sibling pairs appeared to be more extensive than those produced
by dsDNA (Figure 3B, compare to Figure 2).

FIGURE 2 | Dual-genotype transformants. Diagrams show the marker
(donor vs. recipient allele) at each of 28 sites distinguishing the input
(donor) pyrE sequence from the chromosomal gene (marker positions are
not drawn to scale). For details on the marked sites, see Grogan and
Rockwood (2010). The donor allele is represented by a ﬁlled dot, the
recipient allele is an open circle, and the selected marker is represented by
a ﬁlled square. Each pair of genotypes was recovered from a colony of cells
on selective medium that were transformed to the Pyr+ phenotype by
double-stranded pyrEv3 DNA (see Materials and Methods).

experimentally and may not be especially high, since recombinants
−4 (Grogan, 1996). However,
rarely form at frequencies above 10
in contrast to the conjugation system of S. solfataricus, the S. aci-
docaldarius system functions constitutively (Ajon et al., 2011) and
thus cannot be discounted on the basis that the recipient cells were
not treated with DNA-damaging agents under our conditions. We
therefore tested the dependence of genetic sectoring on conjuga-
tion, by performing the same experiments with the conjugation-
−
defective Pil
strain SA1 (Ajon et al., 2011). Dual-genotype
colonies represented three of 19 colonies examined, and their pat-
+
terns of markers resembled those found in the isogenic Pil
recip-
ient MR31, i.e., uninterrupted tracts of donor markers differing at
one end but not the other (Figure 3A). This result demonstrated
that the process leading to the dual-genotype colonies was fully

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 192 | 5

Mao and Grogan

Homologous recombination in Sulfolobus

Based on this result from enzymatically produced ssDNA, we
designed a new assay that used long synthetic oligonucleotides
as multiply marked but chemically deﬁned donor. In this scheme,
two oligonucleotides represent the top and bottom strands, respec-
tively, of the same 185-bp interval of the functional S. acidocaldar-
ius pyrE gene and incorporated silent BPSs within the selected
region and at regular intervals on both sides (Table 2). When elec-
troporated separately into MR31 cells, the two oligonucleotides
+
showed no obvious strand bias (averages of 2.6 vs. 1.8 Pyr
trans-
formants per pmol for top and bottom strand, respectively). In
addition, both top- (T-) and bottom- (B-) strand transformants
included sectored colonies, indicating that these short ssDNAs

form extensive heteroduplex structures with the S. acidocaldar-
ius chromosome which can segregate two distinct genotypes
(Figure 4). The six non-selected, phenotypically silent, markers in
each oligonucleotide (Table 2), deﬁne 26 = 64 possible genotypes
for the transformants in each case. We found 13 of these genotypes
among 48 T-strand transformants, and 15 among 48 B-strand
transformants. Figure 5 compares the two or three most common
of the genotypes recovered under these and other conditions.

In the pyrE gene of the transformants, the frequency of the
donor allele was 100% at the site of selected marker, and decreased
with increasing distance in both directions (Figure 6A). The result-
ing gradients differed somewhat between T-strand and B-strand

FIGURE 4 | Transformation by differentially marked oligonucleotides. Two
synthetic DNAs (Table 2), representing the top strand (T) and bottom strand
(B) of base pairs 43–227 of pyrE, were electroporated individually (A,B) or as
a duplex (C,D). Markers are given in Table 2; the transformants were selected

and analyzed as for Figure 2. (C) Shows pairs of genotypes from sectored
colonies, whereas (D) shows the single genotypes of non-sectored colonies
recovered in the same experiment. Symbols: top-strand donor allele, black;
bottom-strand donor allele, gray; recipient allele, white.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 192 | 6

Mao and Grogan

Homologous recombination in Sulfolobus

FIGURE 5 | Common genotypes formed by differentially marked
oligonucleotides. The two or three most frequent genotypes (data of
Figure 4) are indicated with their frequency among all recombinants. It
should be noted that the number of potential genotypes is much higher for
the duplex than for the individual strands of donor DNA, resulting in lower
absolute frequencies of the most frequent genotypes. Symbols follow the
scheme of Figure 4.

(cid:2)

transformants however, and the pattern suggested preferential loss
portion of both oligonucleotides (Figure 6A). Each
of the 3
transformant contained a continuous block of donor alleles that
includes, at a minimum, the selected marker, and often additional,
silent markers from the donor; we term this feature the selected
donor tract (Grogan and Rockwood, 2010). In most cases, the
selected tracts of the two siblings shared one end in common;
they differed at both ends in only 8% (1/12) of sectored T-strand
colonies, and 16% (3/19) of sectored B-strand colonies.

PROCESSING OF PRE-FORMED HETERODUPLEX
Both the frequent discontinuity of the recombination tracts and
the genetic sectoring implied a form of HR that often separates
markers that are very close together, i.e., within 20–30 nt of each
other. This pattern would seem difﬁcult to achieve by recipro-
cal strand exchanges but relatively straightforward by nucleolytic
removal of short intervals around mismatches, in a manner resem-
bling excision of the damaged strand during nucleotide excision
repair (NER). In this latter scheme, the resulting small gaps would
be re-ﬁlled by DNA synthesis, thereby copying any allele in the gap
to the opposite strand.

To investigate removal of mismatches from a deﬁned heterodu-
plex, we took advantage of the fact that the two ssDNAs used in
the previous study were differentially marked, so that the marker
contributed by the top strand could be distinguished from its
bottom-strand counterpart at all positions, including the selected
region. Equimolar amounts of the two 185-nt strands were there-
fore annealed in vitro to produce the corresponding duplex with
seven regularly spaced mismatches. MR31 cells were electropo-
rated with the resulting duplex, and the pyr
transformants were

+

FIGURE 6 | Frequency of strand-speciﬁc donor marker incorporation.
Graphs show the proportion of recombinants retaining the indicated donor
marker at the corresponding position in the synthetic pyrE DNA described
in Table 2. Panels and symbols correspond to Figure 4. (A) Sectored
transformants from ssDNAs; (B) sectored transformants from dsDNA; (C)
non-sectored transformants from dsDNA.

+

analyzed by PCR of the pyrE locus and scoring of the seven mark-
ers. The efﬁciency of transformation by the linear duplex (average
of 1 Pyr
per pmol DNA) was slightly below the efﬁciencies for
each strand separately (see above), while the proportion of sec-
tored transformants exhibiting sectoring was similar [26% (19 of
72 screened) vs. 29 and 31% for T and B strands, respectively].

The sectored transformants were unexpectedly complex. Four
of the 19 had acquired markers from only one donor, whereas
another four differed with respect to the selected marker, i.e., one
sibling had the T-strand allele the other had the B-strand allele (see
Figure 4, colonies TB2, TB10, TB34, TB49). These latter recombi-
nants preserve the original duplex conﬁguration at the selected site,
but their frequency was not high: 36% (4/11) among all sectored
colonies retaining markers from both donor strands, compared to
22% predicted by random association. This suggests that most pre-
formed heteroduplex DNAs experienced considerable processing

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 192 | 7

Mao and Grogan

Homologous recombination in Sulfolobus

during HR that discarded and resynthesized much of the original
duplex.

stability in Sulfolobus
archaea.

species and other hyperthermophilic

The sibling pairs that retained both T- and B-strand markers
showed a bias in positioning, with B-strand tracts generally extend-
ing farther in the left-hand portion, and T-strand tracts extending
farther in the right-hand portion. Examining the frequency of
T- vs. B-strand markers across all the sectored recombinants con-
ﬁrmed a similar pattern, i.e., lower frequencies of T-strand markers
at the left end of the 185-bp interval and lower frequencies of B-
strand markers at the right end (Figures 6B,C). This suggested
preferential loss of 5
ends, which is the reverse of the donor vs.
recipient bias seen when the same oligonucleotides were electropo-
rated individually (Figure 6A). Thus, although the HR system of
transfers markers from both single-stranded and double-stranded
DNAs to the S. acidocaldarius genome, processing of the two forms
differs in basic respects. We also observed a number of individual
clones that incorporated both T- and B-strand donor markers; in
each of these cases the transition from one donor source to the
other was always immediate, i.e., never interrupted by a recipient
marker (Figures 4C,D).

(cid:2)

Finally, we investigated whether these patterns of marker trans-
fer from the dually marked duplex to the S. acidocaldarius chro-
mosome were a general feature of HR under these conditions,
or alternatively, associated speciﬁcally with genetic sectoring. To
+
test this, we analyzed non-sectored Pyr
transformants from
the experiments described above with respect to the T- and B-
strand markers. The recombinants appeared qualitatively similar
to those recovered from sectored colonies (Figures 4C,D), which
was also supported by quantitative comparisons. For example, sec-
tored and non-sectored transformants incorporated statistically
indistinguishable numbers of top- and bottom-strand markers
(P = 0.778 for sectored and 0.299 for non-sectored, by two-tailed
T -test). They also had similar proportions of genotypes incorpo-
rating both donor markers (55.3 vs. 54.6%), and similar positions
where the transition between the two occurred (pyrE co-ordinate
149 vs. 146). The T-strand allele provided the selected marker in
68.4% of sectored transformants and 68.2% of non-sectored ones,
and the two sets of recombinants showed similar proﬁles of marker
incorporation as a function of position within the marked inter-
val (Figures 6B,C). Thus, we found no quantitative evidence that
genetic sectoring involves processes distinct from those that gen-
erate a single recombinant genotype in cells transformed under
these conditions.

DISCUSSION
In the present study, genetic assays applied to a thermoaci-
dophilic crenarchaeote demonstrate for the ﬁrst time that an
archaeon can assimilate three forms of linear DNA (positive-
strand, negative-strand, and duplex) into pairs of related recom-
binant genotypes that represent alternative products of recom-
bination events. The speciﬁc features of these sibling pairs, and
of the other, non-sectored, recombinants, further indicate that
sporadic strand-removal events, many of them highly localized,
resolve mismatches in heteroduplex DNA. The apparently sto-
chastic, combinatorial nature of these events distinguish HR in
S. acidocaldarius from the dominant modes of HR in eukary-
otes and bacteria, and has signiﬁcant implications for genome

(cid:2)

INCORPORATION OF LINEAR dsDNA INTO THE S. ACIDOCALDARIUS
CHROMOSOME
Transformation by linear DNA involves recombination in an
“ends-out” orientation, and at least two pathways have been pro-
posed for “ends-out” HR in eukaryotes and bacteria, which differ
with respect to the predicted segregation of markers ﬂanking the
selected marker or gene. The ﬁrst pathway, sometimes termed
“double-crossover,” involves strand exchange, and represents the
initial steps of classical DSB/gap repair oriented outward instead
of inward: both 5
ends of the linear duplex are resected to expose
(cid:2)
3
tails, which ﬁnd their complements in the intact recipient DNA
(Figure 7A), and invade the duplex at those sites to generate
two displacement (D-) loops (Langston and Symington, 2004).
The D-loop intermediate has hDNA ﬂanking the selected marker;
sequence divergence of these end regions creates a distinctive con-
ﬁguration of mismatches, deﬁned by the original 3
tails. This
conﬁguration puts input (donor) DNA markers to the right-hand
side in one strand and to the left in the other (Figure 7A). If any
of these mismatches segregate without being repaired, one daugh-
ter cell inherits the donor markers only on the right side of the
selected central segment, while the other daughter cell inherits
donor markers only on the left side; this arrangement is called
the “trans” conﬁguration. The alternative, “strand-assimilation,”
pathway (Figure 7B) has been proposed for E. coli expressing the
λ red genes (Maresca et al., 2010) and for yeast (Leung et al., 1997),
and involves one of the two input strands forming uninterrupted
hDNA across the entire region (i.e., the selected region and both
ﬂanks), which keeps the ﬂanking markers in a “cis” conﬁguration
(i.e., on both sides of the selected gene or marker; Figure 7B).

(cid:2)

+
By genotyping sectored Pyr

transformant colonies, we could
determine the conﬁguration of ﬂanking markers in hDNA that had
segregated to yield two distinct selectable Sulfolobus recombinants.
The most common conﬁguration lacked the basic, bilateral distri-
bution predicted for ends-out (gene-replacement) HR by both the
double-crossover and strand-assimilation models, in that markers
segregated on only one side of the central selected region.

Another test of conformity to existing models of “ends-out” HR
was provided by the distinct genetic markers in the top and bottom
strands of the 185-bp duplex. This short dsDNA documented the
original source of the donor markers in all recombinants, includ-
ing those that did not exhibit sectoring. Both published models
of “ends-out” HR predict recombinants that, when considered
individually, retain donor markers from either the top or bottom
strands of the input duplex, not both (Figures 7A,B). As a test of
symmetry, we calculated the net excess of T over B alleles at each
marked site for each of the 38 recombinants from sectored colonies
and 22 from non-sectored. In both groups (Figure 7C), this mea-
sure of marker bias did not give the clearly bimodal distribution
predicted by early strand separation (Figure 7A) or complete dis-
carding of one strand before annealing (Figure 7B), even if the
choice of strand varied among transformants.

RESOLUTION OF HETERODUPLEX FORMED BY ssDNA
The genetic sectoring we observed in transformation by ssDNA
implies that (i) in the course of HR, the selected marker was

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 192 | 8

Mao and Grogan

Homologous recombination in Sulfolobus

from donor to chromosomal strand of a heteroduplex before it
was replicated, corresponding in Figure 1 to outcome B rather
than outcome A.

Conversely, other features of ssDNA transformants argue that
mismatches of a heteroduplex intermediate can be repaired indi-
vidually, not as part of a large block. Speciﬁcally, isolated recipient
markers (donor-tract interruptions) were generated by both full-
length and 185 nt single-stranded forms of pyrE (Figures 2 and
4), which cannot be explained without invoking resolution of
mismatches. Our data do not address whether the mismatches
triggered the postulated excision events or otherwise inﬂuenced
their position, but they do provide a test for directionality of the
resolution, i.e., whether the donor or the recipient marker was
preferentially copied to the opposite strand. This test is provided
by the relative abundance of isolated donor markers vs. isolated
recipient markers in the transformants, representing resolution of
a single mismatch that preserves the donor allele vs. the recipient
allele. Among the events in T-strand transformants, one retained
the donor allele and three retained the recipient allele. Among B-
strand transformants, ﬁve retained the donor allele and six retained
the recipient allele (the selected marker was excluded from this
analysis). Since these ratios are not statistically different from 1,
they indicate no directional bias with respect to the discontinuous
(donor) strand.

The donor strand in these experiments was an ssDNA 185 nt
or shorter annealed to the chromosome; it can thus be considered
a plausible mimic of a Sulfolobus Okazaki fragment (Beattie and
Bell, 2012), and accordingly, a potential substrate of any hypothet-
ical MutSL-independent post-replication error-correction system
that S. acidocaldarius may have. Such a system operating on this
type of hDNA would be expected to transfer the recipient allele
to the annealed oligonucleotide nearly exclusively. The fact that
we observed frequent mismatch resolution but no strand discrim-
ination thus fails to support the hypothesis that S. acidocaldarius
has a generalized system of post-replicational error correction.
Alternatively, if the mispair resolution we observed does involve
components of such a system, the strand discrimination function
of that system must require a speciﬁc context that was not provided
by our experimental conditions.

We also note that patterns of marker transfer similar to those
we observe in S. acidocaldarius have been reported for MMR-
deﬁcient strains of eukaryotic micro-organisms. Numerous short
recombination tracts, including those transferring a single base-
pair change, were observed following intragenic HR between
diverged sequences in yeast (Coic et al., 2000) and trypanosomes
(Barnes and McCulloch, 2007). The behavior appeared only in
msh2 mutants, however, indicating that it did not involve MutSL
homologs, and in fact was normally masked by their activity. In the
yeast assay, the short-patch events were frequently accompanied by
segregation of hDNA (Coic et al., 2000), whereas no such segrega-
tion was seen in the trypanosomes, for unknown reasons (Barnes
and McCulloch, 2007). The similarities between these recombi-
nation results and our own thus reinforce the hypothesis that the
observed short-patch mode of recombination observed in S. acido-
caldarius involves localized resolution of mispairs in heteroduplex
DNA without the inﬂuence of a post-replicational error-correcting
system.

FIGURE 7 | Alternative models of “ends-out” recombination. Essential
features of two alternatives proposed to explain integration of a linear DNA
sequence into a cellular genome by HR. (A) “Double-crossover” (strand
exchange) model (see Langston and Symington, 2004); (B)
“strand-assimilation” model (see Leung et al., 1997); (C) histogram showing
the distribution of the net excess of T over B markers among sectored and
non-sectored (simple) recombinants from the differentially marked dsDNA.

retained in the donor strand and also copied to the recipient
strand, and (ii) at least one non-selected marker escaped the
copying process (depicted schematically in Figure 1C). In our
assay, all the non-selected markers are BPS; thus, each sectored
transformant generated by ssDNA represents at least one mis-
match that was segregated, presumably by replication, without
being repaired. However, in only seven of 33 sectored ssDNA
transformants was this unrepaired mismatch not accompanied
by conversion of at least one other non-selected marker. It seems
likely, therefore, that many of the non-sectored ssDNA transfor-
mants represent cases in which blocks of markers were copied

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 192 | 9

Mao and Grogan

Homologous recombination in Sulfolobus

(cid:2)

In addition to revealing apparently erratic resolution of mis-
matches in S. acidocaldarius during HR, both the top- and bottom-
strand oligonucleotides exhibited preferential loss of the 3
-end
(i.e., right-side markers for T-strand transformants and left-side
markers for B-strand transformants; Figure 6A). However, when
(cid:2)
the same two strands were introduced as a duplex, the 5
-end
markers of each strand were lost preferentially (Figures 6B,C),
demonstrating that dsDNAs and ssDNAs are processed differently
during HR. Resection of 5
ends of duplex DNA is a critical fea-
ture of HR in eukaryotes and bacteria, and may play an important
role S. acidocaldarius HR, as well. However, the extent of resection
implied by donor markers in the sectored S. acidocaldarius recom-
binants varied erratically at the two ends of the marked interval.
(cid:2)
In none of the 19 sectored colonies analyzed did apparent 5
-end
resection remove the same number of markers from each end,
and in only three cases did it remove at least one marker from
each end.

(cid:2)

are analogous to those proposed to generate discontinuous
recombination tracts from ssDNA, but occur within the con-
text of a T:B donor heteroduplex, rather than a donor:recipient
heteroduplex.

(cid:2)

4. Un-coordinated excision events near the ends of a linear duplex
contribute to net resection of 5
ends. Although the pattern of
(cid:2)
end loss in duplex DNA was biased in favor of 5
ends, very few
(cid:2)
sectored transformants indicate the bilateral 5
-end resection
of classical HR pathways. In most cases, recombination tracts
differed between the two siblings only at one end, and these seg-
regating intervals varied considerably in length. When the two
donor strands were distinguished from each other by markers,
sectored colonies similarly showed little bilateral resection; a
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
few indicated 5
resection at each end, but one was mixed (5
and 3
-end resection, and none had
equal numbers of markers removed from the two ends, despite
the similar spacing of the markers (Figure 4C).

(cid:2)
), one suggested bilateral 3

(cid:2)

IMPLICATIONS FOR HR IN S. ACIDOCALDARIUS
These various functional properties are not typical for HR in
model micro-organisms, and may reﬂect a set of recombination
mechanisms peculiar to S. acidocaldarius, Sulfolobus species, or
hyperthermophilic Archaea as a group. As a basis for designing
future studies that could clarify these questions, we offer four func-
tional interpretations that seem mechanistically consistent with
our results.

1. S. acidocaldarius processes heteroduplex intermediates of HR by
removing single-stranded intervals encompassing individual mis-
pairs or short tracts of mispairs and re-ﬁlling the resulting gaps.
The intervals are neither especially uniform in size, nor directed
with respect to the discontinuous strand of the heteroduplex.
2. S. acidocaldarius incorporates homologous ssDNA into the chro-
mosome to form an extensive heteroduplex. The region of hDNA
can be hundreds of bp long, as indicated by the number of
markers that can be transferred by one ssDNA. The process
(cid:2)
that incorporates the ssDNA involves preferential loss of the 3
end, but remains otherwise undeﬁned.

3. Short-patch conversion can resolve a mispair in any hDNA present
in S. acidocaldarius cells at any stage of the HR process. When
conversion copies the recipient allele onto the donor side of the
heteroduplex, it will often interrupt a string of donor mark-
ers, and when it copies the donor allele to the other strand, it
will often generate a lone donor marker. Such isolated recip-
ient and donor markers represent the most common form of
non-selected marker tract in S. acidocaldarius recombinants
(Grogan and Rockwood, 2010). When the transforming DNA
has two differentially marked strands, we observe that most of
the recombinants inherit donor markers from both strands, and
these disparate donor alleles are never separated by recipient
alleles. Among sectored transformants, only a minority indi-
cates segregation of the two original donor alleles (positive- vs.
negative-strand, or in our terminology, T vs. B) at any position.
Taken together, these properties suggest that localized con-
version events copy most of the surviving donor markers from
one donor strand to the other before the original strands
segregate. These conversion events in pre-formed hDNA

This lack of uniformity or correlation between the two ends could
reﬂect erratic processing by the HerA helicase and NurA nuclease
of S. acidocaldarius, which have been implicated in double-strand
break end resection (Constantinesco et al., 2004; Hopkins and
Paull, 2008; Quaiser et al., 2008). We note that it also could result, in
principle, from the same intrinsically stochastic short-patch exci-
sion events proposed to resolve mispairs in hDNA. These events
should form extensions (overhangs) of both polarities when they
(cid:2)
occur very close to one end of the duplex. The 5
overhangs would
be prone to strand re-synthesis primed by the recessed 3
ends, but
(cid:2)
no such priming is available for a 3
extension created by loss of
(cid:2)
the complementary 5
extensions would tend
(cid:2)
to persist and accumulate. Regardless of how they are formed, 3
-
extensions would be expected to promote integration of the donor
duplex into the recipient chromosome. However, the “random-
excision” pathway we hypothesize predicts that most dsDNAs will
have experienced conversion events by the time they integrate into
the recipient chromosome. This seems consistent with the high
density of T/B conversion events evident in transformants from
the dually marked donor duplex (Figure 4C).

(cid:2)
end. As a result, 3

(cid:2)

Although the four features proposed above leave a number of
important steps undeﬁned, including those that form and stabilize
heteroduplex DNA, they provide a context for formulating and
testing models of HR involving linear DNA in S. acidocaldarius
and other hyperthermophilic archaea. The schemes of Figure 8
illustrate a few of the possibilities, but various alternatives also
cannot be excluded. Short-patch excision events play central roles
in these schemes, and the molecular details of those events also
remain unclear, although we favor the idea of a process analo-
gous to NER, in which each mispair promotes formation of a
small bubble, one strand of which is excised by structure-speciﬁc
endonucleases cutting at the boundaries.

Figure 8A depicts annealing of a ssDNA (with exclusion of
(cid:2)
its 3
end) to a pre-existing gap, incorporation of the base-
paired segment by ligation, conversion of one donor marker by
a short-patch event, and transfer of a block of markers by a
larger conversion event before replication. Figure 8B illustrates
an alternative process in which ssDNA anneals to an exposed
nascent-strand terminus at a regressed replication fork, followed

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 192 | 10

Mao and Grogan

Homologous recombination in Sulfolobus

FIGURE 8 | Mechanistic alternatives for “ends-out” HR in Sulfolobus. (A)
ssDNA annealing at a transient gap in the chromosome; (B) ssDNA annealing
to a transiently regressed replication fork; (C) dsDNA incorporated at a gap in

the chromosome, or alternatively, at a regressed replication fork (dotted
arrow). Arrowheads indicate 3(cid:2) ends, black bars correspond to the top (sense)
strand of the pyrE gene, gray bars indicate the bottom (anti-sense) strand.

(cid:2)

by second-strand synthesis primed by the terminus, and resump-
tion of replication; this creates two heteroduplex structures of
differing length, which can diverge further through short-patch
conversions. Figure 8C depicts dsDNA initially undergoing mul-
tiple short-patch excision events, which rearrange the markers and
expose a 3
extension. This single-strand extension then anneals to
a chromosomal gap and anchors the remaining double-stranded
portion until the opposite end can be captured by the recipient
genome via some form of strand exchange. Another route to ini-
tial capture of the duplex is offered by a regressed replication fork,
as indicated by the dotted arrow from scheme Figures 8B,C; in this
case, subsequent formation and divergence of two heteroduplexes

would follow, as shown in Figure 8B. The schemes, which have
deliberately emphasized relatively simple transactions, seem to
accommodate nearly all of the marker arrangements observed in
recombinants, although we note that ssDNA transformants T11,
B11, B25, and B26, and dsDNA transformants TB66 (all shown in
Figure 4) imply additional, reciprocal forms of strand exchange
not represented in Figure 8.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank J. Rockwood for technical assistance and unpublished
data. This work was supported by grant MCB0543910 from the
National Science Foundation.

REFERENCES
Ajon, M., Frols, S., Van Wolferen,
M., Stoecker, K., Teichmann, D.,
Driessen, A. J., Grogan, D. W., Albers,
S. V., and Schleper, C. (2011). UV-
inducible DNA exchange in hyper-
thermophilic archaea mediated by
type IV pili. Mol. Microbiol. 82,
807–817.

Aylon, Y., and Kupiec, M.
yeast

the

DSB repair:
digm. DNA Repair
797–815.

(2004).
para-
(Amst.) 3,

Barnes, R. L., and McCulloch, R.
(2007). Trypanosoma brucei homol-
ogous recombination is dependent
on substrate length and homology,
though displays a differential depen-
dence on mismatch repair as sub-
strate length decreases. Nucleic Acids
Res. 35, 3478–3493.

Beattie, T. R., and Bell, S. D. (2012).
Coordination of multiple enzyme
activities by a single PCNA in
archaeal Okazaki fragment matura-
tion. EMBO J. 31, 1556–1567.

Bernander, R., and Poplawski, A. (1997).
Cell cycle characteristics of
ther-
mophilic archaea. J. Bacteriol. 179,
4963–4969.

Burgess, S. M. (2004). Homolog pairing
in S. pombe: the ends are the means.
Mol. cell 13, 766–768.

Chen, L., Brugger, K., Skovgaard, M.,
Redder, P., She, Q., Torarinsson, E.,
Greve, B., Awayez, M., Zibat, A.,
Klenk, H. P., and Garrett, R. A.
(2005). The genome of Sulfolobus
acidocaldarius, a model organism of

the Crenarchaeota. J. Bacteriol. 187,
4992–4999.

Coic, E., Gluck, L., and Fabre, F. (2000).
Evidence for short-patch mismatch
repair in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
EMBO J. 19, 3408–3417.

Constantinesco, F., Forterre, P., Koonin,
E. V., Aravind, L., and Elie, C.
(2004). A bipolar DNA helicase gene,
herA, clusters with rad50, mre11
and nurA genes in thermophilic
archaea. Nucleic Acids Res. 32,
1439–1447.

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 192 | 11

Mao and Grogan

Homologous recombination in Sulfolobus

Grogan, D. W. (1996). Exchange of
genetic markers at extremely high
temperatures in the archaeon Sul-
folobus acidocaldarius. J. Bacteriol.
178, 3207–3211.

Grogan, D. W., Carver, G. T., and
Drake, J. W. (2001). Genetic ﬁdelity
under harsh conditions: analysis of
spontaneous mutation in the ther-
moacidophilic archaeon Sulfolobus
acidocaldarius. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 98, 7928–7933.

Grogan, D. W., and Gunsalus, R.
P. (1993). Sulfolobus acidocaldar-
ius synthesizes UMP via a stan-
dard de novo pathway: results of a
biochemical-genetic study. J. Bacte-
riol. 175, 1500–1507.

Grogan, D. W., and Rockwood,

J.
(2010). Discontinuity and limited
linkage in the homologous recom-
bination system of a hyperther-
mophilic archaeon. J. Bacteriol. 192,
4660–4668.

Grogan, D. W., and Stengel, K. R.
(2008). Recombination of synthetic
prokary-
oligonucleotides with
substrate
otic
requirements of
the Escherichia
coli/lambdaRed and Sulfolobus aci-
docaldarius recombination systems.
Mol. Microbiol. 69, 1255–1265.

chromosomes:

Hansen, J. E., Dill, A. C., and Gro-
gan, D. W. (2005). conjugational
genetic exchange in the hyperther-
mophilic archaeon Sulfolobus aci-
docaldarius: intragenic recombina-
tion with minimal dependence on
marker separation. J. Bacteriol. 187,
805–809.

Henikoff, S.

(1984). Unidirectional
digestion with exonuclease III cre-
ates targeted breakpoints for DNA
sequencing. Gene 28, 351–359.

Hopkins, B. B., and Paull, T. T. (2008).
The P. furiosus mre11/rad50 com-
strand resection
plex promotes 5
at a DNA double-strand break. Cell
135, 250–260.

(cid:2)

Kowalczykowski, S. C., Dixon, D. A.,
Eggleston, A. K., Lauder, S. D., and
Rehrauer, W. M. (1994). Biochem-
istry of homologous recombination
in Escherichia coli. Microbiol. Rev. 58,
401–465.

Kreuzer, K. N. (2005). Interplay between
DNA replication and recombination
in prokaryotes. Annu. Rev. Microbiol.
59, 43–67.

Krogh, B. O., and Symington, L. S.
(2004). Recombination proteins in
yeast. Annu. Rev. Genet. 38, 233–271.
Langston, L. D., and Symington, L.
S. (2004). Gene targeting in yeast
is
initiated by two independent
strand invasions. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 101, 15392–15397.

Leung, W., Malkova, A., and Haber, J.
E. (1997). Gene targeting by linear
duplex DNA frequently occurs by
assimilation of a single strand that is
subject to preferential mismatch cor-
rection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
94, 6851–6856.

Lin, E. A., Zhang, X. S., Levine, S. M.,
Gill, S. R., Falush, D., and Blaser,
M. J. (2009). Natural transformation
of helicobacter pylori involves the
integration of short DNA fragments
interrupted by gaps of variable

size. PLoS Pathog. 5, e1000337.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000337

(2010).

Maresca, M., Erler, A., Fu, J., Friedrich,
A., Zhang, Y., and Stewart, A.
F.
Single-stranded het-
eroduplex intermediates in lambda
Red
recombina-
tion. BMC Mol. Biol. 11, 54.
doi:10.1186/1471-2199-11-54

homologous

Michel, B., Flores, M. J., Viguera, E.,
Grompone, G., Seigneur, M., and
Bidnenko, V.
(2001). Rescue of
arrested replication forks by homol-
ogous recombination. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 8181–8188.

Quaiser, A., Constantinesco, F., White,
M. F., Forterre, P., and Elie, C.
(2008). The Mre11 protein inter-
acts with both Rad50 and the HerA
bipolar helicase and is recruited to
DNA following gamma irradiation
in the archaeon Sulfolobus acido-
caldarius. BMC Mol. Biol. 9, 25.
doi:10.1186/1471-2199-9-25

Reilly, M. S., and Grogan, D. W.
(2001). Characterization of intra-
genic recombination in a hyperther-
mophilic archaeon via conjugational
DNA exchange. J. Bacteriol. 183,
2943–2946.

Sandler, S. J., Hugenholtz, P., Schleper,
C., Delong, E. F., Pace, N. R., and
Clark, A. J. (1999). Diversity of
radA genes from cultured and uncul-
tured archaea: comparative analy-
sis of putative RadA proteins and
their use as a phylogenetic marker.
J. Bacteriol. 181, 907–915.

White, M. F., and Grogan, D. W.
(2008). “DNA stability and repair,”

in Thermophiles: Biology and Tech-
nology at High Temperatures, eds F.
T. Robb, G. Antranikian, D. W. Gro-
gan, and A. J. Driessen (Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press), 179–188.

J., Luo,

Wiedmann, M., Wilson, W. J., Cza-
jka,
J., Barany, F., and
Batt, C. A. (1994). Ligase chain
reaction (LCR) – overview and
applications. PCR Methods Appl. 3,
S51–S64.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 06 March 2012; accepted: 11
May 2012; published online: 05 June
2012.
Citation: Mao D and Grogan DW (2012)
Heteroduplex formation, mismatch res-
olution, and genetic sectoring during
homologous recombination in the hyper-
thermophilic archaeon Sulfolobus acido-
caldarius. Front. Microbio. 3:192. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00192
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology,
a specialty of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Mao and Grogan. This
is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attri-
bution Non Commercial License, which
permits non-commercial use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in other forums,
provided the original authors and source
are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 192 | 12

