REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 02 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00108

Systems biology of fungal infection

Fabian Horn1,Thorsten Heinekamp 2, Olaf Kniemeyer 2, Johannes Pollmächer 3, Vito Valiante 2 and
Axel A. Brakhage 2,4*

1 Systems Biology/Bioinformatics, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology – Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany
2 Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology – Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany
3 Applied Systems Biology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology – Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany
4 Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Institute of Microbiology, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany

Edited by:
Jörg Linde, Leibniz Institute for
Natural Product Research and
Infection Biology – Hans Knöll
Institute, Germany
Reviewed by:
Rene Alvarez, Naval Medical
Research Unit-San Antonio, USA
Guoku Hu, Creighton University, USA
Scott G. Filler, Los Angeles
Biomedical Research Institute, USA
*Correspondence:
Axel A. Brakhage, Molecular and
Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute
for Natural Product Research and
Infection Biology – Hans Knöll
Institute, Beutenbergstrasse 11a,
07745 Jena, Germany.
e-mail: axel.brakhage@hki-jena.de

Elucidation of pathogenicity mechanisms of the most important human-pathogenic fungi,
Aspergillus fumigatus and Candida albicans, has gained great interest in the light of the
steadily increasing number of cases of invasive fungal infections. A key feature of these
infections is the interaction of the different fungal morphotypes with epithelial and immune
effector cells in the human host. Because of the high level of complexity, it is necessary to
describe and understand invasive fungal infection by taking a systems biological approach,
i.e., by a comprehensive quantitative analysis of the non-linear and selective interactions
of a large number of functionally diverse, and frequently multifunctional, sets of elements,
e.g., genes, proteins, metabolites, which produce coherent and emergent behaviors in
time and space. The recent advances in systems biology will now make it possible to
uncover the structure and dynamics of molecular and cellular cause-effect relationships
within these pathogenic interactions. We review current efforts to integrate omics and
image-based data of host-pathogen interactions into network and spatio-temporal models.
The modeling will help to elucidate pathogenicity mechanisms and to identify diagnostic
biomarkers and potential drug targets for therapy and could thus pave the way for novel
intervention strategies based on novel antifungal drugs and cell therapy.

Keywords: Aspergillus fumigatus, Candida albicans, gene-regulatory network, network modeling, pathogenicity,
pathogen-host interaction, spatio-temporal modeling, systems biology

1. BACKGROUND
1.1. HUMAN-PATHOGENIC FUNGI
It is estimated that the total number of fungal species exceeds
1.5 million (Hawksworth, 2001). However, only a small minority
of approximately 100 species of fungi are associated with human
diseases. Nevertheless, infections caused by fungal pathogens lead
to a wide range of diseases including allergies, superﬁcial infec-
tions, and invasive mycoses. The outcome of an infection with a
human-pathogenic fungus often depends on the immune status
of the host organism. Patients suffering from a weakened immune
system are at high risk of developing a serious fungal infection.
Continuous progress in medicine, e.g., in chemotherapy and organ
or bone marrow transplantation, has led to an increasing num-
ber of patients with impaired immune status. In recent decades,
the frequency of invasive fungal infections has increased steadily,
resulting in considerable morbidity and mortality. In the USA,
the incidence of sepsis caused by fungi has increased by more
than 200% since 1991, whereas cases of bacterial sepsis have only
increased moderate (Martin et al., 2003). Invasive mycoses are
characterized by a high mortality rate. The increasing number of
fungal infections has signiﬁcantly contributed to health-related
costs (Pfaller and Diekema, 2007).

The yeast Candida albicans and the ﬁlamentous fungus
Aspergillus fumigatus are by far the most important causes of life-
threatening invasive mycoses. Apart from A. fumigatus, around
10% of the more than 200 species of the genus Aspergillus are

regarded as human pathogens or as having other adverse effects,
e.g., A. terreus, A. ﬂavus, and A. niger (Brakhage, 2005). The
prevalence of C. albicans in clinical Candida samples is 50–70%,
followed by infections with Candida glabrata, which is found in
20–25% of clinical Candida samples. Other pathogenic Candida
species include C. tropicalis, C. dubliniensis, C. krusei, and C. parap-
silosis (overview in Pfaller and Diekema, 2007). Another important
human-pathogenic fungus of clinical relevance is the fungus Cryp-
tococcus neoformans. The most common fungal infection among
AIDS patients, cryptococcal meningitis, is caused by this basid-
iomycete. Furthermore, other fungal species, such as Pneumocystis
jiroveci, Zygomycetes, Fusarium species, and Scedosporium species,
have emerged as causal agents of invasive mycoses (Pfaller and
Diekema, 2007).

Despite the different pathogenesis of infections caused by C.
albicans and A. fumigatus, there are several common traits, par-
ticularly when the host response is considered: (i) the pathogens
must be able to overcome epithelial barriers, (ii) innate immunity
represents the major defense system, (iii) pathogenic fungi possess
physiological characteristics, virulence determinants, and capabili-
ties for immune evasion that make them aggressive pathogens, and
(iv) invasive candidiasis and invasive aspergillosis are mainly found
in patients with a weakened immune system either due to reduced
activity of immune effector cells or defects in epithelial barriers.

Consequently, the aims of research on human-pathogenic fungi
are (i) to unravel the pathogenic determinants speciﬁc to each

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 1

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

fungus, (ii) to investigate the distinct roles of epithelial barriers,
the mechanisms of the innate immunity, and potential contri-
butions of the adaptive immune system to the pathogenesis of
fungal infections, and (iii) to elucidate the complex mechanisms
of fungal infections and identify common principles of fungal
pathogenesis.

1.2. PATHOBIOLOGY OF ASPERGILLUS FUMIGATUS: FROM

ENVIRONMENTAL MICROORGANISM TO PATHOGEN

Within the last two decades, the ﬁlamentous fungus A. fumigatus
has become one of the most important fungal pathogens. Conidia
of this saprophytic fungus can be found almost everywhere, from
the winds of the Sahara to the snow of the Antarctic. The most
severe disease caused by A. fumigatus is invasive aspergillosis (IA),
which occurs almost exclusively in immunocompromised patients
(Brakhage, 2005). There is currently a lack of reliable diagnostic
tools and effective treatment options for this condition, resulting
in a high mortality rate despite therapy. Remarkably, A. fumigatus
causes 90% of all systemic Aspergillus infections. This indicates
that A. fumigatus possesses certain virulence determinants that
favor this species becoming an opportunistic human pathogen.
Because of their ubiquitous presence in the air, each person inhales
several hundred A. fumigatus conidia daily. In immunosuppressed
patients, the lung is the primary site of infection. In immuno-
competent individuals, mucociliary clearance and phagocytic cells
normally prevent the disease (Brakhage et al., 2010). However,
there is a correlation between the degree of immunosuppression
and the risk of contracting IA. Consequently, important risk fac-
tors include neutropenia, T cell depletion, CD34-selected stem cell
products, corticosteroid therapy, and cytomegalovirus infections
(Marr et al., 2002).

Since 2005, considerable progress has been made in the analysis
of A. fumigatus. The genome sequence of A. fumigatus is available,
and the transformation efﬁciency of the fungus was drastically
increased by generation of ku70 and ku80 mutants of A. fumigatus
(Nierman et al., 2005; da Silva Ferreira et al., 2006; Krappmann
et al., 2006) making the generation of mutants by targeted gene
deletion much easier. As a result of this improvement, the number
of deletion mutants has increased from a handful, in the year 2000,
to more than 400, today.

However, only a few virulence determinants of A. fumigatus
have been characterized to date. These determinants include the
siderophore-mediated iron uptake system (Schrettl et al., 2004) or
the pksP gene, which is involved in the biosynthesis of the gray-
green spore pigment (Langfelder et al., 1998; Thywißen et al., 2011;
Volling et al., 2011). How these virulence determinants inﬂuence
the infection is currently under investigation. DHN melanin was
shown to inhibit both apoptosis and the acidiﬁcation of conidia-
containing phagolysosomes of macrophages (Thywißen et al.,
2011; Volling et al., 2011). Because virulence is a multifactorial
process, it can safely be expected that many more virulence-
associated traits will be discovered, e.g., A. fumigatus is able to grow
under hypoxic conditions. This ability is essential for pathogenicity
(Willger et al., 2008). A. fumigatus also possesses immune-evasion
mechanisms which reduce recognition, both by immune effec-
tor cells and the complement system (Behnsen et al., 2008, 2010;
Aimanianda et al., 2009).

Innate immunity is of great importance in defense against A.
fumigatus. Alveolar macrophages are the major resident cells of the
lung alveoli and they phagocytose conidia. However, conidia have
the ability to interfere with functions of the macrophages such as
the maturation of phagolysosomes (Jahn et al., 2002; Ibrahim-
Granet et al., 2003; Thywißen et al., 2011). Unphagocytosed
conidia and outgrowing hyphae are killed by neutrophilic granu-
locytes, whose activity is essential for preventing IA (Feldmesser,
2006).

Also, the complement system appears to contribute to the
defense mechanism (Moalli et al., 2010). Human pattern recogni-
tion receptors sensing fungal cell wall components include TLRs
(Toll-like receptors), Galactin 3, DC-Sign (C-type lectin recep-
tors), dendritic cell-speciﬁc intracellular adhesion molecule 3
(ICAM-3)-grabbing non-integrin, Dectin-1, SCARF1, and CD36.
In line with the importance of these receptors for fungal recogni-
tion, a growing number of deﬁned single nucleotide polymor-
phisms in the respective genes that appear to determine host
susceptibility to A. fumigatus were identiﬁed (overview in Romani,
2011).

Furthermore, neutrophils possess recently discovered extra-
cellular killing mechanisms: they degranulate, release DNA, and
form neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) both in vitro and
in vivo against A. fumigatus (Bruns et al., 2010; McCormick et al.,
2010). However, whether NET formation is detrimental for A.
fumigatus overall is currently under investigation, and it remains
unclear how neutrophils ultimately kill A. fumigatus. Reactive
oxygen intermediates (ROI) most probably do not play a role
as primary killing agents, but are required as signaling mole-
cules (Lessing et al., 2007). Incubation of dendritic cells (DCs)
with A. fumigatus in vitro resulted in the release of chemokine
CXCL8, which attracts neutrophils (Gafa et al., 2007). Secretion
of additional factors increased surface expression of CD11b and
CD18 on neutrophils. Dectin-1, which is an important recep-
tor on macrophages and neutrophils, is also expressed on the
surface of immature DCs and is involved in the induction of a
proinﬂammatory cytokine response (Mezger et al., 2008). DCs
thus play an important role in defense against A. fumigatus. The
pathogen recognition receptor Dectin-1 acts upstream of the Syk
tyrosine kinase in response to an infection with A. fumigatus.
Signaling via the Syk tyrosine kinase was recently found to be
essential for the activation of NLRP3 inﬂammasome, another
component of the innate immune system (Saïd-Sadier et al.,
2010). Despite these ﬁndings, we are still in the early stages
of understanding their role in organizing the immune defense
mechanism.

Epithelial and endothelial cells in the lung can internal-
ize conidia. It cannot, therefore, be excluded that these cells
form sites of persistence and foci of infection (Latgé, 1999).
The role of T cells has not yet been clariﬁed. It appears
most likely that they initiate the adaptive immune responses
to Aspergillus species and directly inﬂuence the outcome of
an infection (Dagenais and Keller, 2009). Phagocytosis of
conidia by DCs leads to a protective Th1 response, whereas
hyphal phagocytosis results in non-favorable Th2 responses
and the generation of IL-10-producing CD4 cells (Romani,
2011).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 2

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

1.3. PATHOBIOLOGY OF CANDIDA ALBICANS: FROM COMMENSAL TO

PATHOGEN

Candida albicans normally exists as harmless commensal yeast on
mucosal surfaces of the majority of the human population. Only
under certain circumstances (imbalance of the normal microbial
ﬂora, immunosuppression, damage of tissue barriers), can C. albi-
cans cause superﬁcial (oral thrush in 90% of all untreated HIV
patients, vaginal thrush in 75% of all women once in their lifetime)
or life-threatening systemic infections (nosocomial candidiasis,
candidemia; reviewed in Pfaller and Diekema, 2007; Martin et al.,
2011). C. albicans is currently identiﬁed as the fourth most com-
mon blood isolate in US hospitals, accounting for around 10%
of hospital-acquired bloodstream infections (Wisplinghoff et al.,
2004). Cases of sepsis caused by this fungus lead to mortality rates
of about 40% and are thus higher than observed for any bacte-
rial sepsis (Gudlaugsson et al., 2003; Wisplinghoff et al., 2004;
Picazo et al., 2008). Although C. albicans is an opportunistic
pathogen, only a minority of cases (20%) of disseminated can-
didiasis occurs in patients with severe immunosuppression such as
individuals with neutropenia, corticosteroid therapy, or HIV infec-
tion. Patients with severe illnesses who have prolonged periods of
hospitalizations, a central venous catheter, gastrointestinal/cardiac
surgery, or burns are at especially high risk of developing an
invasive Candida infection (reviewed in Perlroth et al., 2007).

Almost all C. albicans infections are endogenous infections,
caused by commensal strains of patients’ own microﬂora. Despite
numerous studies, it remains unclear how the transition from a
harmless commensal to an aggressive pathogen is triggered. It
seems certain that it is not only modiﬁcations of the microbial
ﬂora and host factors, but also speciﬁc attributes of the fungus
that play an important role in this transition.

The ability to switch from yeast to pseudohyphal or hyphal
growth is an important virulence trait for C. albicans. Several envi-
ronmental conditions such as temperatures above 37˚C, pH values
of 7.0 or higher, high exogenous CO2 concentrations of more than
5%, or the presence of serum (Liu, 2002) trigger this transition.
Numerous genes are involved in the regulation of the morpho-
logical switch, but molecular details are still poorly understood.
The transcription factor Efg1p plays a central role in the control
of morphogenesis (Stoldt et al., 1997; Doedt et al., 2004) and the
loss of the EFG1 gene led to mutants which were locked in the
yeast form and showed reduced virulence in a murine model of
candidiasis (Lo et al., 1997; Stoldt et al., 1997). In the regulation of
the Efg1p pathway, cAMP-mediated signal transduction plays an
essential role and mutants lacking the adenylyl cyclase Cdc35p do
not form hyphae. As well as Efg1p, a large number of other tran-
scription factors have also been reported to inhibit or trigger the
yeast to hyphal transition, e.g., Efh1p, Mcm1p, Cph2p, and Tec1p
(reviewed in Whiteway and Bachewich, 2007).

Besides the morphological plasticity, the ability of C. albicans to
adhere to host cells and tissue and form bioﬁlms is another impor-
tant virulence factor. Amongst others, the ALS (agglutinin-like
sequence) proteins are a well-studied group of proteins that form
a family of peptide-binding proteins and which mediate adhesion
(Salgado et al., 2011). They bind to extracellular matrix proteins,
such as collagen, ﬁbronectin and laminin (Als1p, Als3p, Als5p,
Als6p, Als9p), endothelial and epithelial cells (Als1p, Als3p, Als5p),

and also mediate cell-to-cell aggregation (Als5p) and iron acqui-
sition (Als3p; Filler, 2006; Almeida et al., 2009). Hwp1p is another
important adhesin, expressed only on hyphae, which binds tightly
to oral epithelial cells and that is involved in bioﬁlm formation
(Nobile et al., 2006).

Secreted enzymes with proteolytic or lipolytic activity repre-
sent another group of proteins which contributes signiﬁcantly to
C. albicans’ pathogenicity. A large proportion of the proteolytic
activity is attributed to a multigene family of secreted aspartic
proteinases (SAPs). Ten different SAPs have been described in C.
albicans, eight of which are secreted extracellularly and two of
which are anchored to the membrane via GPI linkage. Their con-
tribution to the pathogenesis of C. albicans infections has been
extensively investigated. SAP1–SAP3 genes were considered to play
a role in localized C. albicans infections and complement eva-
sion, whereas SAP4–SAP6 were postulated to play an important
role in the pathogenesis of invasive candidiasis (Schaller et al.,
2005; Gropp et al., 2009). However, in a recent study by Cor-
reia et al. (2010) the importance of SAP1 to SAP6 for virulence
was reassessed in a murine model of candidemia. In contrast to
previous ﬁndings, SAP1 to SAP6 were found to play no signif-
icant role in disseminated C. albicans infections. In addition to
the virulence determinants described above, physiological ﬁtness,
in other words, high stress tolerance and metabolic ﬂexibility, is
another important factor that contributes to the pathogenicity of
C. albicans (Brown et al., 2007; Fleck et al., 2011).

The fact that C. albicans is a diploid fungus and was long
thought to be an obligate asexual organism (Alby et al., 2009),
has long hindered the production of genetically deﬁned mutants.
In contrast to the well-studied yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, C.
albicans does not have any natural DNA plasmids that could be
used for transformation. In addition to this, C. albicans shows a
non-standard codon usage and translates the CUG codon as serine
instead of leucine (Lloyd and Sharp, 1992). Only after establish-
ing protocols for targeted gene disruptions of both alleles, creating
conditional null mutants based on tetracycline-regulatable sys-
tems, sequencing of the entire genome, establishment of a genome
database, production of genome-wide microarrays, and produc-
tion of reporter strains and other molecular tools as well as
infection models, has C. albicans reached the status of a model
organism for yeast infections (Theiss et al., 2002; Fradin et al.,
2003; Jones et al., 2004; Braun et al., 2005; Samaranayake and
Hanes, 2011; Szabo and MacCallum, 2011).

Due to this technical progress, interactions of C. albicans with
host cells and the immune system have been the focus of many
studies in recent years. Fungal recognition is the ﬁrst step in the
antifungal immune response and is mediated by pattern recog-
nition receptors (PRR). The mannan cell wall component is rec-
ognized by the mannose receptor, the C-type lectin-like receptor
Dectin-2, and the TLR4. Furthermore, TLR2 triggers an immune
response by binding to phospholipomannans, as the Dectin-1
receptor does by binding to β-glucan (Netea et al., 2008). TLR2
and Dectin-1 regulate also the gene transcription of proinﬂamma-
tory cytokines such as the pro-IL-1β. This interleukin is further
processed into its active mature form via the NLRP3 inﬂamma-
some, a multiprotein complex. It has recently been shown that
it is crucial for antifungal host defense (Gross et al., 2009; Hise

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 3

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

et al., 2009). After recognition, phagocytes, like macrophages or
neutrophilic granulocytes, kill C. albicans cells by phagocytosis or
secretion of antimicrobials. One mechanism discovered recently is
the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps as mentioned above
in the section on A. fumigatus (Urban et al., 2006). To link these
interactions to the highly complex setting of clinical infections,
complex in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo infection models have been
established and genome-wide transcriptional proﬁles, including
direct C. albicans transcriptomes from patient samples, have been
produced (Wilson et al., 2009; Cairns et al., 2010).

1.4. SYSTEMS BIOLOGY OF INFECTION
Due to their high complexity, it is conceivable that invasive infec-
tions caused by human-pathogenic fungi can be described and
understood in a comprehensive manner by taking a systems
biological approach. There are two complementary strategies in
systems biology: (i) Starting from smaller, even minimal mod-
els capturing the essential and abstract interactions in the sys-
tem under study and (ii) using experimental measurements such
as large omics datasets in combination with large-scale models.
Hybrid approaches, which integrate these top-down and bottom-
up perspectives, contribute to our understanding of the multiple
interdependencies of different hierarchical levels in biological sys-
tems (Forst, 2006). The global dynamics of a system can only
be understood and quantiﬁed if the functionality of modular
subsystems is elucidated, while considering the most important
interactions on different levels in the biological system. With the
aim of revealing molecular and cellular cause-effect relationships
within the host-pathogen interaction in a non-ambiguous and efﬁ-
cient way, the setup of experiments and the design of experimental
series can be optimized on the basis of established mathematical
and computational models. Data exchange proceeds in an iterative
cycle between model and experiment, with a constant reﬁnement
and validation of the models and the model-based planning of
experiments (Ideker et al., 2001).

Current experimental and modeling techniques focus on spe-
ciﬁc perspectives at different scales. At present, experimental data
from high-throughput experiments are increasingly and routinely
used as the basis for mathematical modeling. This wealth of infor-
mation has become available recently. Nevertheless, the history of
the mathematical modeling of infectious diseases can be traced
back to the eighteenth century, when today’s basic concepts of
evolution, genetics, and molecular biology were still unknown.
Back in 1760, Daniel Bernoulli predicted the life expectancy of a
population which has been immunized with cowpox (Bernoulli,
1760). In the early twentieth century, mathematical models were
developed that mainly focused on the spread of diseases such as
measles and malaria (Ross, 1911; Bailey, 1975). Most models would
be related to today’s research ﬁeld of population biology, meaning
that they dealt with ﬂuctuations in population size under dif-
ferent modes of disease transmission. Since the second half of
the twentieth century, these models have become more sophis-
ticated. Amongst other concepts, they incorporated new aspects
(e.g., population variables, May and Anderson, 1979; transmission
rates, Real and Biek, 2007; pathogen life cycles, and host speciﬁci-
ties, Woolhouse et al., 2001; Barrett et al., 2008) and extended the
model to allow multi-level modeling (Roux and Aiello, 2005) or
concepts of evolution (reviewed in Tong and Ng, 2011).

Naturally, each infection process is unique. Nevertheless, the
modeling makes it possible to reveal fundamental similarities and
differences in the underlying processes. The inﬂuence of single
model parameters and their interdependency can thus be deduced.
These parameters are also assessed if they serve as effective control
options for the implementation of governmental public health risk
management programs (Tong and Ng, 2011).

With the progress in molecular biology, infection biology, and
biotechnology, it is now possible to study species-speciﬁc host-
pathogen interactions at the molecular level in order to search
directly for biomarkers with diagnostic potential and drug targets
for novel therapeutic treatment strategies. The focus of research
has diversiﬁed, resulting in specialized databases and research
groups. Only early steps toward the computational systems biol-
ogy of A. fumigatus and C. albicans have been made, including
genome-scale data mining and mathematical modeling of infec-
tion processes by these fungi (reviewed for human-pathogenic
fungi in Albrecht et al., 2008, 2011 and Rizzetto and Cavalieri,
2011).

2. DATA BASIS AND DATA ANALYSIS
The aim of understanding the complexity of host-pathogen inter-
actions can be achieved by exploiting the increasing amount of
experimental data, including high-throughput data and informa-
tion available from public repositories as well as from biomolecular
databases (see Table 1). Typically, experimental series comprise
knock-down experiments along with global and speciﬁc screen-
ing using knockout mutants of pathogenic fungi. Procedures can
be designed to analyze the complex structured data obtained

Table 1 | Bioinformatic resources of special interest for fungal systems
biology.

Resource

Website

Description

AsperCyc

www.aspercyc.org

Aspergillus
genome DB
BROAD
Candida
genome DB
CFGB

Ensembl
FunCatDB

FungiDB
FungiFun

www.aspgd.org

www.broadinstitute.org
www.candidagenome.org

http://cfgp.riceblast.snu.ac.kr

http://fungi.ensembl.org
www.helmholtz-muenchen.de/
en/mips/projects/funcat
www.fungidb.org
https://sbi.hki-jena.de/FungiFun/

JGI
Omnifung

www.jgi.doe.gov
www.omnifung.hki-jena.de

PhiBase

www.phibase.org

SysMo-DB

www.sysmo-db.org

Aspergillus
metabolic pathways
Aspergillus
genomics
Genomics
Candida genomics

Comparative
genomics platform
Genomics
Gene-annotations

Genomics
Gene set enrichment
analysis
Genomics
Data warehouse for
omics data
Database of
virulence genes
Collaborative
platform

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 4

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

from these experimental series. Standardized pre-processing of
the raw data and integrative analyses allow the identiﬁcation of
key regulators involved in pathogenicity. The management and
integrative analysis of experimental data is challenging and con-
stitutes a research ﬁeld itself within bioinformatics (Albrecht et al.,
2008). It was presented exemplary for genome, transcriptome,
and proteome analysis of the heat shock response of A. fumi-
gatus (Albrecht et al., 2010). Each technique applied generates
different types of data, which have been acquired at the vari-
ous levels of information. For each level, all of the available data
types and their accompanying computational methods are usually
referred to as “omics.” New technologies, such as high-throughput
sequencing, impose new challenges on efﬁcient data storage, data
retrieval, and statistical analysis. In order to handle the tremendous
amount of data required for systems biology, the heterologous
data has to be linked between existing databases. Automatic com-
puter access has to be provided, and different user perspectives
have to be taken into account. The standardization of biological
terms (GO, FunCat, SBO, Ruepp et al., 2004; Arnaud et al., 2009;
Courtot et al., 2011), data formats (SBML, Hucka et al., 2003),
experimental metadata (MIBBI, Taylor et al., 2008), and oper-
ating procedures (Taverna, Hull et al., 2006) contribute to this
objective.

Despite the wealth of information gained from analyzing high-
throughput data, research into biological systems is mostly focused
on a single data level. To overcome these limitations, data ware-
housing approaches (Omnifung, IntegromeDB, Albrecht et al.,
2007; Kozhenkov et al., 2011) aim to integrate the different data
layers. At the same time, most integration tools offer different
visualization techniques as an additional key method for query-
ing and understanding large datasets (Köhler et al., 2006; Smoot
et al., 2011). Even though efforts have been made in this respect, an
integrated view of different omics data levels is still a major chal-
lenge. Regulatory processes, different time scales, and non-linear

processes in the biological system as well as technical limita-
tions of omics technologies hamper the detection of causality
or even correlation between different data layers (Albrecht et al.,
2011).

“OMICS” BASED DATA

2.1.
2.1.1. Genome
The importance of fungal-derived infections is reﬂected impres-
sively by the number of fungal genomes that have been sequenced
in recent years. The genome of the diploid C. albicans was pub-
lished in 2004 (Jones et al., 2004; Braun et al., 2005), followed by
the C. neoformans genome (Loftus et al., 2005) and by the A. fumi-
gatus genome (Nierman et al., 2005). Since then, other Candida
and Aspergilli genomes have been sequenced (Arnaud et al., 2007;
Fedorova et al., 2008). Also, the ﬁrst genomes of dermatophytes
have recently been published (Burmester et al., 2011). Table 2 lists
all human-pathogenic fungi for which the full genome sequence
is available. This list does not include genome projects currently
in progress such as the sequencing of several C. albicans strains to
evaluate Candida genome plasticity. New sequencing technologies
now allow even greater numbers of genomes and transcriptomes
to be deciphered, which will contribute to a better understanding
of fungal pathogenesis. This information has been collected and
released in suitable and easy to use web tools (see Table 1). For
Candida sp., the main websites used are the CandidaDB (d’Enfert
et al., 2005) and the Candida Genome Database (CGD; Arnaud
et al., 2007). For A. fumigatus, the community normally refers to
the Central Aspergillus Data REpositery (CADRE, Gilsenan et al.,
2012) and the new Aspergillus Genome Database (AspGD, Arnaud
et al., 2012).

The information available in the different genome databases
allowed us to apply studies of comparative genomics to human-
pathogenic fungi focusing on evolutionary aspects of virulence
genes. Studies of different Candida sp. highlighted that cell

Table 2 | List of human-pathogenic fungi of which the genomes have been sequenced.

Scientiﬁc classiﬁcation

Species

ASCOMYCOTA
Ascomycetes

Euascomycetes
Eurotiomycetes

Saccharomycetes

Sordariomycetes
Pneumocystidomycetes
BASIDIOMYCOTA
Agaricomycetes
Ustilaginomycetes
ZYGOMYCOTA
Mucorales
MICROSPORIDIA

Ajellomyces dermatitidis, Aspergillus clavatus, Aspergillus ﬁscheri, Aspergillus ﬂavus, Aspergillus fumigatus, Aspergillus
terreus, Blastomyces dermatitidis, Exophiala dermatitidis, Histoplasma capsulatum
Coccidioides immitis, Coccidioides posadasii, Penicillium marneffei
Arthroderma benhamiae, Arthroderma canis, Arthroderma gypseum, Arthroderma otae, Lacazia loboi, Paracoccidioides
brasiliensis, Penicillium chrysogenum, Trichophyton equinum, Trichophyton rubrum, Trichophyton tonsurans, Trichophyton
verrucosum
Candida albicans, Candida dubliniensis, Candida glabrata, Candida guilliermondii, Candida lusitaniae, Candida parapsilosis,
Candida tropicalis
Chaetomium globosum, Fusarium oxysporum, Fusarium verticilloides, Nectria haematococca
Pneumocystis jirovecii

Cryptococcus gattii, Cryptococcus neoformans
Malassezia globosa, Malassezia restricta

Rhizopus oryzae

Encephalitozoon cuniculi, Encephalitozoon intestinalis

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 5

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

wall-associated genes, important for host recognition and viru-
lence of Candida sp., have been subject to gene duplications (Butler
et al., 2009). Furthermore, the high number of lipases or GPI
anchored proteins (normally clustered) is important for the vir-
ulence of C. albicans and C. glabrata (van het Hoog et al., 2007;
Dujon, 2010). This phenomenon is known as gene family expan-
sion and results in an increase of enzymatic power during infection
processes or, where possible, easier rearrangement of the genome.
In both cases, there is an increase in the competitiveness of the
pathogens during infection processes (Moran et al., 2011).

Many clustered genes present in Aspergillus sp. encode pro-
teins for secondary metabolite production, such as mycotoxins
and antibiotics, and do not normally represent repetition of
genes with similar enzymatic activity. A higher degree of genome
rearrangement was observed in telomeric regions, where many of
these clusters are located. The origins of these gene clusters have
always been associated with the possibility of vertical gene trans-
fer from other microbes. However, extensive comparative studies
on Aspergilli genomes suggest that the presence of paralogs in
the different species could be ascribed to gene duplication within
the genus and subsequent translocation to telomere-proximal
locations (Fedorova et al., 2008).

In addition to the importance for taxonomic studies, com-
parative genomics also highlighted peculiarities and similarities
between different fungal species. One example was given by com-
paring signaling pathways in different pathogenic fungi. The
mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways and
the calcineurin pathway have been extensively studied in patho-
genic fungi because of their involvement in pathogenesis. Global
sequence similarity analysis indicated that, on the one hand,
core structures involved in signaling are highly conserved while,
on the other hand, upstream (e.g., receptors) and downstream
factors (e.g., transcription factors) are far more species-speciﬁc
(Rispail et al., 2009). Knowledge obtained in these studies can be
used to identify suitable intraspeciﬁc or interspeciﬁc targets for
therapeutic intervention.

Transcriptome

2.1.2.
A genome, apart from its arrangement and complexity, can always
be regarded as a static feature. In contrast to this, transcriptome
analysis provides information about the dynamics of a genome’s
expression. Due to the availability of fungal genome data, it is
now possible to design microarrays for genome-wide expression
analysis.

For more than 10 years, scientists have had access to various C.
albicans transcriptome studies. Many experiments have focused
on studying gene expression in response to antifungal agents (e.g.,
azole derivatives, amphotericin B, echinocandins; Backer et al.,
2001; Barker et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2005) but also at different stages
of development and during bioﬁlm formation (Doedt et al., 2004;
Murillo et al., 2005). For C. albicans, already in 2005 a comparative
gene expression analysis was published (Ihmels et al., 2005).

Aspergillus fumigatus’ transcriptome history is comparatively
recent. The ﬁrst entire global transcriptome analysis was published
together with the release of the ﬁrst genome sequence (Nierman
et al., 2005). After that, scientists had access to various transcrip-
tome studies of developmental stages, during iron starvation, of

bioﬁlm formation, and response to antifungals (e.g., da Silva Fer-
reira et al., 2006; Schrettl et al., 2008; Bruns et al., 2010; Cagas
et al., 2011; Jain et al., 2011). Fewer transcriptome studies have
been carried out for A. fumigatus than for C. albicans. Further-
more, the comparability of transcriptome data is low. One reason
for this is the development of different microarray platforms that
made it harder to compare different gene expression data. In addi-
tion to this, the experimental design of transcriptome studies has
been quite heterogenous with respect to media, strains, and gen-
eral growth conditions. At present, we can only reliably compare
different transcriptome data on the basis of genes that have high
fold-changes in expression levels.

The main challenge in infection biology is to understand gene
responses during infection. Such studies have been performed in
several ways (co-culture of fungi and immune cells or direct tis-
sue infection). The main problem remains the enrichment of the
RNA from the pathogen prior to the hybridization step in order
to avoid a decrease in data quality caused by cross-hybridization.
This step is normally performed by separation of the different RNA
species that can eventually be ampliﬁed to increase the nucleic acid
quantity (Nygaard and Hovig, 2006). Previous studies identiﬁed
genes involved in nutrient acquisition, oxidative stress response,
and metal homeostasis, which are differentially regulated in C.
albicans when co-cultured with macrophages and neutrophils
(Lorenz and Fink, 2001; Lorenz et al., 2004; Wilson et al., 2009).
Similar results have also been found in A. fumigatus when co-
cultured with neutrophils and dendritic cells (Lessing et al., 2007;
Sugui et al., 2008; Morton et al., 2011). A recent review described
a comparison of transcriptome data obtained from pathogenic
fungi during organ or tissue infections (Cairns et al., 2010).
Many genes involved in primary metabolism appeared to be dif-
ferentially expressed during infection in both human and plant
pathogens. This data suggested that physiological reprogram-
ming during infection remains relatively well conserved among
various pathogens. On the other hand, these types of studies high-
lighted the limitations of hybridization-based techniques such as
microarrays.

Recently, new techniques based on deep RNA sequencing have
been introduced, i.e., the RNA-seq technique to analyze transcrip-
tomes (Wang et al., 2009). Recent work on C. albicans and A.
fumigatus indicated that with this technology it is possible to
identify misannotated genes and differences in the level of low
expressed genes which, for example, is relevant for many secondary
metabolite gene clusters (Bruno et al., 2010; Gibbons et al., 2012).
Furthermore, in infection biology it is important to study the gene
expression proﬁles during infection, not only from the pathogen
side, but also from the host side. To date, microarray analysis was
limited in this respect, because separation of organism-speciﬁc
RNA prior the hybridization is hard to achieve. Theoretically,
RNA-seq analysis is capable of handling this problem. Techni-
cally, RNA from different species can be pooled, and then the
data obtained can be separated during the analysis by aligning raw
sequence data to different genomes. This approach seems possi-
ble because the sequences not matching a genome are normally
discarded. The RNA-seq technique could potentially give us a way
of monitoring gene expression proﬁles from the pathogen and the
host simultaneously.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 6

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

2.1.3. Proteome
To gain global insights into the biology of fungal pathogens and
their interactions, genome-wide studies should focus not only on
the transcript level, but also on the protein level. Proteins are the
molecules that are catalytically active, build up the cellular struc-
ture, and mediate signal transduction and gene regulation. The
release of the genome sequences of C. albicans and A. fumigatus
paved the way for studies on the fungal proteome, i.e., the entire
set of proteins which is synthesized and modiﬁed at a given time
under deﬁned conditions. Two dimensional-gel electrophoresis, a
method invented in the mid-1970s, was the ﬁrst technique used to
study the presence of proteins on a global scale (O’Farrell, 1975;
Klose and Kobalz, 1995). Meanwhile, mass spectrometry (MS)-
based methods have become more and more popular. Here, the
separation of tryptically digested peptides by liquid chromatogra-
phy is coupled to mass spectrometry (reviewed in Aebersold and
Mann, 2003). Despite the signiﬁcant technical progress made in
recent years in the ﬁeld of MS-based proteomics, no technique
currently available allows us to entirely proﬁle the highly dynamic
range and complexity of the protein set of a eukaryotic organism.
However, a lot of knowledge about the proteome of C. albicans and
A. fumigatus has already been obtained, which is summarized in
several recent reviews (Rupp, 2004; Thomas et al., 2006; Kim et al.,
2008; Kniemeyer and Brakhage, 2008; Andersen and Nielsen, 2009;
Kniemeyer, 2011; Kniemeyer et al., 2011). Here, a brief overview
will be given and current trends will be highlighted.

For C. albicans, the ﬁrst studies on the extent of changes in cyto-
plasmic proteins during yeast-mycelial transition were conducted
in the early 1980s, 25 years before the start of the post-genomic era
in the ﬁeld of fungal pathogenicity (Manning and Mitchell, 1980).
More 2D-PAGE studies followed (Niimi et al., 1996), and differ-
ences in protein expression between the two morphotypes were
also analyzed using MS-based techniques (Melanson et al., 2006).
Several proteins that also play a role in the virulence of C. albi-
cans were found to have increased expression levels in hyphal cells
(reviewed in Kniemeyer and Brakhage, 2008). Recently, a study by
Monteoliva et al. (2011) indicated that the primary metabolism
undergoes a reorganization during morphotype-switching. Also,
the composition of the C. albicans cell surface proteome undergoes
changes during the yeast-mycelial transition. Several extraction
techniques have been established in recent years to study this phe-
nomenon (Pitarch et al., 2002; de Groot et al., 2004; Castillo et al.,
2008; Hernáez et al., 2010). Heilmann et al. (2011) gave a ﬁrst
quantitative proteomic snapshot of the changes occurring in the
cell wall proteome of C. albicans during the transition from yeast
to hyphal cells. Several proteins were identiﬁed as indicators of
hyphal growth, including the adhesin Als3p.

Due to the fact that C. albicans faces a multitude of diverse
stresses, e.g., oxidative stress, higher temperatures, hypoxia, and
low pH during infection, the proteomic response to these and other
adverse conditions have been investigated by many groups. Kusch
et al. (2007) and Yin et al. (2009) showed that the levels of many
proteins with antioxidative functions were signiﬁcantly increased
during the oxidative stress response. Sosinska et al. (2008) and
Sosinska et al. (2011) investigated the variability of the cell wall
proteome during iron depletion, hypoxia, and at different pH
values (pH 4 and 7).

Proteomics is also a suitable approach for gaining a deeper
insight into the response of C. albicans toward antifungal com-
pounds. Bruneau et al. (2003) characterized the proteome changes
in C. albicans induced by triazoles (ﬂuconazole and itraconazole)
and an echinocandin-like lipopeptide (mulundocandin). The dif-
ferent modes of action of triazoles and echinocandins, two differ-
ent classes of antifungal agents, were also reﬂected at the protein
level. Similar results were obtained by Hoehamer et al. (2010),
who additionally included the polyene amphotericin B in their
study. Results of a recent study using a liquid chromatography–
mass spectrometry (LC-MS) based approach suggested a cell wall
destabilizing effect of the triazole ﬂuconazole (Sorgo et al., 2011).
Other studies addressed the mechanism of drug resistance by
comparing the proteome of a drug-resistant mutant strain with
a drug-susceptible wild-type strain (Hooshdaran et al., 2004; Yan
et al., 2007).

A lot of progress has also been made in the ﬁeld of A. fumi-
gatus proteomics. In contrast to C. albicans, this pathogenic mold
shows not only a mycelial growth form, but also produces spores
for dispersal. Proteome maps of both morphotypes and the com-
position of the secretome have been established (Vödisch et al.,
2009; Teutschbein et al., 2010; Cagas et al., 2011; Wartenberg et al.,
2011). Also, the stress response to oxidative and heat stress was
characterized (Lessing et al., 2007; Albrecht et al., 2010). Chap-
erones and antioxidative enzymes were produced under both
conditions. Additionally, the results showed that the thioredoxin
system seems to play an important role in maintaining the cellu-
lar redox balance for A. fumigatus. Recent ﬁndings revealed that
A. fumigatus is exposed to oxygen-depleted microenvironments
during infection (Grahl et al., 2011). The response to hypoxia
was also studied at the protein level using an oxygen-controlled
chemostat (Vödisch et al., 2011). Under hypoxic conditions, A.
fumigatus cells developed a higher respiratory capacity, induced
the synthesis of enzymes of the nitrosative stress response, and
activated a secondary metabolite gene cluster (pseurotin A). Also,
other growth conditions triggered the production of secondary
metabolites with biological activity. When A. fumigatus attaches to
surfaces, it can grow into a bioﬁlm-like structure including the for-
mation of an extracellular matrix. Under these conditions, higher
levels of the immunosuppressive secondary metabolite gliotoxin
were produced (Bruns et al., 2010).

Several groups proﬁled the A. fumigatus proteome in response
to the antifungal compounds caspofungin (Cagas et al., 2011)
and amphotericin B (Gautam et al., 2008). Amphotericin B inﬂu-
enced various metabolic processes including the ergosterol path-
way, whereas caspofungin induced a strong increase in levels of
ribosomal proteins.

The study of the interplay between fungal pathogens and
human cells at the level of the proteome remains a challenging task
due to the complexity and the limited number of methods available
for the separation of fungal cells from the human effector cells. Sev-
eral studies characterized the proteome of murine macrophages,
which had been exposed to living or heat-inactivated C. albi-
cans yeast cells (Shin et al., 2005; Martínez-Solano et al., 2006,
2009). To complement these studies, proteomic changes of C.
albicans yeast cells due to macrophage confrontation were inves-
tigated and revealed an increase of the level of chaperones and

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 7

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

other stress-related proteins. No proteomic data is available on
the interaction with other cells of the immune system or on the
interaction of A. fumigatus with cells of the immune system. Nev-
ertheless, proteomic technologies, such as targeted MS methods
with high-performance instruments, have the potential to deter-
mine the mode of interaction between pathogenic fungi and their
host. Targeted proteomic approaches are based on the selection
of speciﬁc peptides of a protein for mass analysis. This process is
termed multiple reaction monitoring (MRM). It allows the identi-
ﬁcation of very low-abundance proteins (Domon and Aebersold,
2010). However, this technique is still limited to the analysis of
several hundred proteins in a single LC-MS/MS run, but technical
progress in this ﬁeld can be expected and may help to make a leap
forward to the systematic investigation of host-pathogen interplay.

IMAGE-BASED DATA

2.2.
Investigation and elucidation of the pathobiology of fungal infec-
tions strictly requires analysis of the interaction of the pathogen
with the host immune effector cells (Brakhage et al., 2010). Image
analysis is an indispensable tool for doing this. In combina-
tion with advances in computer performance and computing
resources, the use of several imaging technologies led to the gen-
eration of large amounts of data (Behnsen et al., 2007; Hickey
and Read, 2009; Brock, 2012) awaiting integration via a systems
biological approach for analysis and interpretation. In general,
image data can be obtained by different experimental approaches,
e.g., microscopy, positron emission tomography (PET)/computer
tomography (CT), or bioluminescence imaging. Due to the fact
that the latter two techniques for monitoring fungal infections in
living hosts are still in the early stages of development (Avet et al.,
2009; Ibrahim-Granet et al., 2010), we focus here on recent studies
using microscopy-generated image data. A good example of such
data is represented by monitoring the interaction of labeled fungal
cells, i.e., conidia, germlings, or hyphae, with immune effector cells
using microscopy, especially ﬂuorescence microscopy or confocal
laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). Interaction of A. fumigatus
and phagocytes based on ﬂuorescence microscopy and manual
image analysis was described, for example, by Ibrahim-Granet
et al. (2003) and Jahn et al. (2002). In theses studies, interac-
tion of A. fumigatus with phagocytes was monitored in detail,
which revealed that A. fumigatus is able to inhibit acidiﬁcation of
phagolysosomes. More recently, Thywißen et al. (2011) were able
to assign this ability to the presence of an active PksP, the polyketide
synthase involved in dihydroxynaphthalene melanin biosynthesis.
All of these studies were based on differentially labeled conidia,
germlings, phagocytes, and their structures and compartments.
It is even possible to monitor different pH values within dis-
tinct compartments of the phagocytes, allowing us to monitor
phagocytosis rates in general and the fate of conidia after con-
frontation with immune cells in detail (Thywißen et al., 2011).
In the future, a large number of mutants can be screened using
this assay to identify further pathogen-derived components inter-
fering with phagocytosis. Although phagocytosis of A. fumigatus
by different phagocytes from both human and mouse has been
analyzed in detail in several studies (Jahn et al., 2002; Ibrahim-
Granet et al., 2003), only a limited amount of data is available with
regard to direct observation of the phagocytosis process itself by

live cell imaging. This applies to live cell imaging of phagocytosis
of Candida species. Cell motility, however, is an essential require-
ment for the function of phagocytes. A detailed spatio-temporal
analysis of the dynamics of the interaction of phagocytes with
A. fumigatus and C. albicans using time-lapse microscopy and
single-cell tracking was performed by Behnsen et al. (2007). In
this study, the natural environments of different phagocytes were
simulated by 2D liquid cultures and by generation of a 3D col-
lagen environment. Live imaging showed that the interaction of
phagocytes with A. fumigatus conidia or C. albicans cells in both
2D and 3D environments is a highly dynamic process that includes
touching, dragging, and phagocytosis of fungal structures. Inter-
estingly, the different immune cells, i.e., neutrophils, macrophages,
and dendritic cells, exhibited different behavior with regard to the
dependence on environmental dimensionality and as well as to the
processing of A. fumigatus and C. albicans. Whereas neutrophils
and alveolar macrophages efﬁciently phagocytosed or dragged A.
fumigatus conidia in a 2D environment, their function was severely
impaired in a 3D matrix. The opposite was found for processing of
C. albicans cells. Phagocytosis was reduced in 2D environments,
while in 3D environments most neutrophils internalized multi-
ple yeast cells. These differences were also found in competitive
assays, when both C. albicans and A. fumigatus were confronted
with immune cells in the respective environment. Despite frequent
touching of the other pathogen, neutrophils primarily incorpo-
rated A. fumigatus conidia in 2D and C. albicans yeast cells in a 3D
environment. It is therefore conceivable that the activity and efﬁ-
cacy of the different phagocytes is best in the environment where
a pathogen is naturally encountered.

Analysis of image data with regard to host-pathogen interac-
tion was performed almost exclusively manually, with all of the
inherent drawbacks and disadvantages. Manual data analysis is
very time-consuming, error-prone, and last but not least, depen-
dent on subjective criteria of the person performing the analysis.
A ﬁrst approach to automatize image analysis was performed
by Mech et al. (2011). As a proof of principle, the interaction
of A. fumigatus conidia with macrophages was monitored (see
Figure 1). Data was collected by CLSM using cells labeled with
different ﬂuorescent dyes. The ruleset developed for processing
microscopic raw data allows fully automated and context-based
analysis of image data. By applying this method, discrimination
between different cell types, i.e., phagocytes and conidia, was
facilitated. Furthermore, cell counting based on discrimination
between phagocytosed, adherent and non-adherent exterior coni-
dia was performed. This is of particular importance since the
different steps in conidia-macrophage interaction, i.e., recogni-
tion, adherence, ingestion, and intracellular processing of inhaled
spores, deﬁne important pathogenesis-related processes. A prereq-
uisite for automated image analysis, e.g., to determine phagocyto-
sis rates, is the digitization of images. However, due to the fact that
phagocytosis of A. fumigatus conidia by macrophages is a complex
process, current image analysis tools that require precisely deﬁned
and homogeneous objects (overview in Shamir et al., 2010; Sysko
and Davis, 2010) cannot be applied here. During co-incubation,
conidia and macrophages tend to attach and form clusters. In
addition to this, the relevant structures vary in their intensities
as a result of different labeling efﬁcacies and, last but not least,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 8

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

the background differs considerably. These parameters were taken
into consideration by the ruleset developed by Mech et al. (2011)
and thereby allowed fully automated and context-based analysis
of spatially resolved biological data, i.e., phagocytosis rates of A.

fumigatus conidia. As this ruleset can be easily transferred to high-
throughput microscopy measurements of other pathogens, e.g.,
Candida sp. or Cryptococcus neoformans, it will contribute to the
further elucidation of host-pathogen interactions.

3. MODELING
The identiﬁcation of pathogenic traits will increasingly be sup-
ported by mathematical and computational modeling and by the
integration of experimental data and prior knowledge into com-
plex models that describe the underlying virulence mechanisms.
The generation of models and their subsequent application aim
to support the optimal and standardized design of experiments
and to generate and validate hypotheses. This allows that new
knowledge is gained and predictions for novel strategies for diag-
nostics (biomarker design) and therapy (drug discovery, drug
administration, therapy decision support) are made.

Systems biology of fungal infections describes and analyses var-
ious aspects of the confrontation of the host and its pathogen
under deﬁned conditions. The interactions and co-evolution of
host and pathogen can be described with the help of evolutionary
models (May and Anderson, 1979). Currently, molecular modeling
of the host-pathogen interaction generally takes a reductionistic
approach.

In general, models either describe a biological perspective on
a single scale, or they span several different orders of magnitude
(see Figure 2). Molecular mechanisms of host-pathogen inter-
action were identiﬁed with the help of statistical and integrated
analysis of experimental data (see section 2). Single interactions
represent only a reduced level of complexity, and a combina-
tion of several different mechanisms is capable of reﬂecting the
global behavior at a cellular level. Such multi-systems interactions
will become more complex when several species are considered.
More recent approaches incorporate different biological levels to

FIGURE 1 | Image of the phagocytosis assay showing all conidia and
macrophages after segmentation and classiﬁcation. Exterior
non-adherent conidia outlined in magenta, adherent conidia outlined in
white, interior conidia outlined in orange, and macrophages outlined in
yellow. (

Taken from Mech et al., 2011.)

FIGURE 2 | Schematic diagram of different biological and modeling
levels of systems biology of infectious diseases. Biological systems span
several orders of magnitude. Mathematical methods, which are presented in
this paper, focus on different biological levels of a fungal or similar infection.
Modeling approaches can be applied to host and pathogen systems and their

interplay. The ﬂexibility and adaptability of agent-based modeling allows
analysis at multiple levels without any restrictions with respect to the
biological system. In order to generate new hypotheses, the advantages of
bottom-up and top-down models are usually incorporated into the analysis.
(Figure adapted from Forst, 2006.)

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 9

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

get an interrelated view of fungal infections. These multi-scale
approaches need to integrate data from experiments on two or
more scales (Walker and Southgate, 2009). The greatest challenge
arises from the fact that an effective computational framework
has to deal with the complexity of different length and time scales
spanning several orders of magnitude. This leads to quantiﬁable
differences of crucial constituents (e.g., one cell and its sizeable
number of molecules) and to newly considered events (e.g., move-
ment of the cell and the corresponding events at the molecular
scale).

To date, only a few models of fungal infections of humans
have been studied, which is mainly due to the complex model-
ing challenges and the previous lack of measurements of model
parameters. In perspective, the host-pathogen interaction should
be described by a combination of spatio-temporal models with
interacting molecular network models.

3.1. NETWORK MODELING
Nodes in networks stand for interacting molecular entities (e.g.,
genes, proteins, metabolites) whose concentration or activity can
be quantiﬁed by discrete or continuous variables. Edges, which
stand for the relationships between the nodes, can be modeled in
different ways, e.g., by directed or undirected edges and labeled by
linear or non-linear functionality (Hecker et al., 2009). The cellular
behavior of a system is usually represented by gene-regulatory net-
works, signaling networks, protein-protein interaction networks
(PPI), and metabolic networks (see Figure 3). In addition to this,
a confrontation between pathogen and host can be viewed as two
interacting molecular networks, for example one within the host
epithelial or immune cells and the other in the colonizing, per-
sisting, or invading pathogens. Network models are capable of
reﬂecting the non-linear dynamic behavior of the systems. Despite
the fact that network visualization and handling is not scalable, its
representation is intuitive and, as an example, there are ongoing
projects which aim to standardize the graphical representation
(BioPax, PSI-MI, SBGN, Hermjakob et al., 2004; Strömbäck and
Lambrix, 2005; Le Novère et al., 2009). Basic networks only model
the coordinated behavior of biological entities, and experimental
data can be mapped to the network in order to conﬁrm and anno-
tate experimental results. The integration of general and speciﬁc
knowledge transforms those “inﬂuence networks” into “mecha-
nistic networks” of higher quality (Hecker et al., 2009; Santamaría
et al., 2011) which themselves already represent a molecular inter-
action model that can be tested with the help of perturbation
experiments. The dynamic nature of a system is partly reﬂected

in the network topology. The investigation of the interactivity, the
distribution and regulation of hubs, network motifs, and cross-talk
of functional modules and reaction sets (e.g., coupled reaction sets
and elementary ﬂux patterns in metabolic networks) contribute
to our understanding of the robustness and ﬂexibility of a system
(Barabási and Oltvai, 2004).

The major challenge of a systems biology-based approach
to understanding the host-pathogen interaction arises from the
robustness of the pathogenic system. The robustness originates
from the network structure of the biological system that makes it
unlikely that it will be possible to develop a single biomarker or
drug against fungal infection. In the interests of clinical success,
a system-oriented drug design with multiple antifungal strategies
needs to affect sufﬁcient points in the infection process (Kitano,
2007).

3.1.1. Gene-regulatory networks
Gene expression is mainly regulated by transcription factors and
co-factors and additionally by post-transcriptional modiﬁcation
as well as mRNA and protein degradation. The reverse engi-
neering of genome-wide interdependencies between these mol-
ecular entities relies on comprehensive datasets. Since there are
only a few datasets on infectious processes available, one of the
major tasks is to collect and process data and prior knowledge
required for the development of novel parsimonious network
models, describing essential fungus-host interactions. The infer-
ence process is mathematically challenging because the search
space (number of possible gene regulations) increases exponen-
tially with the number of nodes (genes). The modeling, on the
other hand, relies on a small amount of data, which is usually
obtained from microarray time series experiments. The experi-
mental design is a trade-off that minimizes the cost and effort of
the experiment, while ensuring that the data reliably reﬂects the
underlying processes of the perturbation experiment. Many differ-
ent network model architectures and inference methods have been
proposed (reviewed in Hecker et al., 2009; Marbach et al., 2010). As
part of the DREAM5-initiative1 (Dialog for Reverse Engineering
Assessments and Methods), gene expression data of the bacterial
pathogen Staphylococcus aureus was presented to infer large-scale
gene-regulatory networks. The inferred networks have been used
to create a predictive community network of 1054 genes and 1688
edges, which need to be validated experimentally (Stolovitzky,

1http://wiki.c2b2.columbia.edu/dream/

FIGURE 3 | Graphical representation of (A) gene-regulatory network, (B)
metabolic network, and (C) signaling network. (A) The activation of genes
is shown by arrows whereas repression is marked by bars. (B) Metabolites

(Mi) are connected with internal (vi) or external (bi) metabolic ﬂuxes. (C) A
signal can lead to a phosphorylation (“-P”) cascade of MAP kinases, and
eventually the target is activated or repressed.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 10

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

2011). The infection process of the fungi C. albicans and A. fumiga-
tus were modeled using tools such as NetGenerator (Guthke et al.,
2005; Toepfer et al., 2007), which are based on ordinary differential
equation systems and linear regression methods that are capable
of describing the dynamic behavior of systems, even on a global
scale (Altwasser et al., 2012). The high dimensionality of the math-
ematical problem can be reduced at several stages in the network
reconstruction process (Hecker et al., 2009). For example, Guthke
et al. (2007) reconstructed the underlying gene-regulatory events
when A. fumigatus was exposed to a temperature shift. In order to
select features for the network modeling, expression proﬁles with
similar signiﬁcantly regulated time courses were clustered to func-
tional entities. Cluster representatives, indicating main biological
functions, were assigned to these entities using gene annotation
(Priebe et al., 2011).

The dimensionality of the problem can be further reduced
when known global characteristics of a gene-regulatory network
are taken into account. The observed high modularity, hierar-
chical structure, and over-representation of network motifs can
guide the optimization of the structure of the model. A widely
used criterion is the network sparseness, meaning that each gene
is regulated only by a small number of regulatory genes. This fea-
ture of gene networks was incorporated in studies by Linde et al.
(2010, 2012), who analyzed transcriptomic data focused on the
iron homeostasis of C. albicans during infection and of A. fumi-
gatus after a change in available iron concentration. The authors
also used prior knowledge in order to reduce the search space.
Interactions between genes and transcription factors found in lit-
erature were used to build a network template, and this prior
knowledge was integrated into the network reconstruction pro-
cedures with the help of a weighting function. Currently, prior
knowledge about fungi is scarcely available in databases and needs
to be extracted from literature or genome sequences, e.g., by pre-
dicting transcription factor binding sites (Fazius et al., 2011).
The prior knowledge also forms the basis for the analysis of the
validity of the inferred network and the performance of the applied
reconstruction method.

Recently, the inference of gene-regulatory network was applied
to predict host-pathogen interactions (Tierney et al., 2012). RNA-
seq data from a C. albicans infection of Mus musculus were used
to predict subnetworks which were subsequently combined into
an interspecies network. This model contained predicted regula-
tions between the two species during the infection process. The
results were supported by experimental ﬁndings which, overall,
demonstrated that network inference can be used to support the
deciphering of complex infectious processes.

3.1.2. Protein-protein interaction network
The biological function of genes originates from encoded proteins
which form molecular structures, catalyze metabolic reactions,
and are involved in signaling and regulation. With the help of
technologies such as yeast two-hybrid or tandem afﬁnity puriﬁ-
cation combined with mass spectrometry, it is possible to identify
interacting protein partners which form an “interactome” net-
work. The interactome shifts the focus from the detection of single
protein interactions to the decoding of the global organization
of proteomes (Barabási and Oltvai, 2004). Protein networks are

increasingly used to identify host immune molecules and path-
ogenic effector proteins associated with host infection and drug
targets (reviewed in Ideker and Sharan, 2008). For fungal infec-
tions, the main challenge is the lack of experimental protein inter-
action data, which is required to (semi)automatically construct
such a network. The bioinformatic approaches either rely on text-
mining (Zhou and He, 2008; Rao et al., 2010), or the interaction is
predicted on the basis of sequence analyses (Dyer et al., 2007; Skra-
banek et al., 2008). For the modeling of infectious diseases, Dyer
et al. (2008) mapped all available host-pathogen protein interac-
tions to a single protein network. Many pathogens were found to
target the same process and therefore supported the hypothesis
that topological properties of the protein-protein interaction net-
work can be used to identify pathogenetic traits (Mukhtar et al.,
2011) and drug targets (Hase et al., 2009; Zhu et al., 2009). In
addition to this, the functional annotation of single gene prod-
ucts is supported by the interaction context of proteins within
the global protein-protein interaction network (Xu and Li, 2006;
Sharan et al., 2007).

3.1.3. Signaling Networks
The cell’s response to an internal and external stimulus is triggered
by a signaling network whose regulation is the key control for cel-
lular behavior. The understanding and modeling of this network
holds great promise for the development of new therapeutic strate-
gies and, consequently, many different modeling techniques have
been developed (reviewed in Aldridge et al., 2006). The elements
of the signal transduction networks help to identify the effect of
positive or negative feedback loops (Blüthgen et al., 2009) and also
shed light on the cross-talk between different signaling pathways
(Borisov et al., 2009).

Successful application of signaling models depends on care-
ful validation of the underlying data, especially since molecular
signals are hard to measure experimentally. This is one reason
why many applications in this research area concentrate on the
perspective of the human host where, for example, the JAK/Stat
pathway (Vera et al., 2011) and macrophage activation (Raza et al.,
2008) have been modeled. Currently, the yeast Saccharomyces cere-
visiae is a model organism for the analysis of fungal signaling
networks (Waltermann and Klipp, 2010). The modeling of fungal
pathogen signaling is still in its early stages. Efforts are being made
to reconstruct the underlying signaling network, e.g., for C. albi-
cans, with the help of sequence analysis and molecular biological
experiments (Rispail et al., 2009). Additionally, the effects of host-
pathogen interaction on the signaling pathways of the host are the
subject of several studies (reviewed in Brodsky and Medzhitov,
2009; Hajishengallis and Lambris, 2011). For example, Franke et al.
(2008) modeled the c-Met signaling network of hepatocytes after
infection with the pathogenic bacterium Helicobacter pylori and
predicted the effects of gene knock-outs, which were subsequently
conﬁrmed experimentally.

3.1.4. Metabolic networks
Supported by the increasing number of
sequenced fungal
genomes, the modeling of host-pathogen interactions with the
help of genome-scale metabolic networks is feasible. The function-
ality of thousands of genes can be associated with a set of metabolic

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 11

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

reactions, because they either encode enzymes or they regulate
related reactions (Cavalieri and Filippo, 2005). The steady state
of metabolic ﬂuxes through a metabolic network structure can be
understood as a phenotypic state of an organism. For example, the
metabolic capacity of the pathogen needs to be able to produce a
variety of secretory metabolites and proteins which correspond to
the pathogenic traits of the species and which are interesting drug
targets (Fang et al., 2009). On the other hand, fungi also rely on the
uptake of essential minerals which are bound to storage proteins in
the host, e.g., iron bound to hemoglobin or ferritin during C. albi-
cans infection (Almeida et al., 2009). The intertwined nature of the
host-pathogen interaction can thus be modeled by two interacting
metabolic networks (Raghunathan et al., 2009).

Despite the increasing number of sequencing projects for path-
ogenic fungi (see Table 2), the number of reconstructed networks
is limited to species which are in the focus of metabolic engineer-
ing. To the best of our knowledge, only two large-scale, manually
curated metabolic network reconstructions of fungal pathogens
exist, namely for A. fumigatus (Tuckwell et al., 2011) and C. albi-
cans2. Despite the recent efforts made at automation, a high quality
network reconstruction process needs manual curation, a step
which acts as the bottleneck in this modeling technique (Pitkänen
et al., 2010). During the curation of speciﬁc metabolic pathways,
genes that encode missing enzymes are annotated with the help
of bioinformatic tools or experimental validation (Pitkänen et al.,
2010). The reconstruction process itself thus already contributes
to the elucidation of the underlying molecular processes.

The mathematical modeling and simulation of metabolic net-
works allow us to address questions such as (i) the inﬂuence of
single enzymes (and corresponding genes) within the network,
(ii) the search for invariant steady states, (iii) the prediction of ele-
mentary ﬂux modes, and even (iv) the consideration of different
optimization strategies for the organism (Ruppin et al., 2010).
With these objectives in mind, speciﬁc methods and concepts
of metabolic modeling, which do not rely on mostly unknown
speciﬁc kinetic parameters, can be applied to fungi.

Nevertheless, it is promising to compare metabolic networks of
closely related pathogenic and non-pathogenic species in order to
understand the physical features of pathogenicity (Lee et al., 2009).
Recently, Oberhardt et al. (2011) examined differences and sim-
ilarities between a pathogenic and non-pathogenic Pseudomonas
species. Prior to analysis, the authors reconciled both metabolic
networks in order to minimize the inﬂuence of different recon-
struction approaches on the results. The subsequent analysis con-
ﬁrmed the multifactorial aspect of pathogenicity, but differences
in the ﬂexibility of sulfur related pathways were also found.

3.2. SPATIO-TEMPORAL MODELING
In contrast to the network models discussed in section 3.1, which
are based on “omics”-data that does not contain any spatial infor-
mation, spatio-temporal models are developed to include this type
of information. For example, modeling the afﬁnity maturation of
antibodies in germinal centers in response to the recognition of
antigens has been successfully performed in recent years in joint

2http://www.candidagenome.org and commercially available at Insilico Biotechnol-
ogy AG and ERGO

FIGURE 4 | Schematic illustration of a continuous 3D spatial
environment in silico within an agent-based model. Spherical objects
represent cells, the different colors depict different cell types.

experimental and theoretical studies (Figge, 2005; Figge et al.,
2008; Garin et al., 2010). Similarly, this modeling approach can
be applied to the ﬁeld of fungal infections to model the innate
immune response (see Figure 4). With the application of special
imaging techniques to generate spatially and spatio-temporally
resolved data and their automated analysis (see section 2.2), the
way has been paved to model, simulate, and study interactions
between the host and pathogenic fungi from this point of view.

Two common approaches to model spatio-temporally resolved
systems are partial differential equations (PDEs) and agent-based
models (ABMs). The former treats systemic constituents (e.g., mol-
ecules or cells) as concentrations (or populations), whereas the
latter deals with them as discrete objects. When it comes to the
number of constituents and their quantities, scalability is one of
the computational strengths of PDEs. Apart from this advantage,
crucial limitations such as the identiﬁcation of single objects, their
speciﬁc local interactions and their particular internal states exist
(Van Dyke Parunak et al., 1998). ABMs can cope with all of the con-
straints mentioned above, but come at the price of more expensive
computer resources in terms of computer memory and computing
time (Chavali et al., 2008).

Each modeling approach has its own right to exist. ABM sys-
tems proved to have the necessary properties when higher levels of
granularity for single constituents are considered. PDEs are ade-
quate when the general behavior, such as Brownian motion, for
a whole population of constituents is considered (Guo and Tay,
2005). Another criterion for making the right choice is the amount
of data and knowledge available for the scale under consideration.
Cells can be differentiated in various states. They may either move
in a straight line or show random migration behavior and inter-
act individually, depending on the interaction partners involved.
These characteristics favor the choice of an ABM. However, mod-
eling molecules at the level of individual molecules also has several
advantages. Nevertheless, describing innate immune responses
against fungal infections at all levels within ABMs renders the

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 12

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

multi-scale system intractable because of the overwhelmingly large
number of cells and molecules. A promising approach toward
modeling multi-scale systems was proposed by Guo et al. (2008),
where, within a hybrid model, cells are described in continuous
space as individual agents by an ABM approach, while molecular
interaction is described by PDEs via reaction-diffusion equations
for molecular populations. Such a hybrid multi-scale approach has
the potential to model fungal infections since it is adaptable and
extensible, thus providing the required ﬂexibility.

At the beginning of the modeling process of this multi-scale
system, one major issue is the deﬁnition of the necessary features
of cells at the cellular scale. Examples of macroscopic character-
istics are the cellular migration type as well as their morphology
and interaction with other cells. A major source of these essential
parameters are images and time-lapse videos, which are recorded
during microscopy experiments. With the analysis of single frames,
cellular sizes, morphological properties, and population quanti-
ties can be computationally extracted in an automated fashion
(see Figure 1). An automated analysis of the interaction between
macrophages and A. fumigatus was recently presented by Mech
et al. (2011). Furthermore, the analysis of cell tracks extracted
from videos plays an important role in the calculation of charac-
teristic properties of the cellular movement such as speed, motility
coefﬁcient, and diffusion constant. The intercellular interactions
can be deﬁned at both the cellular and molecular scale. The initial
setup of the interaction model can be arranged by implementing
simple interaction rules of cellular behavior based on phenomeno-
logical knowledge. An extension toward a complex rule-system is
also conceivable as well as the implementation of speciﬁc strategic
behavior of the pathogenic fungi, as recently unraveled by Hum-
mert et al. (2010), by applying methods of game theory. It would
also be conceivable to include cell-cell interactions by considering
interacting molecules at the cellular surface and their subsequent
impact on internal and external signaling. These processes, taking
place at the molecular level, require the data basis that underlies the
network models (see section 3.1) and can be integrated together
with the microscopy data basis into one and the same multi-scale
model.

In addition to the integration of data, there are also other chal-
lenging tasks, such as the estimation of unknown parameters and
the establishment of efﬁcient algorithms and adequate data struc-
tures, in order to make simulations computational feasible. The
former issue is strongly related to the generation of hypotheses.
The efﬁciency of the applied algorithms needs to be veriﬁed exper-
imentally in further studies. We are still at the beginning of the
systems biology cycle regarding the spatio-temporal modeling of
fungal infections, but the ﬁrst promising steps have successfully
been made.

4. OUTLOOK
Although great advances have been made in the understanding
of molecular and cellular mechanisms of fungal infections, they
do not currently provide a genome-wide view on the pathogenic
processes of both fungal pathogens and hosts. New technologies
such as RNA-seq, single-cell measurements, and PET/CT imag-
ing open up new opportunities to unravel molecular and cellular
mechanisms in greater detail and complexity. However, integrative
analysis of high-throughput and spatio-temporal data on several

molecular and cellular levels is increasingly becoming the limiting
step when identifying molecular key regulators and mechanisms
involved in fungal pathogenicity. Efforts to standardize data man-
agement and annotation promise advances for computational
approaches to the mathematical modeling of host-pathogen inter-
actions. Bioinformatic tools also need to be further adapted to the
speciﬁc biological context of fungi. The current focus of systems
biology is on the application of network and agent-based mod-
eling techniques to genome-wide and spatio-temporally resolved
dynamic systems thus exploiting the full range of high-throughput
and image data available. In order to fully facilitate existing com-
putational methods, it is necessary to deepen our understanding
of molecular mechanisms thus improving gene annotation and
establishing wider knowledge bases.

Genomic knowledge, coupled with high-throughput gene
knock-out methodologies, are already advancing. The availabil-
ity of mutant strains has grown rapidly over the last 10 years
(McCluskey et al., 2010). We now have the possibility to screen
more than 3,000 C. albicans single deletion mutants, but we still
lack complete A. fumigatus or C. albicans knock-out libraries.
At present, many high-throughput investigations are performed
using complete gene knock-out libraries from S. cerevisiae or Neu-
rospora crassa. This approach can be exploited to discover wide
spectra of antimycotic drugs, but is not helpful for virulence stud-
ies. However, complete sets of viable genome-wide mutants for
many pathogenic fungi are expected to become available in the
next few years. In parallel, many efforts are being made to cre-
ate high-throughput screening infection model systems. Recently,
alternative systems using insects, nematodes, or embryonated eggs
have been used (Ferrandon et al., 2007; Mylonakis, 2008; Moy et al.,
2009; Jacobsen et al., 2010).

In the meantime, the scientiﬁc community continues to inves-
tigate the role of innate immunity during fungal infections. It has
yet to be explored how neutrophil granulocytes actually kill out-
growing hyphae of A. fumigatus. The cellular mechanisms can be
explored with the help of images which are a promising data source
for driving the systems biology cycle. Image-based Systems Biology
focuses on spatial properties such as cellular morphology or the
mechanical features of interactions, and allows further insights
which contribute to a better understanding of biological systems.
In clinical practice, differential diagnosis of infectious diseases
and sepsis is based primarily on clinical criteria. These crite-
ria lack the required sensitivity and speciﬁcity (Alberti et al.,
2003) making the identiﬁcation of novel biomarkers essential to
identify the pathogen causing the infection on time. In clinical
decision-making, fast and reliable diagnosis of speciﬁc pathogens
is required. Theranostics (Chen, 2011) is a novel concept of com-
bining novel platforms and technologies in clinical diagnostics
and therapy such as image-guided therapy by, e.g., PET (Walther
et al., 2011) or Raman spectroscopy (Neugebauer et al., 2006).
There is currently a great deal of effort being made to push
commercialization and collaboration strategies to establish the
so-called companion diagnostics (CDx) marketplace. So-called
Translational Systems Biology describes the clinical application of
mathematical or computational models by enhancing the under-
standing of the complex dynamics of biomedical processes in an
integrative, genome-wide way (Vodovotz et al., 2008). It integrates
the scientiﬁc background of these trends and is based on current

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 13

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

experimental ﬁndings. Apart from integrating different “omics”
data levels, models should not exclusively focus on the host’s and
the pathogen’s aspects of the infection process, but also on the
interaction between both biological systems. This interconnected
perspective supports the elucidation of mechanisms underlying
the complex process of fungal pathogenicity. Translational Sys-
tems Biology is primarily directed at drug target identiﬁcation
and validation as well as rational drug design, supported by
analysis of the inferred molecular network models (Klipp et al.,
2010). Furthermore, Translational Systems Biology of infection
aims (i) to recognize pathogens by their molecular signatures, (ii)
to make the outcome and responsiveness of therapeutic interven-
tions more predictable, and (iii) to identify more effective therapies
using mathematical and computational models. The ﬁrst steps

in Translational Systems Biology were taken in the area of sep-
sis control (Vodovotz et al., 2008) and tuberculosis research (Day
et al., 2010). Translational Systems Biology of fungal infections
with applications in personalized medicine (Willard and Ginsburg,
2009) can be expected to be developed in the near future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Part of this work was supported by the excellence graduate school
Jena School for Microbial Communication (JSMC), funded by
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, as part o ﬁt, by the Inter-
national Leibniz Research School for Microbial and Biomolec-
ular Interactions (ILRS Jena) and by a grant from the Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) in the frame of
ERA-NetPathoGenoMics.

REFERENCES
R.,
Aebersold,
(2003). Mass
proteomics. Nature 422, 198–207.

and Mann, M.
spectrometry-based

Aimanianda, V., Bayry,

J., Bozza,
S., Kniemeyer, O., Perruccio, K.,
Elluru, S. R., Clavaud, C., Paris,
S., Brakhage, A. A., Kaveri, S.
V., Romani, L., and Latgé,
J.-P.
(2009). Surface hydrophobin pre-
vents immune recognition of air-
borne fungal spores. Nature 460,
1117–1121.

Alberti, C., Brun-Buisson, C., Good-
man, S. V., Guidici, D., Granton, J.,
Moreno, R., Smithies, M., Thomas,
O., Artigas, A., Gall, J. R. L., and
Group, E. S. (2003). Inﬂuence of sys-
temic inﬂammatory response syn-
drome and sepsis on outcome of
critically ill infected patients. Am.
J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 168,
77–84.

Albrecht, D., Guthke, R., Brakhage,
A. A., and Kniemeyer, O. (2010).
Integrative analysis of
the heat
shock response in Aspergillus fumi-
gatus. BMC Genomics
11, 32.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-32

Albrecht, D., Guthke, R., Kniemeyer, O.,
and Brakhage, A. A. (2008). “Sys-
tems biology of human-pathogenic
fungi,” in Handbook of Research on
Systems Biology Applications in Med-
icine, Vol. 1, ed. A. Daskalaki (Her-
shey: IGI Global), 400–418.

Integration of

Albrecht, D., Kniemeyer, O., Brakhage,
A. A., Berth, M., and Guthke, R.
(2007).
transcrip-
tome and proteome data from
human-pathogenic fungi by using a
data warehouse. J. Integr. Bioinform.
4, 52.

Albrecht, D., Kniemeyer, O., Mech,
F., Gunzer, M., Brakhage, A. A.,
and Guthke, R. (2011). On the
way toward systems biology of
Aspergillus fumigatus infection. Int.
J. Med. Microbiol. 301, 453–459.

Alby, K., Schaefer, D., and Bennett,
R. J. (2009). Homothallic and het-
erothallic mating in the oppor-
tunistic pathogen Candida albicans.
Nature 460, 890–893.

Aldridge, B. B., Burke, J. M., Lauf-
fenburger, D. A., and Sorger, P. K.
(2006). Physicochemical modelling
of cell signalling pathways. Nat. Cell
Biol. 8, 1195–1203.

Almeida, R. S., Wilson, D., and Hube, B.
(2009). Candida albicans iron acqui-
sition within the host. FEMS Yeast
Res. 9, 1000–1012.

Altwasser, R., Linde, J., Buyko, E., Hahn,
U., and Guthke, R. (2012). Genome-
wide scale-free network inference for
Candida albicans. Front. Microbiol.
3:51. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2012.00051
Andersen, M. R., and Nielsen, J. (2009).
Current status of systems biology
in aspergilli. Fungal Genet. Biol.
46(Suppl. 1), S180–S190.

Arnaud, M. B., Cerqueira, G. C.,
Inglis, D. O., Skrzypek, M. S., Bink-
ley,
J., Chibucos, M. C., Crab-
tree,
J.,
J., Howarth, C., Orvis,
Shah, P., Wymore, F., Binkley, G.,
Miyasato, S. R., Simison, M., Sher-
lock, G., and Wortman, J. R. (2012).
The Aspergillus Genome Database
(AspGD): recent developments in
comprehensive multispecies cura-
tion, comparative genomics and
community resources. Nucleic Acids
Res. 40, D653–D659.

Arnaud, M. B., Costanzo, M. C., Shah,
P., Skrzypek, M. S., and Sherlock,
G. (2009). Gene ontology and the
annotation of pathogen genomes:
the case of Candida albicans. Trends
Microbiol. 17, 295–303.

Arnaud, M. B., Costanzo, M. C.,
Skrzypek, M. S., Shah, P., Binkley, G.,
Lane, C., Miyasato, S. R., and Sher-
lock, G. (2007). Sequence resources
at the Candida Genome Database.
Nucleic Acids Res. 35, D452–D456.
[Database issue].

Avet, J., Granjon, D., Prevot-Bitot, N.,
Isnardi, V., Berger, C., Stephan, J.
L., and Dubois, F. (2009). Monitor-
ing of systemic candidiasis by 18F-
FDG PET/CT. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol.
Imaging 36, 1900.

Backer, M. D. D., Ilyina, T., Ma, X.
J., Vandoninck, S., Luyten, W. H.,
and Bossche, H. V. (2001). Genomic
proﬁling of the response of Can-
dida albicans to itraconazole treat-
ment using a DNA microarray.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45,
1660–1670.

Bailey, N. J. T. (1975). The Mathemati-
cal Theory of Infectious Diseases and
its Application. London: Grifﬁn.

Barabási, A.-L., and Oltvai, Z. N. (2004).
Network biology: understanding the
cell’s functional organization. Nat.
Rev. Genet. 5, 101–113.

Barker, K. S., Crisp, S., Wiederhold, N.,
Lewis, R. E., Bareither, B., Eckstein, J.,
Barbuch, R., Bard, M., and Rogers, P.
D. (2004). Genome-wide expression
proﬁling reveals genes associated
with amphotericin B and ﬂucona-
zole resistance in experimentally
induced antifungal resistant isolates
of Candida albicans. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 54, 376–385.

Barrett, L. G., Thrall, P. H., Burdon,
J. J., and Linde, C. C. (2008). Life
history determines genetic structure
and evolutionary potential of host-
parasite interactions. Trends Ecol.
Evol. (Amst.) 23, 678–685.

Behnsen, J., Hartmann, A., Schmaler,
J., Gehrke, A., Brakhage, A. A., and
Zipfel, P. F. (2008). The oppor-
tunistic human pathogenic fungus
Aspergillus fumigatus evades the host
complement system. Infect. Immun.
76, 820–827.

Behnsen,

J., Lessing, F., Schindler,
S., Wartenberg, D.,
I.
D., Thoen, M., Zipfel, P. F., and
Brakhage, A. A. (2010). Secreted
Aspergillus fumigatus protease Alp1

Jacobsen,

degrades human complement pro-
teins C3, C4, and C5. Infect. Immun.
78, 3585–3594.

Behnsen, J., Narang, P., Hasenberg, M.,
Gunzer, F., Bilitewski, U., Klippel, N.,
Rohde, M., Brock, M., Brakhage, A.
A., and Gunzer, M. (2007). Environ-
mental dimensionality controls the
interaction of phagocytes with the
pathogenic fungi Aspergillus fumi-
gatus and Candida albicans. PLoS
Pathog. 3, e13. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.ppat.0030013

Bernoulli, D. (1760). Essai d’une nou-
velle analyse de la mortalité causée
par la petite vérole et des avantages
de l’inoculation pour la prévenir.
Mémoires de Mathématiques et de
Physique Paris Académie Royale des
Sciences 1, 1–45.

Blüthgen, N., Legewie, S., Kielbasa, S.
M., Schramme, A., Tchernitsa, O.,
Keil, J., Solf, A., Vingron, M., Schäfer,
R., Herzel, H., and Sers, C. (2009).
A systems biological approach sug-
gests that transcriptional feedback
regulation by dual-speciﬁcity phos-
phatase 6 shapes extracellular signal-
related kinase activity in RAS-
transformed ﬁbroblasts. FEBS J. 276,
1024–1035.

Borisov, N., Aksamitiene, E., Kiyatkin,
A., Legewie, S., Berkhout, J., Mai-
wald, T., Kaimachnikov, N. P., Tim-
mer, J., Hoek, J. B., and Kholodenko,
B. N. (2009). Systems-level interac-
tions between insulin-EGF networks
amplify mitogenic signaling. Mol.
Syst. Biol. 5, 256.

Brakhage, A. A. (2005). Systemic fungal
caused by Aspergillus
infections
infection
species:
process and virulence determinants.
Curr. Drug Targets 6, 875–886.

epidemiology,

Brakhage, A. A., Bruns, S., Thywis-
sen, A., Zipfel, P. F., and Behnsen,
J. (2010). Interaction of phagocytes
with ﬁlamentous fungi. Curr. Opin.
Microbiol. 13, 409–415.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 14

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

Braun, B. R., van Het Hoog, M.,
d’Enfert, C., Martchenko, M., Dun-
gan, J., Kuo, A., Inglis, D. O., Uhl,
M. A., Hogues, H., Berriman, M.,
Lorenz, M., Levitin, A., Oberholzer,
U., Bachewich, C., Harcus, D., Mar-
cil, A., Dignard, D., Iouk, T., Zito, R.,
Frangeul, L., Tekaia, F., Rutherford,
K., Wang, E., Munro, C. A., Bates,
S., Gow, N. A., Hoyer, L. L., Köh-
ler, G., Morschhäuser, J., Newport,
G., Znaidi, S., Raymond, M., Tur-
cotte, B., Sherlock, G., Costanzo, M.,
Ihmels, J., Berman, J., Sanglard, D.,
Agabian, N., Mitchell, A. P., John-
son, A. D., Whiteway, M., and Nan-
tel, A. (2005). A human-curated
annotation of the Candida albicans
genome. PLoS Genet. 1, 36–57.

Brock, M. (2012). Application of bio-
luminescence imaging for in vivo
monitoring of fungal infections. Int.
J. Microbiol. 2012, 956794.

Brodsky, I. E., and Medzhitov, R. (2009).
Targeting of immune signalling net-
works by bacterial pathogens. Nat.
Cell Biol. 11, 521–526.

Brown, A. J. P., Odds, F. C., and Gow,
N. A. R. (2007). Infection-related
gene expression in Candida albicans.
Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 10, 307–313.
Bruneau, J. -M., Maillet, I., Tagat, E.,
Legrand, R., Supatto, F., Fudali, C.,
Caer, J.-P. L., Labas, V., Lecaque,
D., and Hodgson, J. (2003). Drug
induced proteome changes in Can-
dida albicans: comparison of
the
effect of beta(1,3) glucan synthase
inhibitors and two triazoles, ﬂucona-
zole and itraconazole. Proteomics 3,
325–336.

Bruno, V. M., Wang, Z., Marjani,
S. L., Euskirchen, G. M., Martin,
J., Sherlock, G., and Snyder, M.
(2010). Comprehensive annotation
of the transcriptome of the human
fungal pathogen Candida albicans
using RNA-seq. Genome Res. 20,
1451–1458.

Bruns, S., Seidler, M., Albrecht, D., Sal-
venmoser, S., Remme, N., Hertweck,
C., Brakhage, A. A., Kniemeyer,
O., and Müller, F.-M. C. (2010).
proﬁling
Functional
of Aspergillus
fumigatus bioﬁlm
reveals enhanced production of the
mycotoxin gliotoxin. Proteomics 10,
3097–3107.

genomic

Burmester, A., Shelest, E., Glöckner,
G., Heddergott, C., Schindler, S.,
Staib, P., Heidel, A., Felder, M., Pet-
zold, A., Szafranski, K., Feuermann,
M., Pedruzzi, I., Priebe, S., Groth,
M., Winkler, R., Li, W., Kniemeyer,
O., Schroeckh, V., Hertweck, C.,
Hube, B., White, T. C., Platzer, M.,
Guthke, R., Heitman,
J., Wöste-
meyer, J., Zipfel, P. F., Monod, M.,

and Brakhage, A. A. (2011). Com-
parative and functional genomics
provide insights into the patho-
genicity of dermatophytic fungi.
Genome Biol. 12, R7.

Butler, G., Rasmussen, M. D., Lin, M.
F., Santos, M. A. S., Sakthikumar, S.,
Munro, C. A., Rheinbay, E., Grab-
herr, M., Forche, A., Reedy, J. L.,
Agraﬁoti, I., Arnaud, M. B., Bates, S.,
Brown, A. J. P., Brunke, S., Costanzo,
M. C., Fitzpatrick, D. A., de Groot,
P. W. J., Harris, D., Hoyer, L. L.,
Hube, B., Klis, F. M., Kodira, C.,
Lennard, N., Logue, M. E., Mar-
tin, R., Neiman, A. M., Nikolaou,
E., Quail, M. A., Quinn, J., Santos,
M. C., Schmitzberger, F. F., Sher-
lock, G., Shah, P., Silverstein, K. A. T.,
Skrzypek, M. S., Soll, D., Staggs, R.,
Stansﬁeld, I., Stumpf, M. P. H., Sud-
bery, P. E., Srikantha, T., Zeng, Q.,
Berman, J., Berriman, M., Heitman,
J., Gow, N. A. R., Lorenz, M. C., Bir-
ren, B. W., Kellis, M., and Cuomo,
C. A. (2009). Evolution of patho-
genicity and sexual reproduction in
eight Candida genomes. Nature 459,
657–662.

Cagas, S. E., Jain, M. R., Li, H., and
Perlin, D. S. (2011). Proﬁling the
Aspergillus fumigatus proteome in
response to caspofungin. Antimi-
crob. Agents Chemother. 55, 146–154.
Cairns, T., Minuzzi, F., and Bignell,
E. (2010). The host-infecting fun-
gal transcriptome. FEMS Microbiol.
Lett. 307, 1–11.

Castillo, L., Calvo, E., Martínez, A. I.,
Ruiz-Herrera, J., Valentín, E., Lopez,
J. A., and Sentandreu, R. (2008).
A study of
the Candida albicans
cell wall proteome. Proteomics 8,
3871–3881.

Cavalieri, D., and Filippo, C. D. (2005).
Bioinformatic methods
inte-
grating whole-genome expression
results into cellular networks. Drug
Discov. Today 10, 727–734.

for

Chavali, A. K., Gianchandani, E. P.,
Tung, K. S., Lawrence, M. B., Peirce,
S. M., and Papin, J. A. (2008).
Characterizing emergent proper-
ties of immunological systems with
multi-cellular rule-based computa-
tional modeling. Trends Immunol.
29, 589–599.

Chen, X. S. (2011). Introducing Thera-
nostics journal – from the editor-in-
chief. Theranostics 1, 1–2.

Correia, A., Lermann, U., Teixeira, L.,
Cerca, F., Botelho, S., da Costa,
R. M. G., Sampaio, P., Gärtner, F.,
Morschhäuser, J., Vilanova, M., and
Pais, C. (2010). Limited role of
secreted aspartyl proteinases Sap1
to Sap6 in Candida albicans viru-
lence and host immune response

in murine hematogenously dissemi-
nated candidiasis. Infect. Immun. 78,
4839–4849.

Courtot, M., Juty, N., Knüpfer, C., Wal-
temath, D., Zhukova, A., Dräger,
A., Dumontier, M., Finney, A.,
Golebiewski, M., Hastings, J., Hoops,
S., Keating, S., Kell, D. B., Ker-
rien, S., Lawson, J., Lister, A., Lu, J.,
Machne, R., Mendes, P., Pocock, M.,
Rodriguez, N., Villeger, A., Wilkin-
son, D. J., Wimalaratne, S., Laibe, C.,
Hucka, M., and Novère, N. L. (2011).
Controlled vocabularies and seman-
tics in systems biology. Mol. Syst.
Biol. 7, 543.

da Silva Ferreira, M. E., Malavazi, I.,
Savoldi, M., Brakhage, A. A., Gold-
man, M. H. S., Kim, H. S., Nier-
man, W. C., and Goldman, G. H.
(2006). Transcriptome analysis of
Aspergillus
fumigatus exposed to
voriconazole. Curr. Genet. 50, 32–44.
Dagenais, T. R. T., and Keller, N. P.
(2009). Pathogenesis of Aspergillus
fumigatus in invasive aspergillosis.
Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 22, 447–465.

Day, J., Schlesinger, L. S., and Friedman,
A. (2010). Tuberculosis research:
going
forward with a power-
ful “translational systems biology”
approach. Tuberculosis (Edinb.) 90,
7–8.

de Groot, P. W. J., de Boer, A. D.,
Cunningham, J., Dekker, H. L., de
Jong, L., Hellingwerf, K. J., de Koster,
C., and Klis, F. M. (2004). Pro-
teomic analysis of Candida albi-
cans cell walls reveals covalently
bound carbohydrate-active enzymes
and adhesins. Eukaryotic Cell 3,
955–965.

d’Enfert, C., Goyard, S., Rodriguez-
Arnaveilhe, S., Frangeul, L., Jones,
L., Tekaia, F., Bader, O., Albrecht,
A., Castillo, L., Dominguez, A.,
Ernst, J. F., Fradin, C., Gaillardin,
C., Garcia-Sanchez, S., de Groot,
P., Hube, B., Klis, F. M., Krishna-
murthy, S., Kunze, D., Lopez, M.-C.,
Mavor, A., Martin, N., Moszer, I.,
Onésime, D., Martin, J. P., Sentan-
dreu, R., Valentin, E., and Brown,
A.
(2005). CandidaDB: a
genome database for Candida albi-
cans pathogenomics. Nucleic Acids
Res. 33, D353–D357.
[Database
issue].

J. P.

Doedt, T., Krishnamurthy, S., Bock-
mühl, D. P., Tebarth, B., Stempel, C.,
Russell, C. L., Brown, A. J. P., and
Ernst, J. F. (2004). APSES proteins
regulate morphogenesis and metab-
olism in Candida albicans. Mol. Biol.
Cell 15, 3167–3180.

Domon, B., and Aebersold, R. (2010).
Options and considerations when
selecting a quantitative proteomics

strategy. Nat.
710–721.

Biotechnol.

28,

Dujon, B.

(2010). Yeast evolution-
ary genomics. Nat. Rev. Genet. 11,
512–524.

Dyer, M. D., Murali, T. M., and Sobral,
B. W. (2007). Computational pre-
diction of host-pathogen protein-
protein interactions. Bioinformatics
23, i159–i166.

Dyer, M. D., Murali, T. M., and Sobral, B.
W. (2008). The landscape of human
proteins interacting with viruses and
other pathogens. PLoS Pathog. 4, e32.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.0040032

Fang, X., Wallqvist, A., and Reif-
man, J. (2009). A systems biol-
ogy framework for modeling meta-
bolic enzyme inhibition of Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis. BMC Syst. Biol.
3, 92.

Fedorova, N. D., Khaldi, N.,

Fazius, E., Shelest, V., and Shelest, E.
(2011). SiTaR: a novel tool for tran-
scription factor binding site predic-
tion. Bioinformatics 27, 2806–2811.
Joar-
dar, V. S., Maiti, R., Amedeo, P.,
Anderson, M. J., Crabtree, J., Silva,
J. C., Badger, J. H., Albarraq, A.,
Angiuoli, S., Bussey, H., Bowyer, P.,
Cotty, P. J., Dyer, P. S., Egan, A.,
Galens, K., Fraser-Liggett, C. M.,
Haas, B. J., Inman, J. M., Kent, R.,
Lemieux, S., Malavazi, I., Orvis, J.,
Roemer, T., Ronning, C. M., Sun-
daram, J. P., Sutton, G., Turner,
G., Venter,
J. C., White, O. R.,
Whitty, B. R., Youngman, P., Wolfe,
K. H., Goldman, G. H., Wort-
man, J. R., Jiang, B., Denning, D.
W., and Nierman, W. C. (2008).
Genomic islands in the pathogenic
ﬁlamentous fungus Aspergillus fumi-
gatus. PLoS Genet. 4, e1000046.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000046

Feldmesser, M. (2006). Role of neu-
in invasive aspergillosis.

trophils
Infect. Immun. 74, 6514–6516.

Ferrandon, D.,

Imler,

J.-L., Hetru,
C., and Hoffmann, J. A. (2007).
The Drosophila systemic immune
response: sensing and signalling dur-
ing bacterial and fungal infections.
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 7, 862–874.

Figge, M. T. (2005). Stochastic discrete
event simulation of germinal center
reactions. Phys. Rev. E Stat. Nonlin.
Soft Matter Phys. 71, 051907.

Figge, M. T., Garin, A., Gunzer, M.,
Kosco-Vilbois, M., Toellner, K.-M.,
and Meyer-Hermann, M. (2008).
Deriving a germinal center lympho-
cyte migration model
from two-
photon data.
J. Exp. Med. 205,
3019–3029.

Filler, S. G. (2006). Candida-host cell
receptor-ligand interactions. Curr.
Opin. Microbiol. 9, 333–339.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 15

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

Fleck, C. B., Schöbel, F., and Brock,
M. (2011). Nutrient acquisition by
pathogenic fungi: nutrient availabil-
ity, pathway regulation, and differ-
ences in substrate utilization. Int. J.
Med. Microbiol. 301, 400–407.

Forst, C. V. (2006). Host-pathogen sys-
tems biology. Drug Discov. Today 11,
220–227.

Fradin, C., Kretschmar, M., Nichterlein,
T., Gaillardin, C., d’Enfert, C., and
Hube, B. (2003). Stage-speciﬁc gene
expression of Candida albicans in
human blood. Mol. Microbiol. 47,
1523–1543.

Franke, R., Müller, M., Wundrack,
N., Gilles, E.-D., Klamt, S., Kähne,
T.,
and Naumann, M.
(2008).
Host-pathogen systems
biology:
logical modelling of hepatocyte
growth factor
and Helicobacter
pylori induced c-Met signal trans-
duction. BMC Syst. Biol. 2, 4.
doi:10.1186/1752-0509-2-4

Gafa, V., Remoli, M. E., Giacomini, E.,
Gagliardi, M. C., Lande, R., Severa,
M., Grillot, R., and Coccia, E. M.
(2007). In vitro infection of human
dendritic cells by Aspergillus fumiga-
tus conidia triggers the secretion of
chemokines for neutrophil and Th1
lymphocyte recruitment. Microbes
Infect. 9, 971–980.

Garin, A., Meyer-Hermann, M., Contie,
M., Figge, M. T., Buatois, V., Gunzer,
M., Toellner, K. -M., Elson, G., and
Kosco-Vilbois, M. H. (2010). Toll-
like receptor 4 signaling by follicular
dendritic cells is pivotal for germinal
center onset and afﬁnity maturation.
Immunity 33, 84–95.

Gautam, P., Shankar, J., Madan, T., Sird-
eshmukh, R., Sundaram, C. S., Gade,
W. N., Basir, S. F., and Sarma, P.
U. (2008). Proteomic and transcrip-
tomic analysis of Aspergillus fumi-
gatus on exposure to amphotericin
B. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 52,
4220–4227.

Gibbons,

J. G., Beauvais, A., Beau,
J.-P.,
R., McGary, K. L., Latge,
and Rokas, A.
(2012). Global
transcriptome changes underlying
colony growth in the opportunis-
tic human pathogen Aspergillus
fumigatus. Eukaryotic Cell.
11,
68–78.

Gilsenan, J. M., Cooley, J., and Bowyer,
P. (2012). CADRE: The Central
Aspergillus Data Repository 2012.
Nucleic Acids Res. 40, D660–D666.

Grahl, N., Puttikamonkul, S., Mac-
Donald, J. M., Gamcsik, M. P., Ngo,
L. Y., Hohl, T. M., and Cramer,
R. A. (2011). In vivo hypoxia and
a fungal alcohol dehydrogenase
inﬂuence the pathogenesis of inva-
sive
aspergillosis.

pulmonary

Pathog.

PLoS
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002145

e1002145.

7,

Gropp, K., Schild, L., Schindler, S.,
Hube, B., Zipfel, P. F., and Skerka, C.
(2009). The yeast Candida albicans
evades human complement attack
by secretion of aspartic proteases.
Mol. Immunol. 47, 465–475.

Gross, O., Poeck, H., Bscheider, M.,
Dostert, C., Hannesschläger, N.,
Endres, S., Hartmann, G., Tardivel,
A., Schweighoffer, E., Tybulewicz, V.,
Mocsai, A., Tschopp, J., and Ruland,
J. (2009). Syk kinase signalling cou-
ples to the Nlrp3 inﬂammasome
for anti-fungal host defence. Nature
459, 433–436.

Gudlaugsson, O., Gillespie, S., Lee, K.,
Berg, J. V., Hu, J., Messer, S., Her-
waldt, L., Pfaller, M., and Diekema,
D. (2003). Attributable mortality of
nosocomial candidemia, revisited.
Clin. Infect. Dis. 37, 1172–1177.

Guo, Z., Sloot, P. M., and Tay,

J.
C. (2008). A hybrid agent-based
approach for modeling microbio-
logical systems. J. Theor. Biol. 255,
163–175.

Guo, Z., and Tay, J. (2005). A compar-
ative study on modeling strategies
for immune system dynamics under
HIV-1 infection. Artif. Immune Syst.
3627, 220–233.

Guthke, R., Kniemeyer, O., Albrecht,
D., Brakhage, A. A., and Möller, U.
(2007). Discovery of gene regulatory
networks in Aspergillus fumigatus.
Lect. Notes Bioinform. 4366, 22–41.

Guthke, R., Möller, U., Hoffmann, M.,
Thies, F., and Töpfer, S. (2005).
Dynamic network reconstruction
from gene expression data applied
to immune response during bac-
terial
infection. Bioinformatics 21,
1626–1634.

Hajishengallis, G., and Lambris,

J.
D.
(2011). Microbial manipula-
tion of receptor crosstalk in innate
immunity. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11,
187–200.

Hase, T., Tanaka, H., Suzuki, Y., Nak-
agawa, S., and Kitano, H. (2009).
Structure of protein interaction
networks and their
implications
on drug design. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 5, e1000550. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pcbi.1000550

Hawksworth, D. (2001). The magni-
tude of
fungal diversity: the 1.5
million species estimate revisited.
Mycol. Res. 105, 1422–1432.

Hecker, M., Lambeck, S., Toepfer, S., van
Someren, E., and Guthke, R. (2009).
Gene regulatory network inference:
data integration in dynamic mod-
els – a review. BioSystems 96, 86–103.
Heilmann, C. J., Sorgo, A. G., Siliakus,
A. R., Dekker, H. L., Brul, S., de

Koster, C. G., de Koning, L. J., and
Klis, F. M. (2011). Hyphal induction
in the human fungal pathogen Can-
dida albicans reveals a characteris-
tic wall protein proﬁle. Microbiology
157, 2297–2307.

Hermjakob, H., Montecchi-Palazzi, L.,
J., Salwinski,
Bader, G., Wojcik,
L., Ceol, A., Moore, S., Orchard,
S., Sarkans, U., von Mering, C.,
Roechert, B., Poux, S., Jung, E., Mer-
sch, H., Kersey, P., Lappe, M., Li,
Y., Zeng, R., Rana, D., Nikolski, M.,
Husi, H., Brun, C., Shanker, K.,
Grant, S. G. N., Sander, C., Bork,
P., Zhu, W., Pandey, A., Brazma, A.,
Jacq, B., Vidal, M., Sherman, D.,
Legrain, P., Cesareni, G., Xenarios,
I., Eisenberg, D., Steipe, B., Hogue,
C., and Apweiler, R. (2004). The
HUPO PSI’s molecular interaction
format – a community standard
for the representation of protein
interaction data. Nat. Biotechnol. 22,
177–183.

Hernáez, M. L., Ximénez-Embún, P.,
Martínez-Gomariz, M., Gutiérrez-
Blázquez, M. D., Nombela, C., and
Gil, C. (2010).
Identiﬁcation of
Candida albicans exposed surface
proteins in vivo by a rapid pro-
teomic approach. J. Proteomics 73,
1404–1409.

Hickey, P. C., and Read, N. D. (2009).
Imaging living cells of Aspergillus
in vitro. Med. Mycol. 47(Suppl. 1),
S110–S119.

Hise, A. G., Tomalka, J., Ganesan, S.,
Patel, K., Hall, B. A., Brown, G. D.,
and Fitzgerald, K. A. (2009). An
essential role for the NLRP3 inﬂam-
masome in host defense against
the human fungal pathogen Can-
dida albicans. Cell Host Microbe 5,
487–497.

Hoehamer, C. F., Cummings, E. D.,
Hilliard, G. M., and Rogers, P. D.
(2010). Changes in the proteome
of Candida albicans in response to
azole, polyene, and echinocandin
antifungal agents. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 54, 1655–1664.

Hooshdaran, M. Z., Barker, K.
S., Hilliard, G. M., Kusch, H.,
Morschhäuser, J., and Rogers, P.
D. (2004). Proteomic analysis of
azole resistance in Candida albicans
clinical isolates. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 48, 2733–2735.

Hucka, M., Finney, A., Sauro, H. M.,
Bolouri, H., Doyle, J. C., Kitano, H.,
Arkin, A. P., Bornstein, B. J., Bray,
D., Cornish-Bowden, A., Cuellar, A.
A., Dronov, S., Gilles, E. D., Ginkel,
M., Gor, V., Goryanin, I. I., Hed-
ley, W. J., Hodgman, T. C., Hofmeyr,
J.-H., Hunter, P. J., Juty, N. S., Kas-
berger, J. L., Kremling, A., Kummer,

U., Novère, N. L., Loew, L. M., Lucio,
D., Mendes, P., Minch, E., Mjolsness,
E. D., Nakayama, Y., Nelson, M. R.,
Nielsen, P. F., Sakurada, T., Schaff,
J. C., Shapiro, B. E., Shimizu, T. S.,
Spence, H. D., Stelling, J., Takahashi,
K., Tomita, M., Wagner, J., Wang, J.,
and Forum, S. B. M. L. (2003). The
systems biology markup language
(SBML): a medium for representa-
tion and exchange of biochemical
network models. Bioinformatics 19,
524–531.

Hull, D., Wolstencroft, K., Stevens, R.,
Goble, C., Pocock, M. R., Li, P.,
and Oinn, T. (2006). Taverna: a tool
for building and running workﬂows
of services. Nucleic Acids Res. 34,
W729–W732. [Web Server issue].

Hummert, S., Hummert, C., Schröter,
A., Hube, B., and Schuster, S. (2010).
Game theoretical modelling of sur-
vival strategies of Candida albicans
inside macrophages. J. Theor. Biol.
264, 312–318.

and Brock, M.

Ibrahim-Granet, O., Jouvion, G., Hohl,
T. M., Droin-Bergère, S., Philip-
part, F., Kim, O. Y., Adib-Conquy,
M., Schwendener, R., Cavaillon,
(2010).
J.-M.,
In vivo bioluminescence
imag-
ing and histopathopathologic analy-
sis reveal distinct roles for resi-
dent and recruited immune effec-
tor cells in defense against inva-
sive aspergillosis. BMC Microbiol. 10,
105. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-10-105
Ibrahim-Granet, O., Philippe, B., Boleti,
H., Boisvieux-Ulrich, E., Grenet,
D., Stern, M., and Latgé,
J. P.
(2003). Phagocytosis and intracellu-
lar fate of Aspergillus fumigatus coni-
dia in alveolar macrophages. Infect.
Immun. 71, 891–903.

Ideker, T., Galitski, T., and Hood, L.
(2001). A new approach to decod-
ing life: systems biology. Annu. Rev.
Genomics Hum. Genet. 2, 343–372.

Ideker, T., and Sharan, R. (2008). Protein
networks in disease. Genome Res. 18,
644–652.

Ihmels, J., Bergmann, S., Berman, J.,
and Barkai, N. (2005). Comparative
gene expression analysis by differen-
tial clustering approach: application
to the Candida albicans transcrip-
tion program. PLoS Genet. 1, e39.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.0010039

Jacobsen, I. D., Grosse, K., Slesiona,
S., Hube, B., Berndt, A., and
Brock, M. (2010). Embryonated eggs
as an alternative infection model
to investigate Aspergillus
fumiga-
tus virulence. Infect. Immun. 78,
2995–3006.

Jahn, B., Langfelder, K., Schneider, U.,
Schindel, C., and Brakhage, A. A.
(2002). PKSP-dependent reduction

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 16

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

of phagolysosome fusion and intra-
cellular kill of Aspergillus fumiga-
tus conidia by human monocyte-
derived macrophages. Cell. Micro-
biol. 4, 793–803.

Jain, R., Valiante, V., Remme, N.,
Docimo, T., Heinekamp, T., Her-
tweck, C., Gershenzon, J., Haas, H.,
and Brakhage, A. A. (2011). The
MAP kinase MpkA controls cell wall
integrity, oxidative stress response,
gliotoxin production and iron adap-
tation in Aspergillus fumigatus. Mol.
Microbiol. 82, 39–53.

Jones, T., Federspiel, N. A., Chibana,
H., Dungan, J., Kalman, S., Magee,
B. B., Newport, G., Thorstenson, Y.
R., Agabian, N., Magee, P. T., Davis,
R. W., and Scherer, S. (2004). The
diploid genome sequence of Can-
dida albicans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 101, 7329–7334.

Kim, Y., Nandakumar, M. P., and
Marten, M. R. (2008). The state
of proteome proﬁling in the fun-
gal genus Aspergillus. Brief. Funct.
Genomic. Proteomic. 7, 87–94.

Kitano, H. (2007). A robustness-based
approach to systems-oriented drug
design. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 6,
202–210.

Klipp, E., Wade, R. C., and Kummer, U.
(2010). Biochemical network-based
drug-target prediction. Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 21, 511–516.

Klose, J., and Kobalz, U. (1995). Two-
dimensional electrophoresis of pro-
teins: an updated protocol and
implications for a functional analy-
sis of the genome. Electrophoresis 16,
1034–1059.
Kniemeyer, O.

(2011). Proteomics
of eukaryotic microorganisms: the
medically and biotechnologically
important fungal genus Aspergillus.
Proteomics 11, 3232–3243.

Kniemeyer, O., and Brakhage, A. A.
(2008). “Proteomics and its appli-
cation to the human-pathogenic
fungi,” in Human and Animal Rela-
tionships: The Mycota VI, eds A. A.
Brakhage and P. F. Zipfel (Berlin:
Springer), 154–186.

Kniemeyer, O., Schmidt, A. D., Vödisch,
M., Wartenberg, D., and Brakhage,
A. A. (2011). Identiﬁcation of vir-
ulence determinants of the human
pathogenic fungi Aspergillus fumi-
gatus and Candida albicans by pro-
teomics. Int. J. Med. Microbiol. 301,
368–377.

Köhler, J., Baumbach, J., Taubert, J.,
Specht, M., Skusa, A., Rüegg, A.,
Rawlings, C.,Verrier, P., and Philippi,
S. (2006). Graph-based analysis and
visualization of experimental results
with ONDEX. Bioinformatics 22,
1383–1390.

J.,

Kozhenkov, S., Sedova, M., Dubin-
ina, Y., Gupta, A., Ray, A., Pono-
marenko,
and Baitaluk, M.
(2011). Biological networks – tools
enabling the integration of multi-
scale data for the host-pathogen
studies. BMC Syst. Biol. 5, 7.
doi:10.1186/1752-0509-5-7

Krappmann, S., Sasse, C., and Braus,
G. H. (2006). Gene targeting in
Aspergillus fumigatus by homolo-
gous recombination is facilitated
in a nonhomologous end-joining-
deﬁcient
background.
Eukaryotic Cell 5, 212–215.

genetic

Kusch, H., Engelmann, S., Albrecht, D.,
Morschhäuser, J., and Hecker, M.
(2007). Proteomic analysis of the
oxidative stress response in Candida
albicans. Proteomics 7, 686–697.

Langfelder, K.,

Jahn, B., Gehringer,
H., Schmidt, A., Wanner, G., and
Brakhage, A. A. (1998). Identiﬁ-
cation of a polyketide synthase
gene (pksP) of Aspergillus fumigatus
involved in conidial pigment biosyn-
thesis and virulence. Med. Microbiol.
Immunol. 187, 79–89.

Latgé, J. P. (1999). Aspergillus fumiga-
tus and aspergillosis. Clin. Microbiol.
Rev. 12, 310–350.

Le Novère, N., Hucka, M., Mi, H.,
Moodie, S., Schreiber, F., Sorokin,
A., Demir, E., Wegner, K., Alad-
jem, M. I., Wimalaratne, S. M.,
Bergman, F. T., Gauges, R., Ghazal,
P., Kawaji, H., Li, L., Matsuoka, Y.,
Villéger, A., Boyd, S. E., Calzone,
L., Courtot, M., Dogrusoz, U., Free-
man, T. C., Funahashi, A., Ghosh,
S., Jouraku, A., Kim, S., Kolpakov,
F., Luna, A., Sahle, S., Schmidt, E.,
Watterson, S., Wu, G., Goryanin, I.,
Kell, D. B., Sander, C., Sauro, H.,
Snoep, J. L., Kohn, K., and Kitano, H.
(2009). The systems biology graph-
ical notation. Nat. Biotechnol. 27,
735–741.

Lee, D.-S., Burd, H., Liu, J., Almaas, E.,
Wiest, O., Barabási, A.-L., Oltvai, Z.
N., and Kapatral,V. (2009). Compar-
ative genome-scale metabolic recon-
struction and ﬂux balance analy-
sis of multiple Staphylococcus aureus
genomes identify novel antimicro-
bial drug targets. J. Bacteriol. 191,
4015–4024.

Lessing, F., Kniemeyer, O., Wozniok,
I., Loefﬂer, J., Kurzai, O., Haertl,
A., and Brakhage, A. A. (2007).
The Aspergillus fumigatus transcrip-
tional regulator AfYap1 represents
the major
for defense
against reactive oxygen intermedi-
ates but is dispensable for path-
ogenicity in an intranasal mouse
infection model. Eukaryotic Cell 6,
2290–2302.

regulator

Linde,

J., Hortschansky, P., Fazius,
E., Brakhage, A. A., Guthke, R.,
and Haas, H. (2012). Regulatory
iron homoeo-
interactions
fumigatus
statis
inferred by
systems biology
approach. BMC Syst. Biol. 6, 6.
doi:10.1186/1752-0509-6-6

in Aspergillus

for

a

Linde, J., Wilson, D., Hube, B., and
Guthke, R. (2010). Regulatory net-
work modelling of iron acquisition
by a fungal pathogen in contact with
epithelial cells. BMC Syst. Biol. 4,
148. doi:10.1186/1752-0509-4-148

Liu, H.

(2002). Co-regulation of
pathogenesis with
dimorphism
and phenotypic switching in Can-
dida albicans, a commensal and a
pathogen. Int. J. Med. Microbiol. 292,
299–311.

Liu, T. T., Lee, R. E. B., Barker, K.
S., Lee, R. E., Wei, L., Homay-
ouni, R., and Rogers, P. D. (2005).
Genome-wide expression proﬁling
of the response to azole, polyene,
echinocandin, and pyrimidine anti-
fungal agents in Candida albicans.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49,
2226–2236.

Lloyd, A. T., and Sharp, P. M. (1992).
Evolution of codon usage patterns:
the extent and nature of divergence
between Candida albicans and Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae. Nucleic Acids
Res. 20, 5289–5295.

D.,

and Fink, G. R.

Lo, H. J., Köhler, J. R., DiDomenico, B.,
Cacciapuoti,
Loebenberg,
(1997).
A.,
Nonﬁlamentous
albicans
mutants are avirulent. Cell 90,
939–949.

C.

Loftus, B. J., Fung, E., Roncaglia, P.,
Rowley, D., Amedeo, P., Bruno, D.,
Vamathevan, J., Miranda, M., Ander-
son, I. J., Fraser, J. A., Allen, J. E.,
Bosdet, I. E., Brent, M. R., Chiu,
R., Doering, T. L., Donlin, M. J.,
D’Souza, C. A., Fox, D. S., Grinberg,
V., Fu, J., Fukushima, M., Haas, B.
J., Huang, J. C., Janbon, G., Jones,
S. J. M., Koo, H. L., Krzywinski, M.
I., Kwon-Chung, J. K., Lengeler, K.
B., Maiti, R., Marra, M. A., Marra,
R. E., Mathewson, C. A., Mitchell, T.
G., Pertea, M., Riggs, F. R., Salzberg,
S. L., Schein, J. E., Shvartsbeyn, A.,
Shin, H., Shumway, M., Specht, C.
A., Suh, B. B., Tenney, A., Utter-
back, T. R., Wickes, B. L., Wort-
man, J. R., Wye, N. H., Kronstad, J.
W., Lodge, J. K., Heitman, J., Davis,
R. W., Fraser, C. M., and Hyman,
R. W. (2005). The genome of the
basidiomycetous yeast and human
pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans.
Science 307, 1321–1324.

Lorenz, M. C., Bender, J. A., and Fink, G.
R. (2004). Transcriptional response

of Candida albicans upon internal-
ization by macrophages. Eukaryotic
Cell 3, 1076–1087.

Lorenz, M. C., and Fink, G. R. (2001).
The glyoxylate cycle is required for
fungal virulence. Nature 412, 83–86.
Manning, M., and Mitchell, T. G. (1980).
Morphogenesis of Candida albicans
and cytoplasmic proteins associ-
ated with differences in morphology,
strain, or temperature. J. Bacteriol.
144, 258–273.

Marbach, D., Prill, R.

J., Schaffter,
T., Mattiussi, C., Floreano, D., and
Stolovitzky, G. (2010). Revealing
strengths and weaknesses of meth-
ods for gene network inference.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
6286–6291.

Marr, K. A., Carter, R. A., Boeckh,
M., Martin, P., and Corey, L.
(2002). Invasive aspergillosis in allo-
geneic stem cell transplant recipi-
ents: changes in epidemiology and
risk factors. Blood 100, 4358–4366.

Martin, G. S., Mannino, D. M., Eaton, S.,
and Moss, M. (2003). The epidemi-
ology of sepsis in the United States
from 1979 through 2000. N. Engl. J.
Med. 348, 1546–1554.

Martin, R., Wächtler, B., Schaller,
M., Wilson, D., and Hube, B.
(2011). Host-pathogen interactions
and virulence-associated genes dur-
ing Candida albicans oral infections.
Int. J. Med. Microbiol. 301, 417–422.
Martínez-Solano, L., Nombela, C.,
Molero, G., and Gil, C. (2006).
Differential protein expression of
murine macrophages upon inter-
action with Candida albicans. Pro-
teomics 6(Suppl. 1), S133–S144.

Martínez-Solano, L., Reales-Calderón, J.
A., Nombela, C., Molero, G., and Gil,
C. (2009). Proteomics of RAW 264.7
macrophages upon interaction with
heat-inactivated Candida albicans
cells unravel an anti-inﬂammatory
response. Proteomics 9, 2995–3010.
May, R. M., and Anderson, R. M. (1979).
Population biology of infectious dis-
eases. Part II. Nature 280, 455–461.
McCluskey, K., Wiest, A., and Plamann,
M. (2010). The Fungal Genetics
Stock Center: a repository for 50
years of fungal genetics research. J.
Biosci. 35, 119–126.

McCormick, A., Heesemann,

J., Heesemann,

L.,
Wagener, J., Marcos, V., Hartl, D.,
Loefﬂer,
J., and
Ebel, F. (2010). NETs formed by
human neutrophils inhibit growth
of the pathogenic mold Aspergillus
fumigatus. Microbes
12,
928–936.

Infect.

Mech, F., Thywissen, A., Guthke, R.,
Brakhage, A. A., and Figge, M. T.
(2011). Automated image analysis

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 17

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

of
the host-pathogen interaction
between phagocytes and Aspergillus
fumigatus. PLoS ONE 6, e19591.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0019591

Melanson,

J. E., Chisholm, K. A.,
and Pinto, D. M. (2006). Targeted
comparative proteomics by liquid
chromatography/matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization triple-
quadrupole mass
spectrometry.
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 20,
904–910.

Mezger, M., Kneitz, S., Wozniok, I.,
Kurzai, O., Einsele, H., and Loefﬂer,
J. (2008). Proinﬂammatory response
of immature human dendritic cells is
mediated by dectin-1 after exposure
to Aspergillus fumigatus germ tubes.
J. Infect. Dis. 197, 924–931.

Moalli, F., Doni, A., Deban, L., Zelante,
T., Zagarella, S., Bottazzi, B., Romani,
L., Mantovani, A., and Garlanda, C.
(2010). Role of complement and
fcgamma receptors in the protective
activity of the long pentraxin PTX3
against Aspergillus fumigatus. Blood
116, 5170–5180.

Monteoliva, L., Martinez-Lopez, R.,
Pitarch, A., Hernaez, M. L., Serna,
A., Nombela, C., Albar, J. P., and
Gil, C. (2011). Quantitative pro-
teome and acidic subproteome pro-
ﬁling of Candida albicans yeast-to-
hypha transition. J. Proteome Res. 10,
502–517.

Moran, G. P., Coleman, D. C., and
Sullivan, D. J. (2011). Compara-
tive genomics and the evolution of
pathogenicity in human pathogenic
fungi. Eukaryotic Cell 10, 34–42.

Morton, C. O., Varga, J. J., Hornbach, A.,
Mezger, M., Sennefelder, H., Kneitz,
S., Kurzai, O., Krappmann, S., Ein-
sele, H., Nierman, W. C., Rogers,
T. R., and Loefﬂer, J. (2011). The
temporal dynamics of differential
gene expression in Aspergillus fumi-
gatus interacting with human imma-
ture dendritic cells in vitro. PLoS
ONE 6, e16016. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0016016

Moy, T. I., Conery, A. L., Larkins-
Ford, J., Wu, G., Mazitschek, R.,
Casadei, G., Lewis, K., Carpenter,
A. E., and Ausubel, F. M. (2009).
High-throughput screen for novel
antimicrobials using a whole animal
infection model. ACS Chem. Biol. 4,
527–533.

Mukhtar, M. S., Carvunis, A.-R., Dreze,
M., Epple, P., Steinbrenner, J., Moore,
J., Tasan, M., Galli, M., Hao, T.,
Nishimura, M. T., Pevzner, S. J.,
Donovan, S. E., Ghamsari, L., San-
thanam, B., Romero, V., Poulin, M.
M., Gebreab, F., Gutierrez, B. J., Tam,
S., Monachello, D., Boxem, M., Har-
bort, C. J., McDonald, N., Gai, L.,

Chen, H., He,Y.„ E. U. E. C.,Vanden-
haute, J., Roth, F. P., Hill, D. E., Ecker,
J. R., Vidal, M., Beynon, J., Braun,
P., and Dangl, J. L. (2011). Inde-
pendently evolved virulence effec-
tors converge onto hubs in a plant
immune system network. Science
333, 596–601.

Murillo, L. A., Newport, G., Lan, C.-
Y., Habelitz, S., Dungan, J., and
Agabian, N. M. (2005). Genome-
wide transcription proﬁling of the
early phase of bioﬁlm formation by
Candida albicans. Eukaryotic Cell 4,
1562–1573.

Mylonakis, E. (2008). Galleria mel-
lonella and the study of
fungal
pathogenesis: making the case for
another genetically tractable model
host. Mycopathologia 165, 1–3.

Netea, M. G., Brown, G. D., Kullberg,
B. J., and Gow, N. A. R. (2008). An
integrated model of the recognition
of Candida albicans by the innate
immune system. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
6, 67–78.

Neugebauer, U., Schmid, U., Baumann,
K., Holzgrabe, U., Ziebuhr, W., Koz-
itskaya, S., Kiefer, W., Schmitt, M.,
and Popp, J. (2006). Characteriza-
tion of bacterial growth and the
inﬂuence of antibiotics by means of
UV resonance Raman spectroscopy.
Biopolymers 82, 306–311.

Nierman, W. C., Pain, A., Anderson, M.
J., Wortman, J. R., Kim, H. S., Arroyo,
J., Berriman, M., Abe, K., Archer, D.
B., Bermejo, C., Bennett, J., Bowyer,
P., Chen, D., Collins, M., Coulsen,
R., Davies, R., Dyer, P. S., Farman,
M., Fedorova, N., Fedorova, N., Feld-
blyum, T. V., Fischer, R., Fosker, N.,
Fraser, A., García, J. L., García, M.
J., Goble, A., Goldman, G. H., Gomi,
K., Grifﬁth-Jones, S., Gwilliam, R.,
Haas, B., Haas, H., Harris, D., Hori-
uchi, H., Huang, J., Humphray, S.,
Jiménez, J., Keller, N., Khouri, H.,
Kitamoto, K., Kobayashi, T., Kon-
zack, S., Kulkarni, R., Kumagai, T.,
Lafon, A., Lafton, A., Latgé, J.-P., Li,
W., Lord, A., Lu, C., Majoros, W. H.,
May, G. S., Miller, B. L., Mohamoud,
Y., Molina, M., Monod, M., Mouyna,
I., Mulligan, S., Murphy, L., O’Neil,
S., Paulsen, I., Peñalva, M. A., Pertea,
M., Price, C., Pritchard, B. L., Quail,
M. A., Rabbinowitsch, E., Rawlins,
N., Rajandream, M.-A., Reichard, U.,
Renauld, H., Robson, G. D., de Cór-
doba, S. R., and Rodríguez-Peña,
J. M., Ronning, C. M., Rutter, S.,
Salzberg, S. L., Sanchez, M., Sánchez-
Ferrero, J. C., Saunders, D., Seeger,
K., Squares, R., Squares, S., Takeuchi,
M., Tekaia, F., Turner, G., de Aldana,
C. R. V., Weidman, J., White, O.,
Woodward, J., Yu, J. H., Fraser, C.,

Galagan, J. E., Asai, K., Machida, M.,
Hall, N., Barrell, B., and Denning, D.
W. (2005). Genomic sequence of the
pathogenic and allergenic ﬁlamen-
tous fungus Aspergillus fumigatus.
Nature 438, 1151–1156.

Niimi, M., Shepherd, M. G., and Monk,
B. C. (1996). Differential proﬁles
of soluble proteins during the ini-
tiation of morphogenesis in Can-
dida albicans. Arch. Microbiol. 166,
260–268.

Nobile, C. J., Nett, J. E., Andes, D. R.,
and Mitchell, A. P. (2006). Function
of Candida albicans adhesin Hwp1
in bioﬁlm formation. Eukaryotic Cell
5, 1604–1610.

Nygaard, V., and Hovig, E. (2006).
Options available for proﬁling small
samples: a review of sample ampli-
ﬁcation technology when combined
with microarray proﬁling. Nucleic
Acids Res. 34, 996–1014.

Oberhardt, M. A., Puchalka, J., Mar-
tins dos Santos, V. A. P., and
Papin, J. A. (2011). Reconciliation of
genome-scale metabolic reconstruc-
tions for comparative systems analy-
sis. PLoS Comput. Biol. 7, e1001116.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1001116

O’Farrell, P. H. (1975). High resolu-
tion two-dimensional electrophore-
sis of proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 250,
4007–4021.

Perlroth, J., Choi, B., and Spellberg,
B. (2007). Nosocomial fungal infec-
tions: epidemiology, diagnosis, and
treatment. Med. Mycol. 45, 321–346.
Pfaller, M. A., and Diekema, D. J. (2007).
Epidemiology of invasive candidi-
asis: a persistent public health
problem. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 20,
133–163.

Picazo, J. J., González-Romo, F., and
Candel, F. J. (2008). Candidemia
in the critically ill patient.
Int.
J. Antimicrob. Agents 32(Suppl. 2),
S83–S85.

Pitarch, A., Sánchez, M., Nombela, C.,
and Gil, C. (2002). Sequential frac-
tionation and two-dimensional gel
analysis unravels the complexity of
the dimorphic fungus Candida albi-
cans cell wall proteome. Mol. Cell
Proteomics 1, 967–982.

Pitkänen, E., Rousu, J., and Ukkonen,
E. (2010). Computational methods
for metabolic reconstruction. Curr.
Opin. Biotechnol. 21, 70–77.

Priebe, S., Linde, J.,Albrecht, D., Guthke,
R., and Brakhage, A. A. (2011).
FungiFun: a web-based application
for functional categorization of fun-
gal genes and proteins. Fungal Genet.
Biol. 48, 353–358.

Raghunathan, A., Reed,

Shin,
S., Palsson, B., and Daeﬂer, S.
(2009). Constraint-based analysis

J.,

of metabolic capacity of Salmonella
typhimurium during host-pathogen
interaction. BMC Syst. Biol. 3, 38.
doi:10.1186/1752-0509-3-38

Rao, A., Kumar, M. K., Joseph, T., and
Bulusu, G. (2010). Cerebral malaria:
insights from host-parasite protein-
protein interactions. Malar. J. 9, 155.
Raza, S., Robertson, K. A., Lacaze, P.
A., Page, D., Enright, A. J., Ghazal,
P., and Freeman, T. C. (2008). A
logic-based diagram of signalling
pathways central
to macrophage
activation. BMC Syst. Biol. 2, 36.
doi:10.1186/1752-0509-2-36

Real, L. A., and Biek, R. (2007). Infec-
tious disease modeling and the
dynamics of transmission. Curr. Top.
Microbiol. Immunol. 315, 33–49.

Rispail, N., Soanes, D. M., Ant, C.,
Czajkowski, R., Grünler, A., Huguet,
R., Perez-Nadales, E., Poli, A., Sar-
torel, E., Valiante, V., Yang, M.,
Beffa, R., Brakhage, A. A., Gow,
N. A. R., Kahmann, R., Lebrun,
M.-H., Lenasi, H., Perez-Martin, J.,
Talbot, N.
J., Wendland, J., and
Di Pietro, A. (2009). Compara-
tive genomics of MAP kinase and
calcium-calcineurin signalling com-
ponents in plant and human path-
ogenic fungi. Fungal Genet. Biol. 46,
287–298.

Rizzetto, L., and Cavalieri, D. (2011).
Friend or foe: using systems biology
to elucidate interactions between
fungi and their hosts. Trends Micro-
biol. 19, 509–515.

Romani, L. (2011). Immunity to fun-
gal infections. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11,
275–288.

Ross, R. (1911). The Prevention of
Malaria, with Addendum on the The-
ory of Happenings. London: Murray.
Roux, A. V. D., and Aiello, A. E. (2005).
Multilevel analysis of infectious dis-
eases. J. Infect. Dis. 191(Suppl. 1),
S25–S33.

Ruepp, A., Zollner, A., Maier, D., Alber-
mann, K., Hani, J., Mokrejs, M.,
Tetko, I., Güldener, U., Mannhaupt,
G., Münsterkötter, M., and Mewes,
H. W. (2004). The FunCat, a func-
tional annotation scheme for sys-
tematic classiﬁcation of proteins
from whole genomes. Nucleic Acids
Res. 32, 5539–5545.

Rupp, S. (2004). Proteomics on its way
to study host-pathogen interaction
in Candida albicans. Curr. Opin.
Microbiol. 7, 330–335.

reconstruction,

Ruppin, E., Papin, J. A., de Figueiredo,
L. F., and Schuster, S. (2010). Meta-
bolic
constraint-
based analysis and game theory to
probe genome-scale metabolic net-
works. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 21,
502–510.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 18

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

Saïd-Sadier, N., Padilla, E., Langs-
ley, G., and Ojcius, D. M. (2010).
Aspergillus fumigatus stimulates the
NLRP3 inﬂammasome through a
pathway requiring ROS production
and the Syk tyrosine kinase. PLoS
ONE 5, e10008. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0010008

Salgado, P. S., Yan, R., Taylor, J. D.,
Burchell, L., Jones, R., Hoyer, L. L.,
Matthews, S. J., Simpson, P. J., and
Cota, E. (2011). Structural basis for
the broad speciﬁcity to host-cell lig-
ands by the pathogenic fungus Can-
dida albicans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 108, 15775–15779.

Samaranayake, D. P., and Hanes, S.
D. (2011). Milestones in Candida
albicans gene manipulation. Fungal
Genet. Biol. 48, 858–865.

Santamaría, R., Rizzetto, L., Bromley,
M., Zelante, T., Lee, W., Cavalieri,
D., Romani, L., Miller, B., Gut, I.,
Santos, M., Pierre, P., Bowyer, P.,
and Kapushesky, M. (2011). Systems
biology of infectious diseases: a focus
on fungal infections. Immunobiology
216, 1212–1227.

Schaller, M., Korting, H. C., Borelli, C.,
Hamm, G., and Hube, B. (2005).
Candida albicans-secreted aspartic
proteinases modify the epithelial
cytokine response in an in vitro
model of vaginal candidiasis. Infect.
Immun. 73, 2758–2765.

Schrettl, M., Bignell, E., Kragl, C.,
Joechl, C., Rogers, T., Arst, H. N.,
Haynes, K., and Haas, H. (2004).
Siderophore biosynthesis but not
reductive iron assimilation is essen-
tial for Aspergillus fumigatus viru-
lence. J. Exp. Med. 200, 1213–1219.
Schrettl, M., Kim, H. S., Eisendle,
M., Kragl, C., Nierman, W. C.,
Heinekamp, T., Werner, E. R.,
Jacobsen,
Illmer, P., Yi, H.,
Brakhage,A. A., and Haas, H. (2008).
SreA-mediated iron regulation in
Aspergillus fumigatus. Mol. Micro-
biol. 70, 27–43.

I.,

Shamir, L., Delaney, J. D., Orlov, N.,
Eckley, D. M., and Goldberg, I.
G. (2010). Pattern recognition soft-
ware and techniques for biologi-
cal
image analysis. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 6, e1000974. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pcbi.1000974

Sharan, R., Ulitsky, I., and Shamir, R.
(2007). Network-based prediction
of protein function. Mol. Syst. Biol.
3, 88.

Shin, Y.-K., Kim, K.-Y., and Paik,
Y.-K. (2005). Alterations of pro-
tein expression in macrophages in
response to Candida albicans infec-
tion. Mol. Cells 20, 271–279.

Skrabanek, L., Saini, H. K., Bader,
G. D., and Enright, A. J. (2008).

Computational
of
protein-protein interactions. Mol.
Biotechnol. 38, 1–17.

prediction

Smoot, M. E., Ono, K., Ruscheinski, J.,
Wang, P.-L., and Ideker, T. (2011).
Cytoscape 2.8: new features for data
integration and network visualiza-
tion. Bioinformatics 27, 431–432.

Sorgo, A. G., Heilmann, C. J., Dekker, H.
L., Bekker, M., Brul, S., de Koster, C.
G., de Koning, L. J., and Klis, F. M.
(2011). Effects of ﬂuconazole on the
secretome, the wall proteome, and
wall integrity of the clinical fungus
Candida albicans. Eukaryotic Cell 10,
1071–1081.

Sosinska, G. J., de Groot, P. W. J., de
Mattos, M. J. T., Dekker, H. L., de
Koster, C. G., Hellingwerf, K. J., and
Klis, F. M. (2008). Hypoxic condi-
tions and iron restriction affect the
cell-wall proteome of Candida albi-
cans grown under vagina-simulative
conditions. Microbiology 154(Pt 2),
510–520.

Sosinska, G. J., de Koning, L. J., de Groot,
P. W. J., Manders, E. M. M., Dekker,
H. L., Hellingwerf, K. J., de Koster,
C. G., and Klis, F. M. (2011). Mass
spectrometric quantiﬁcation of the
adaptations in the wall proteome
of Candida albicans in response to
ambient pH. Microbiology 157(Pt 1),
136–146.

Stoldt, V. R., Sonneborn, A., Leuker, C.
E., and Ernst, J. F. (1997). Efg1p, an
essential regulator of morphogene-
sis of the human pathogen Candida
albicans, is a member of a conserved
class of bHLH proteins regulating
morphogenetic processes in fungi.
EMBO J. 16, 1982–1991.

Stolovitzky, G. (2011). “Wisdom of
crowds for gene network inference,”
in 12th International Conference on
Systems Biology, August 28 to Sep-
tember 1st, 2011, Heidelberg.

Strömbäck, L., and Lambrix, P. (2005).
Representations of molecular path-
ways: an evaluation of SBML, PSI
MI and BioPAX. Bioinformatics 21,
4401–4407.

Sugui, J. A., Kim, H. S., Zarember,
K. A., Chang, Y. C., Gallin, J. I.,
Nierman, W. C., and Kwon-Chung,
K. J. (2008). Genes differentially
expressed in conidia and hyphae
of Aspergillus fumigatus upon expo-
sure to human neutrophils. PLoS
ONE 3, e2655. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0002655

Sysko, L. R., and Davis, M. A. (2010).
From image to data using com-
mon image-processing techniques.
Curr. Protoc. Cytom. Chapter 12,
Unit 12.21.

Szabo, E. K., and MacCallum, D. M.
(2011). The contribution of mouse

models to our understanding of sys-
temic candidiasis. FEMS Microbiol.
Lett. 320, 1–8.

Taylor, C. F., Field, D., Sansone, S.-A.,
Aerts, J., Apweiler, R., Ashburner, M.,
Ball, C. A., Binz, P.-A., Bogue, M.,
Booth, T., Brazma, A., Brinkman,
R. R., Clark, A. M., Deutsch, E.
W., Fiehn, O., Fostel, J., Ghazal,
P., Gibson, F., Gray, T., Grimes,
G., Hancock,
J. M., Hardy, N.
W., Hermjakob, H., Julian, R. K.,
Kane, M., Kettner, C., Kinsinger, C.,
Kolker, E., Kuiper, M., Novère, N.
L., Leebens-Mack, J., Lewis, S. E.,
Lord, P., Mallon, A.-M., Marthan-
dan, N., Masuya, H., McNally, R.,
Mehrle, A., Morrison, N., Orchard,
S., Quackenbush, J., Reecy, J. M.,
Robertson, D. G., Rocca-Serra, P.,
Rodriguez, H., Rosenfelder, H.,
Santoyo-Lopez, J., Scheuermann, R.
H., Schober, D., Smith, B., Snape,
J., Stoeckert, C. J., Tipton, K., Sterk,
P., Untergasser, A., Vandesom-
pele, J., and Wiemann, S. (2008).
Promoting
coherent minimum
reporting guidelines for biological
and biomedical investigations: the
MIBBI project. Nat. Biotechnol. 26,
889–896.

Teutschbein, J., Albrecht, D., Pötsch, M.,
Guthke, R.,Aimanianda,V., Clavaud,
C., Latgé, J.-P., Brakhage, A. A.,
and Kniemeyer, O. (2010). Proteome
proﬁling and functional classiﬁca-
tion of intracellular proteins from
conidia of the human-pathogenic
mold Aspergillus fumigatus. J. Pro-
teome Res. 9, 3427–3442.

Theiss, S., Köhler, G. A., Kretschmar,
M., Nichterlein, T., and Hacker, J.
(2002). New molecular methods to
study gene functions in Candida
infections. Mycoses 45, 345–350.

J. L.

Thomas, D. P., Bachmann, S. P., and
Lopez-Ribot,
(2006). Pro-
teomics for the analysis of the Can-
dida albicans bioﬁlm lifestyle. Pro-
teomics 6, 5795–5804.

Thywißen, A., Heinekamp, T., Dahse,
H.-M., Schmaler-Ripcke, J., Niet-
zsche, S., Zipfel, P. F., and Brakhage,
A. A. (2011). Conidial dihydroxy-
naphthalene melanin of the human
pathogenic fungus Aspergillus fumi-
gatus interferes with the host endo-
cytosis pathway. Front. Microbiol. 2,
96. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2011.00096

Tierney, L., Linde, J., Müller, S., Brunke,
S., Molina, J., Hube, B., Schöck,
U., Guthke, R., and Kuchler, K.
(2012). An interspecies regulatory
from simul-
network
inferred
taneous RNA-seq
of Candida
invading innate immune
albicans
cells.
85.
3,
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2012.00085

Front. Microbiol.

Toepfer, S., Guthke, R., Driesch, D.,
Woetzel, D., and Pfaff, M. (2007).
The NetGenerator algorithm: recon-
struction of gene regulatory net-
works. Lect. Notes Bioinform. 4366,
119–130.

Tong, J. C., and Ng, L. F. P. (2011).
agents
Understanding
from an in silico perspective. Drug
Discov. Today 16, 42–49.

infectious

Tuckwell, D., Denning, D. W., and
Bowyer, P. (2011). A public resource
for metabolic pathway mapping of
Aspergillus fumigatus Af293. Med.
Mycol. 49(Suppl 1), S114–S119.

Urban, C. F., Reichard, U., Brinkmann,
V., and Zychlinsky, A. (2006). Neu-
trophil extracellular traps capture
and kill Candida albicans yeast and
hyphal
forms. Cell. Microbiol. 8,
668–676.

Van Dyke Parunak, H., Savit, R., and
Riolo, R. (1998). “Agent-based mod-
eling vs. equation-based modeling:
a case study and users’ guide,”
in Multi-Agent Systems and Agent-
Based Simulation, eds J. Sichman,
R. Conte, and N. Gilbert, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1534
(Berlin: Springer), 277–283.

van het Hoog, M., Rast, T.

J.,
Martchenko, M., Grindle, S., Dig-
nard, D., Hogues, H., Cuomo, C.,
Berriman, M., Scherer, S., Magee,
B. B., Whiteway, M., Chibana, H.,
Nantel, A., and Magee, P. T. (2007).
Assembly of the Candida albicans
genome into sixteen supercontigs
aligned on the eight chromosomes.
Genome Biol. 8, R52.

Vera, J., Rateitschak, K., Lange, F., Kos-
sow, C., Wolkenhauer, O., and Jaster,
R. (2011). Systems biology of JAK-
STAT signalling in human malignan-
cies. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 106,
426–434.

Vödisch, M., Albrecht, D., Lessing, F.,
Schmidt, A. D., Winkler, R., Guthke,
R., Brakhage, A. A., and Kniemeyer,
O. (2009). Two-dimensional pro-
teome
the
human pathogenic ﬁlamentous fun-
gus Aspergillus fumigatus. Proteomics
9, 1407–1415.

reference maps

for

Vödisch, M., Scherlach, K., Winkler, R.,
Hertweck, C., Braun, H.-P., Roth, M.,
Haas, H., Werner, E. R., Brakhage,
A. A., and Kniemeyer, O. (2011).
Analysis of the Aspergillus fumigatus
proteome reveals metabolic changes
and the activation of the pseurotin A
biosynthesis gene cluster in response
to hypoxia.
J. Proteome Res. 10,
2508–2524.

Vodovotz, Y., Csete, M., Bartels,

J.,
(2008).
Chang, S., and An, G.
Translational
systems biology of
inﬂammation. PLoS Comput. Biol.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 19

Horn et al.

Systems biology of fungal infection

4, e1000014. doi:10.1371/journal.
pcbi.1000014

Volling, K., Thywissen, A., Brakhage, A.
A., and Saluz, H. P. (2011). Phago-
cytosis of melanized Aspergillus
conidia
exerts
cytoprotective effects by sustained
PI3K/Akt signalling. Cell. Microbiol.
13, 1130–1148.

by macrophages

Walker, D. C., and Southgate, J. (2009).
The virtual cell – a candidate co-
ordinator for‘middle-out’modelling
of biological systems. Brief. Bioinfor-
matics 10, 450–461.

Waltermann, C., and Klipp, E. (2010).
Signal integration in budding yeast.
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 38, 1257–1264.
Walther, M., Gebhardt, P., Grosse-
Gehling, P., Würbach, L.,
Irm-
ler, I., Preusche, S., Khalid, M.,
Opfermann, T., Kamradt, T., Stein-
bach, J., and Saluz, H.-P. (2011).
Implementation of 89Zr produc-
tion and in vivo imaging of B-
cells
in mice with 89Zr-labeled
anti-B-cell antibodies by small ani-
mal PET/CT. Appl. Radiat. Isot. 69,
852–857.

Wang, Z., Gerstein, M., and Snyder,
M. (2009). RNA-seq: a revolutionary
tool for transcriptomics. Nat. Rev.
Genet. 10, 57–63.

Wartenberg, D., Lapp, K., Jacobsen, I.
D., Dahse, H.-M., Kniemeyer, O.,
Heinekamp, T., and Brakhage, A.

A. (2011). Secretome analysis of
Aspergillus fumigatus reveals Asp-
hemolysin as a major secreted pro-
tein. Int. J. Med. Microbiol. 301,
602–611.

Whiteway, M., and Bachewich, C.
(2007). Morphogenesis in Candida
albicans. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 61,
529–553.

Willard, H., and Ginsburg, G. (2009).
Genomic and Personalized Medicine.
Number Vol. 2 in Genomic and
Personalized Medicine. Amsterdam:
Academic Press.

Willger, S. D., Puttikamonkul, S.,
Kim, K.-H., Burritt, J. B., Grahl,
N., Metzler, L.
J., Barbuch, R.,
Bard, M., Lawrence, C. B., and
Cramer, R. A. (2008). A sterol-
regulatory element binding protein
is required for cell polarity, hypoxia
adaptation, azole drug resistance,
and virulence in Aspergillus fumi-
gatus. PLoS Pathog. 4, e1000200.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000200

Wilson, D., Thewes, S., Zakikhany, K.,
Fradin, C., Albrecht, A., Almeida,
R., Brunke, S., Grosse, K., Mar-
tin, R., Mayer, F., Leonhardt, I.,
Schild, L., Seider, K., Skibbe, M.,
Slesiona, S., Waechtler, B., Jacobsen,
I., and Hube, B. (2009). Identifying
infection-associated genes of Can-
dida albicans in the postgenomic era.
FEMS Yeast Res. 9, 688–700.

Wisplinghoff, H., Bischoff, T., Tallent,
S. M., Seifert, H., Wenzel, R. P., and
Edmond, M. B. (2004). Nosocomial
bloodstream infections in US hospi-
tals: analysis of 24,179 cases from a
prospective nationwide surveillance
study. Clin. Infect. Dis. 39, 309–317.
Woolhouse, M. E., Taylor, L. H., and
Haydon, D. T. (2001). Population
biology of multihost pathogens. Sci-
ence 292, 1109–1112.

Xu,

J., and Li, Y. (2006). Discov-
ering disease-genes by topological
features in human protein-protein
interaction network. Bioinformatics
22, 2800–2805.

Yan, L., Zhang, J.-D., Cao, Y.-B., Gao,
P.-H., and Jiang, Y.-Y. (2007). Pro-
teomic analysis reveals a metabolism
shift in a laboratory ﬂuconazole-
resistant Candida albicans strain. J.
Proteome Res. 6, 2248–2256.

Yin, Z., Stead, D., Walker, J., Selway, L.,
Smith, D. A., Brown, A. J. P., and
Quinn, J. (2009). A proteomic analy-
sis of the salt, cadmium and peroxide
stress responses in Candida albicans
and the role of the Hog1 stress-
activated MAPK in regulating the
stress-induced proteome. Proteomics
9, 4686–4703.

Zhou, D., and He, Y. (2008). Extracting
interactions between proteins from
the literature. J. Biomed. Inform. 41,
393–407.

Zhu, M., Gao, L., Li, X., Liu, Z., Xu, C.,
Yan, Y., Walker, E., Jiang, W., Su, B.,
Chen, X., and Lin, H. (2009). The
analysis of the drug-targets based
on the topological properties in the
human protein-protein interaction
network. J. Drug Target 17, 524–532.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 12 December 2011; accepted: 05
March 2012; published online: 02 April
2012.
Citation: Horn
F, Heinekamp T,
Kniemeyer O, Pollmächer J, Valiante V
and Brakhage AA (2012) Systems biol-
ogy of fungal infection. Front. Microbio.
3:108. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00108
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Microbial Immunology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Horn, Heinekamp,
Kniemeyer, Pollmächer, Valiante and
Brakhage. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution Non Com-
mercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 108 | 20

