ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 09 January 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00270

Protection of metal artifacts with the formation of
metal–oxalates complexes by Beauveria bassiana

Edith Joseph1,2*, Sylvie Cario 2, Anaële Simon2, Marie Wörle 1, Rocco Mazzeo 3, Pilar Junier 2 and Daniel Job 2

1 Laboratory of Conservation Research, Sammlungszentrum, Swiss National Museum, Affoltern am Albis, Switzerland
2 Laboratory of Microbiology, Institute of Biology, University of Neuchâtel, Neuchâtel, Switzerland
3 Microchemistry and Microscopy Art Diagnostic Laboratory, University of Bologna, Ravenna, Italy

Edited by:
Weiwen Zhang, Tianjin University,
China
Reviewed by:
Liang Shi, Wright State University,
USA
Shawn Chen, Ohio University, USA
*Correspondence:
Edith Joseph, Laboratory of
Conservation Research,
Sammlungszentrum, Swiss National
Museum, Lindenmoosstrasse 1, 8910
Affoltern am Albis, Switzerland.
e-mail: edith.joseph@snm.admin.ch

Several fungi present high tolerance to toxic metals and some are able to transform
metals into metal–oxalate complexes. In this study, the ability of Beauveria bassiana to pro-
duce copper oxalates was evaluated. Growth performance was tested on various copper-
containing media. B. bassiana proved highly resistant to copper, tolerating concentrations
of up to 20 g L−1, and precipitating copper oxalates on all media tested. Chromatographic
analyses showed that this species produced oxalic acid as sole metal chelator.The produc-
tion of metal–oxalates can be used in the restoration and conservation of archeological and
modern metal artifacts. The production of copper oxalates was conﬁrmed directly using
metallic pieces (both archeological and modern).The conversion of corrosion products into
copper oxalates was demonstrated as well. In order to assess whether the capability of B.
bassiana to produce metal–oxalates could be applied to other metals, iron and silver were
tested as well. Iron appears to be directly sequestered in the wall of the fungal hyphae
forming oxalates. However, the formation of a homogeneous layer on the object is not yet
optimal. On silver, a co-precipitation of copper and silver oxalates occurred. As this green-
ish patina would not be acceptable on silver objects, silver reduction was explored as a
tarnishing remediation. First experiments showed the transformation of silver nitrate into
nanoparticles of elemental silver by an unknown extracellular mechanism. The production
of copper oxalates is immediately applicable for the conservation of copper-based artifacts.
For iron and silver this is not yet the case. However, the vast ability of B. bassiana to trans-
form toxic metals using different immobilization mechanisms seems to offer considerable
possibilities for industrial applications, such as the bioremediation of contaminated soils or
the green synthesis of chemicals.

Keywords: Beauveria bassiana, metal immobilization, oxalates, bioremediation, conservation science

INTRODUCTION
Fungi play an essential role in the bioweathering of rocks and min-
erals, and especially in the transformation of metals, which are
present in large quantities in mineral components. This transfor-
mation regulates metal bioavailability through either solubiliza-
tion or immobilization (Gadd, 2007). The capability to accumulate
and precipitate metals has biotechnological applications and can
be exploited for the bioremediation of metal-polluted soils and
waste treatment (Gadd, 2010).

Leaching of metals by fungi is the result of different mecha-
nisms promoted by proton efﬂux or metabolites with chelating
properties. Metal immobilization can also occur through others
processes of reductive metal precipitation such as the synthesis of
metallic nanoparticles (Gadd, 2007). Among the metabolites with
chelating properties, some of the most common are carboxylic
acids and in particular oxalic acid. In previous studies, differ-
ent species of fungi were studied for their production of oxalic
acid and transformation of metal-containing minerals (Sayer and
Gadd, 1997; Gharieb et al., 2004). This includes a few papers
published on the precipitation of toxic metals as metal–oxalates,

as for example copper oxalates by entomopathogenic fungi such
as Beauveria species (Fomina et al., 2005) and iron oxalates by
ectomycorrhizal fungi (Landeweert et al., 2001).

On the other hand, there is a growing interest for the syn-
thesis of inorganic materials by biological means because these
are more environmental friendly processes. Novel applications
of this are the use of microorganisms for corrosion control or
protection of stone monuments, which were recently illustrated
in literature (Cappitelli et al., 2006; Zuo, 2007). In the ﬁeld of
conservation, this could represent an innovative treatment for
archeological and artistic metal artifacts. This will be in contrast
to the treatments currently employed such as the application of
organic protective coatings, which simply create a barrier against
aggressive environments in a non-selective way.

As part of the Biological patinA for arcHaeological and Artis-
tic Metal ArtefactS (BAHAMAS) project, a novel approach based
on inorganic treatments addressing speciﬁc corrosion features is
envisaged for copper, iron, and silver. These substrates are widely
represented in cultural heritage artwork and face several problems
of active corrosion. The research activities foreseen aim at creating

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 270 | 1

Joseph et al.

Protection of metal artifacts by Beauveria bassiana

protective fungal patinas by the conversion of existing corrosion
products into more stable and less soluble compounds while main-
taining the surface’s physical appearance. The color of the oxalate
layer created will be different according to the treated metal sub-
strate and is expected to be green, red–brown, and white on the
respective copper/bronze, iron, and silver substrates. As part of
this project, the aim of the present study was to evaluate the ability
of Beauveria bassiana to tolerate and transform copper, iron, and
silver compounds into stable compounds, such as metal–oxalate
complexes. The performance of B. bassiana was compared with
four other phylogenetically related soil fungal species in order to
establish whether B. bassiana is exceptionally promising for this
biotechnological application.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
STRAINS
Beauveria bassiana was isolated from copper-contaminated vine-
yard soil (Bevaix Abbey, Neuchâtel, Switzerland). The Bevaix abbey
vineyard soil (Neuchâtel, Switzerland) was treated for more than
a century with copper-based pesticide agents and is highly cont-
aminated with Cu (total concentration in soil reaches 350 ppm).
Trichophyton mentagrophytes (MUCL 9823), Trichophyton rubrum
(MUCL 11954), Arthroderma quadriﬁdum (MUCL 9822), and
Geomyces pannorum (MUCL 151) were provided from the culture
collection BCCM/MUCL of the University of Louvain (Belgium).
The ﬁve strains are deposited in the culture collection of the
Microbiology Laboratory (University of Neuchatel).

−1 agar and 12 g L

MEDIA AND CULTURE CONDITIONS
−1 malt
Agar malt extract medium (MA; 15 g L
−1. Differ-
in distilled water) was autoclaved at 121˚C, 25 min L
ent metal compounds were added to the medium for the speciﬁc
experiments (Table 1). Brochantite Cu4(OH)6(SO4)4 and ata-
camite Cu2Cl(OH)3 were synthesized according to the literature
(Sharkey and Lewin, 1971; Tanaka et al., 1991). Cuprite Cu2O,
hematite Fe2O3, and silver nitrate AgNO3 were purchased from
Fluka (purum). Magnetite Fe3O4 and iron (III) oxide FeOOH
were supplied by Aldrich (99.99%) and acanthite Ag2S by Riedel-
de Haën (pure). The different metal compounds were sterilized
with an UV-rays exposure of 30 min and added to the media after
autoclaving. When biocides were used, these were added after auto-
claving to the melted malt agar media at a temperature lower than
60˚C. Cultures were incubated (unless otherwise stated) at room
temperature in the dark.

GROWTH PERFORMANCE TEST
Pre-cultures onto MA petri dishes incubated at room tempera-
ture were used as inocula. Square fungal plugs of 5 mm side were
taken out with a sterilized cork borer and placed onto new Petri
dishes containing the different modiﬁed solid media summarized
in Table 1. The media (two or three replicates for each composi-
tion) were incubated at room temperature for 18 days (8 days for
iron) and the mycelia growth diameters measured. The growth
rates were determined measuring the radial growth diameters of
the mycelium each 3–4 days in two directions at 90˚ angles (Trinci,
1971; Grifﬁn et al., 1974; Prosser, 1994). MA medium was used as
a control.

ORGANIC ACID ANALYSIS
Beauveria bassiana was grown at room temperature for 21 days on
−1 agar and 8
two different malt agar media that contained 15 g L
−1 malt in distilled water (three replicates for each compo-
or 12 g L
sition). Cultures were ﬁltrated on 0.2 μm Whatman paper and cell
ﬁltrates were lyophilized and suspended in 100 μL deionized water.
The organic acids excretion was analyzed using high performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) with a UV–VIS DAD detector.
A calibration was established using 11 different organic acids as
standards. An Agilent HPLC 1100 series controller was used with
+
an ion-exchange column (H
form, Benson, Reno, NV, USA) and
sulfuric acid (20 mM) as eluent. Forty-ﬁve microliters portions
−1. UV–
of triplicate samples were eluted for 20 min at 7 mL min
VIS absorbance spectra of the acid function C= O were collected
between 210 and 400 nm.

SAMPLES
Two copper washers (W33 and W34), one Roman bronze (Cu/Sn)
alloy coin (C1), and one copper coin from France (Louis XIII
Double Tournois, C2) were used to evaluate the copper oxalate
formation in a liquid medium. Two copper roof sheets (R1 and
R2, 0.1 cm× 1.5 cm× 2 cm) were used for evaluate the copper
oxalates formation in a solid medium. Two iron washers (W37 and
W38) and two iron nails (N58 and N59) were used for evaluate the
iron oxalates formation in a liquid medium. The experiments with
solid media were performed on four window hinges (Fe1–Fe4) and
four iron screws (Fe6–Fe9). The silver oxalates formation was eval-
uated on a one Swiss Franc coin (Ag 83.5%/Cu 16.5% alloy) C3
from 1966.

FORMATION OF METAL–OXALATES ON SAMPLES
The different objects were not sterilized and placed in 85-mm
diameter Petri dishes. For copper, a malt medium containing
−1 malt was used for the cultures in liquid medium on
12 g L
samples W33, W34, C1, and C2 (immersion <2 mm). For assays
in solid medium cultures with copper, MA, and MABRO media
(Table 1) were put onto the copper roof sheets R1 and R2 and
their shape adapted to the size of the samples. The thickness of the
solid media was 2 mm. Finally B. bassiana was inoculated under
a laminar ﬂow hood using aliquots of spores suspended in water.
Conidies were collected from cultures of B. bassiana onto MA
petri dishes and suspended in deionized water in order to obtain
enough conidies per square millimeter of the samples surface (at

Table 1 | Composition of the different media used for the growth rates
measurements.

Medium

MA
MABRO
MACUP
MAACAN
MAHE
MAMA
MAIOH

Composition
12 g.L−1 malt+ 15 g.L−1 agar
MA+ 5g.L−1 brochantite
MA+ 5g.L−1 cuprite
MA+ 5g.L−1 acanthite
MA+ 5g.L−1 hematite
MA+ 5g.L−1 magnetite
MA+ 5g.L−1 iron (III) oxide

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiotechnology, Ecotoxicology and Bioremediation

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 270 | 2

Joseph et al.

Protection of metal artifacts by Beauveria bassiana

least 200 conidies for each Petri dish). The copper oxalates for-
mation was evaluated during 3 weeks through optical microscopy
observations and FTIR spectroscopy analysis every week. An iden-
tical protocol was followed for iron. Solid media MA, MAHE,
MAMA, and MAIOH were used on samples Fe1–Fe4 and Fe6–Fe9.
−1) was used on iron nails N58 and
Liquid medium (malt 12 g L
N59 and on iron washers W37 and W38. The precipitation of sil-
ver oxalates was evaluated on the sample C3 using a MA medium.
The experimental protocol was the same as the one developed for
copper.

FORMATION OF SILVER NANOPARTICLES
The experimental protocol was adapted from the literature (Vig-
neshwaran et al., 2007; Birla et al., 2009; Ingle et al., 2009). Conidia
were collected from cultures of B. bassiana onto MA petri dishes
and suspended in deionized water in order to obtain a ﬁnal con-
centration of 8× 105 spores mL
−1. Two milliliters aliquots of B.
bassiana spores were used to inoculate 250 ml Schott ﬂasks each
−1) and the ﬂasks
containing 100 mL of a malt medium (12 g L
were placed under agitation (125 rpm) for 150 h in dark at room
temperature. The culture was ﬁltered on an 11-μm Whatman ﬁlter
(previously sterilized under UV for 40 min) in order to separate
mycelium and cell ﬁltrate. The mycelium (in 24.5 mL deionized
water) and 24.5 mL cell ﬁltrate were inoculated each in 250 mL
Schott ﬂasks. Silver nitrate was added to obtain a ﬁnal concentra-
tion of 6 mM Ag
ions. The ﬂasks were then incubated at room
temperature under agitation (125 rpm) for 72 h. Controls were
prepared in the same way but adding 24.5 mL deionized water
instead.

+

CHARACTERIZATION OF TRANSFORMATION PRODUCTS
Optical microscopy
Bright ﬁeld observations were performed using an Leica DMR
optical microscope equipped with ﬁxed oculars of 10× and objec-
tives with different magniﬁcations (5, 10, 40, and 100×). Photomi-
crographs were recorded with a Nikon DXM1200 digital camera
directly connected to the microscope and controlled through the
ACT-1 software.

Scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive spectroscopy
A Tescan Mira LMU environmental scanning electron micro-
scope, equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray analyzer was
used to observe the crystals formed by B. bassiana. The samples
were lyophilized, covered with carbon and gold layers, and ﬁnally
observed in the secondary electron mode at an acceleration voltage
of 15 kV and a working distance of 5–25 mm.

FTIR microscopy
A Biorad Excalibur spectrometer coupled with a Varian UMA500
FTIR microscope ﬁtted with an MCT detector cooled by liquid
nitrogen was used for FTIR measurements. The measurements
were made either in reﬂection mode or in transmission mode using
a micro diamond compression cell. All spectra were acquired in
−1. A
the range 4000–650 cm
total of 64 scans were recorded and the resulting interferogram
averaged. Data collection and post-run processing were carried
out using Varian resolutions Pro™software.

−1, at a spectral resolution of 4 cm

X-ray diffraction
A calibration was established using mixtures of dihydrated copper
oxalate (CuC2O4·2H2O) and quartz with exact proportion. The

cultures of B. bassiana in MABRO, MATA, and MACUP media
were dried at 60˚C and then ground to a homogenous powder
with particle size <40 μm. For each Cu(II) concentration, one
sample of 800 mg has been pressed (20 bars) in a powder holder
covered with a blotting paper and analyzed by XRD, using a SCIN-
TAG 2000 Diffractometer, Thermo, Ecublens, Switzerland. Fixed
analysis conditions were as follows: wave length: 1.5406 Å Cu Kα;
generator power: 45 kV and 40 mA; emitting slits: 2, 4 mm; receiv-
ing slits: 0.5, 0.3 mm; continuous 2θ scan from 1˚ to 65˚; step size:
0.02˚; scan rate 1.00/min; acquisition step size (chopper increment;
0.03˚ 2θ).

UV–VIS spectroscopy
Two-milliliter aliquots of cell ﬁltrate were centrifuged at 10,000 g
for 10 min and rinsed three times with deionized water. Mycelium
was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min, rinsed three times with
deionized water and homogenized with a ultrasonic bath. Sodium
chloride was added in order to precipitate the remaining sil-
ver (I) ions, which would interfere with the measurements.
A UV–VIS Thermo Genesis 10 s spectrometer was used and
absorbance spectra were recorded between 300 and 800 nm with
1 nm resolution.

Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using R software. For exper-
imental results on solid media with iron compounds, the signiﬁ-
cance (p < 0.05) of differences among growth rates was evaluated
using one-way ANOVA for parametric data and a complementary
Tukey’s post hoc test.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
EFFECT OF DIFFERENT COPPER COMPOUNDS ON GROWTH AND
PRECIPITATION OF COPPER OXALATES IN B. bassiana
In order to test the ability of B. bassiana to tolerate and immo-
bilize copper through the precipitation of copper oxalates, this
strain was exposed to Cu(II) present in different chemical forms
(Cu oxide, hydroxysulfate, and hydroxychloride). Growth perfor-
mance was compared with a control medium containing only a
carbon source but no Cu(II) (MA medium). In MA, B. bassiana
−1) compared to copper-
had the highest growth rate (3.9 mm day
enriched solid media, which signiﬁcantly altered growth rates.
On medium supplemented with increasing concentrations of
cuprite (Cu oxide, MACUP medium) growth rates decreased
to 0.35± 0.06 mm day
−1 at 10 and to 0.35± 0.03 mm day
−1
−1
−1 at 50 g L
at 20 g L
(Figure 1A). Likewise, growth rates severely decreased for media
containing brochantite (Cu hydroxysulfate, MABRO medium;
Figure 1A). Despite the elevated toxicity of chlorides for fungi,
this strain developed on atacamite (Cu hydroxychloride, MATA
−1 and
medium) with concentrations of Cu chloride up to 20 g L
had a radial growth of 0.60± 0.10 mm day
−1. However, B. bassiana
−1 of atacamite (Figure 1A).
growth was fully inhibited at 50 g L
The lowest B. bassiana growth was on MACUP media and could
be related to the higher solubility of cuprite in water respect to
brochantite and atacamite (Cramer et al., 2002).

−1 and reduced to 0.20± 0.03 mm day

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 270 | 3

Joseph et al.

Protection of metal artifacts by Beauveria bassiana

FIGURE 1 | Ability of B. bassiana to tolerate and form copper oxalates
on different soil media containing cuprite (MACUP), brochantite
(MABRO), and atacamite (MATA). (A) Radial growth rates on solid media
amended with Cu(II) concentrations ranging from 10 to 50 g L−1. The bars
reﬂect mean values of three replicates. Error bars indicate SEs of the
means. (B) Copper oxalates semi-quantitative estimation calculated from
the XRD measurements and expressed in percentage of the dry weight of
treated mycelium.

After 18 days of incubation, green concentric ring patterns
were observed on the surface of the MACUP and MABRO Petri
dishes, suggesting the solubilization of copper and its transforma-
tion into copper oxalates within Liesegang rings. Such patterns
are formed when reaction, diffusion, and precipitation processes
interact together (Henisch, 1988). After 3 months of incubation,
the amount of copper oxalates precipitated by B. bassiana was
estimated by XRD analysis (Figure 1B). In general, the amount of
copper oxalates increased with the amount of copper available in
−1 of copper, the amount of copper rep-
the medium. With 10 g L
−1
resented 22.5% of the total weight and rose to 38.9% with 20 g L
−1. The results illustrated that in presence
and 44.3% with 50 g L
of more copper, B. bassiana precipitated a larger quantity of cop-
per oxalates. This feature together with the stimulation of oxalic
acid production was already reported for other fungal species and
in particular for brown rot basidiomycetes (Clausen and Green,
2003).

Beauveria bassiana was isolated from vineyard soil that was
treated for centuries with copper-based pesticide agents. It cer-
tainly developed a resistance toward high concentrations of copper
ions, as suggested by the results presented below. It is worth men-
tioning that B. bassiana is part of the entomopathogenic fungi
group, whose copper resistance is already reported in the liter-
ature (Baath, 1991). In order to test whether the ability of B.
bassiana to tolerate copper is exceptional, four other soil fungi were
tested for their ability to tolerate and immobilize copper through
the precipitation of copper oxalates. In control medium (MA), B.
bassiana grew at a slightly faster rate (3.94± 0.35 mm day
−1) than
A. quadriﬁdum and G. Pannorum, which had rates of 3.8± 0.26
and 2.47± 0.06 mm day
−1 respectively (Figure 2A). The two Tri-
chophyton strains (T. mentagrophytes and T. rubrum) grew with
the lowest rates (2.29± 0.06 and 1.51± 0.04 mm day
−1, respec-
tively). However, the Cu protection mechanisms of strains others
than B. bassiana seemed limited, as they were not able to grow on
MABRO or MACUP media (Figures 2B,C). On MABRO, only

FIGURE 2 | Growth rate curves for the MA (A), MABRO (B), and
MACUP (C) media. Beauveria bassiana (dash line), Trichophyton
mentagrophytes (black line), Trichophyton rubrum (dash-dot line),
Arthroderma quadriﬁdum (gray line), and Geomyces pannorum (dot line).
Error bars indicate SEs of the means.

A. quadriﬁdum (0.26± 0.26 mm day
−1) developed marginally
(Figure 2B). On MACUP none of the four other strains was able
to grow (Figure 2C).

−1 of malt, 23.3 kg m

Regarding the immobilization mechanism used by B. bassiana,
HPLC analyses combined with UV–VIS spectroscopy revealed that
this strain excreted considerable amounts of oxalic acid and none
of the other organic acids evaluated (Figure 3). The concentration
of oxalic acid produced varied at different concentrations of malt.
−3 day
−1 of oxalic acid was produced.
In 8 g L
−3 day
−1 when the concentration
This value increased to 31.6 kg m
−1. Based on these values, the theo-
of malt was increased to 12 g L
retical total production of oxalic acid after 21 days of incubation,
−1 of
would be of 489 kg m
−1 of malt. For comparison, in
malt and 663 kg m
Aspergillus niger, which is the most important fungi studied for
production of oxalic acid, production is up to 10 times lower con-
−1) or mutant
sidering the values reported for wild (3.7 kg m
−1) strains. In addition, A. niger excreted also citric
(9.7 kg m
and gluconic acid (Cameselle et al., 1998; Rymowicz and Lenart,
2003).

−3 on solid medium containing 8 g L

−3 with 12 g L

−3 day

−3 day

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiotechnology, Ecotoxicology and Bioremediation

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 270 | 4

Joseph et al.

Protection of metal artifacts by Beauveria bassiana

In addition, the characterization of copper oxalates formed by
B. bassiana was further performed by means of ESEM observa-
tions, XRD, and FTIR measurements (Joseph et al., 2011). These
data completed the work here presented. ESEM observations
allowed characterizing the crystals as rounded foil-like concre-

tions, which were identiﬁed as moolooite (CuC2O4·nH2O with
n < 1), a natural hydrated copper oxalate by XRD and FTIR
measurements on the three media MACUP, MABRO, and MATA.

appeared to be formed in MA medium (Figure 4C) respect to
MABRO (Figure 4D), and suggested that the addition of copper
to the medium did not increase the copper oxalates precipitation.
The surface of the treated samples was characterized by FTIR mea-
surements (Figure 5). The results showed that the original patina
composed of brochantite is gradually transformed into copper
oxalates and that the conversion is all but complete on the surface
areas where B. bassiana had grown.

APPLICATION OF OXALATE BIOPATINAS ON COPPER/BRONZE
SAMPLES
The precipitation of copper oxalates presented here has a poten-
tial application in the ﬁeld of art conservation science. In fact, on
outdoor exposed bronzes, copper oxalates are identiﬁed but not
associated with the phenomenon of cyclical corrosion (Graedel
et al., 1987). Instead they form green protective patinas on the
bronze surface, which are highly insoluble and chemically sta-
ble even in acidic atmospheres (Marabelli and Mazzeo, 1993).
Thus, considering the production of copper oxalates demonstrated
in B. bassiana prompted the evaluation of the formation of a
homogenous layer of copper oxalates on corroded artifacts.

After 3 weeks of incubation of B. bassiana in liquid medium
in the presence of several copper-containing objects, the forma-
tion of copper oxalates was observed on the different samples
(Figure 4). The green copper oxalates were distributed around
the sample either on the edge of the sample (W33 and W34) or
in the surrounding medium (samples C1 and C2; Figures 4A,B).
Such application procedure is therefore unsuitable for the pur-
pose of creating a homogeneous and adherent layer of copper
oxalates on the samples. We designed another application proce-
dure where the fungi can be directly inoculated on a solid medium
that has been previously poured onto the samples. Copper roof
sheets were used for this optimized application procedure. Optical
microscopy observations on the R1 and R2 coupons have shown
that either within MA or MABRO media, copper oxalates crys-
tals formed and were already visible after 7 days of incubation
(Figures 4C,D). Moreover, a higher amount of copper oxalates

FIGURE 4 | Optimization of the treatment of copper objects with
B. bassiana. (A,B) Aspect of samples immersed in liquid medium
inoculated with B. bassiana cultures after 3 weeks incubation. Objects
depicted: (A) C1 and C2, (B) W33, and W34. Embedded images present
samples before treatment. (C,D) Optical microscopy observations of MA
(C) and MABRO (D) medium after 7 days incubation of B. bassiana with R1
and R2 samples respectively. Red circles indicate the presence of copper
oxalates.

FIGURE 3 | High performance liquid chromatography separation
spectra for B. bassiana cultures on MA medium with 8 g L−1 (black line)
and 12 g L−1 (dash line) of malt together with the HPLC reference
spectra of oxalic acid (gray line).

FIGURE 5 | Reﬂectance FTIR spectra (2000–650 cm−1) obtained from
the surface of the samples R1 and R2 after 1 (gray), 2 (dark gray), or 3
(black) weeks of incubation of B. bassiana on MA (continuous lines) or
MABRO (dash lines) medium, respectively. The arrows indicate the
characteristic absorbance bands of copper oxalates, whose heights
increased with time.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 270 | 5

Joseph et al.

Protection of metal artifacts by Beauveria bassiana

APPLICATION ON IRON AND SILVER SAMPLES
Considering the encouraging results obtained for copper-
containing objects, the ability of B. bassiana to precipitate iron
oxalates, form silver oxalates, or to reduce silver compounds to
elemental silver was evaluated as well. To our knowledge this is the
ﬁrst time that such an attempt is conducted.

Iron oxalates formation
The ability of B. bassiana to transform and immobilize iron was
tested on different iron compounds. Growth rates were signif-
icantly different (F = 52.18, df = 4, p = 0.00001) for all tested
media. Among the different iron-containing media, B. bassiana
demonstrated to have a much higher growth on MAIOH than on
the other two media tested (Figure 6). These results were in agree-
ment with the fact that iron is essential to fungi and not as toxic
as copper. Even after 45 days of incubation, no crystal formation
was observed within the media.

Since our primarily interest is to obtain iron oxalate layers over
art objects, a ﬁrst attempt was made with iron samples on differ-
ent solid media. After 2 months of incubation with MAHE, some
hyphae adopted a red coloration under optical microscopy obser-
vations (data not shown). However contamination did not allow
an accurate evaluation for all other media and further experi-
ments will be therefore be foreseen with the use of antibiotics
in order to obtain a selective medium for B. bassiana. Follow up
experiments performed on iron samples (N58, N59, W37, and
W38) in liquid media gave very promising results: after a few
weeks, hyphae around the samples presented a red coloration.
Optical microscopy showed that hyphae close to the objects accu-
mulated a dark red aggregate and seemed completely incrusted
with red crystals (Figure 7A). The crystals were characterized by
SEM observations and FTIR measurements. SEM observations
allowed observing the encrustation of crystals around hyphae
(Figure 7B). Further, FTIR analyses showed the presence of char-
acteristics absorbance bands at 1366 (νsC–O), 1320 (νsC–O), and
−1 (Figure 7C), which can be attributed to iron
822 (δC–O) cm
oxalates (D’Antonio et al., 2009). Based on these results, further
test should be performed to lessen the amount of water used for
example a spray for the aspersion of the culture over the pieces.

Silver oxalates and nanoparticles precipitation
For the growth performance of B. bassiana on silver compounds
the highest growth rate was obtained in MAACAN medium
−1). Optical observations showed the presence of few
(3.4 mm day
rectangular and bipyramidal crystals (3–4 μm length; Figure 8A).
The same crystal morphology was reported in the literature for sil-
ver oxalate aggregates (Boldyrev, 2002; Pourmortazavi et al., 2008),
but due to the small amount of crystals observed, any attempt to
characterize these crystals with SEM–EDS and FTIR microscopy
was not possible. However, the mechanism for silver immobiliza-
tion in B. bassiana seemed similar to that for copper, as the same
extracellular precipitation was observed. It is worth saying that
most silver artifacts are based on a copper–silver alloy and a green
patina will therefore be formed by the precipitation of copper
oxalates as for sample C3 (Figure 8B). In these cases, the esthetic
value of the objects will thus be altered, as a color change of the
object’s surface is not acceptable as far as conservation ethics are
concerned. Hence, the formation of an eventual homogeneous
and compact layer of silver oxalates appeared problematic for the
conservation of silver artifacts.

Therefore a different conservation strategy against the tarnish-
ing of silver artifacts based on the synthesis of silver nanoparticles
was tested. As reported in the literature, some fungi are able to
transform silver nitrate into silver metal nanoparticles (Rai et al.,
2009). This may represent an innovative conservation method
where tarnished areas could be reverted back to metal silver. The
ability of B. bassiana to synthesize Ag0 nanoparticles was tested
either in liquid medium or within a cell ﬁltrate (Figure 8C). After
3 days of incubation, UV–VIS spectroscopy analysis showed a char-
acteristic absorbance band at 420 nm, which was absent in the
controls and can be attributed to the presence of Ag0 nanoparticles
due a Plasmon resonance phenomenon. Comparing the mycelium
and cell ﬁltrate spectra, the peak height is much higher in this latter

FIGURE 6 | Growth rate curves for the B. bassiana cultures on MA (gray
line) MABRO (dark gray line), MAHE (black line), MAMA (dot line), and
MAIOH (dash-dot line) media. Error bars indicate SEs of the means.

FIGURE 7 | Beauveria bassiana cultures on MA medium with iron
sample W38. (A) Optical microscopy observations. (B) Secondary electron
image. (C) Transmittance FTIR spectrum (4000–650 cm−1) obtained from
hyphae incrusted in red crystals.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiotechnology, Ecotoxicology and Bioremediation

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 270 | 6

Joseph et al.

Protection of metal artifacts by Beauveria bassiana

CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
In this study, the ability of B. bassiana to grow in presence of
Cu ions and to form copper oxalate crystals on different media
was highlighted. Moreover, the possibilities offered by the use of
B. bassiana as an innovative conservation approach were demon-
strated. In fact, the results of the HPLC analysis showed the speciﬁc
production of oxalic acid. This feature will allow us to create
oxalate patinas without the formation of other carboxylates, as it
could be the case for other fungal strains producing a combination
of carboxylic acids. In addition, the precipitation of iron oxalates
and silver nanoparticles was reported for the ﬁrst time. The dif-
ferent crystal aggregates were characterized by either SEM, XRD
measurements, or UV–VIS spectroscopy. Further FTIR analysis
permitted to observe the gradual conversion of copper sulfates into
oxalates and to identify iron oxalates. B. bassiana is a cosmopo-
lite fungi, which has been widely applied as insecticide following
eco-friendly processes. Therefore, safety concerns are minimal and
this will allow the development of an in situ application kit for
conservators–restorers.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research has been partially carried out with the support of
the European Union, within the VII Framework Program (Con-
tract: BAHAMAS, PIEF-GA-2009-252759, 2010-2012). Authors
acknowledge Mr. T. Adatte and Dr. P. Vonlanthen (Institute of
geology and paleontology, University of Lausanne, Switzerland)
for providing X-ray diffraction and SEM–EDS facilities, respec-
tively and for their assistance during experiments. Authors are also
grateful to the analytical service of the Faculty of Sciences, Uni-
versity of Neuchâtel and in particular Dr. A. Vallat for assistance
during experiments.

FIGURE 8 | Growth of B. bassiana on silver compounds. (A) Optical
microscopy observations of B. bassiana cultures on MAACAN medium with
rectangular and bipyramidal crystals indicated by red circles. (B) Sample C3
(copper–silver alloy) with copper oxalates formed around the area indicated
by a red circle. (C) UV–visible absorbance spectra of mycelium (black line)
and cell ﬁltrate (dash line) containing silver nanoparticles. As control the
reference spectra for mycelium (gray line) and cell ﬁltrate (gray dash line)
were included.

conﬁrming the synthesis of metal nanoparticles by a still unknown
extracellular enzyme (Ingle et al., 2009). This simple and eco-
friendly biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles by B. bassiana seemed
very promising in particular in the ﬁeld of nanotechnology, where
such materials are studied for their antimicrobial properties.

REFERENCES
Baath, E. (1991). Tolerance of cop-
per by entomogenous fungi and
the use of copper-amended media
for
entomogenous
fungi
from soil. Mycol. Res. 95,
1140–1142.

isolation of

Birla, S. S., Tiwari, V. V., Gade, A. K.,
Ingle, A. P., Yadav, A. P., and Rai,
M. K. (2009). Fabrication of silver
nanoparticles by Phoma glomerata
and its combined effect against
Pseudomonas
Escherichia
aeruginosa
Staphylococcus
aureus. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 48,
173–179.

coli,
and

Boldyrev, V. V. (2002). Thermal decom-
silver oxalate. Ther-

position of
mochim. Acta 388, 63–90.

Cameselle, C., Bohlmann, J. T., Núñez,
M. J., and Lema, J. M. (1998). Oxalic
acid production by Aspergillus
niger. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 19,
247–252.

Cappitelli, F., Zanardini, E., Ranalli, G.,
Mello, E., Daffonchio, D., and Sor-
lini, C. (2006). Improved methodol-
ogy for bioremoval of black crusts

on historical stone artworks by use
of sulfate-reducing bacteria. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 72, 3733–3737.

Clausen, C. A., and Green, F. (2003).
acid overproduction by
Oxalic
copper-tolerant brown-rot basid-
iomycetes on southern yellow pine
treated with copper-based preserva-
tives. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegradation
51, 139–144.

factors

Cramer, S., Matthes, S., Covino, B.,
Bullard, S., and Holcomb, G. (2002).
“Environmental
affecting
the atmospheric corrosion of cop-
per,” in Outdoor Atmospheric Cor-
rosion (ASTM International), ed.
H. Townsend (Philadelphia, PA:
ASTM), 254–264.

D’Antonio, M. C., Wladimirsky, A.,
Palacios, D., Coggiolaa, L., González-
Baró, A. C., Baran, E.
J., and
Mercader, R. C. (2009). Spectro-
scopic investigations of iron(II) and
iron(III) oxalates. J. Braz. Chem. Soc.
20, 445–450.

Fomina, M., Hillier, S., Charnock, J.
M., Melville, K., Alexander, I. J., and
Gadd, G. M. (2005). Role of oxalic

acid over excretion in transforma-
tions of
toxic metal minerals by
Beauveria caledonica. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 71, 371–381.

Gadd, G. M. (2007). Geomycology:
biogeochemical transformations of
rocks, minerals, metals and radionu-
clides by fungi, bioweathering and
bioremediation. Mycol. Res. 111,
3–49.

Gadd, G. M. (2010). Metals, minerals
and microbes: geomicrobiology and
bioremediation. Microbiology 156,
609–643.

Gharieb, M. I., Ali, M. I., and El-Shoura,
A. A. (2004). Transformation of cop-
per oxychloride fungicide into cop-
per oxalate by tolerant fungi and the
effect of nitrogen source on toler-
ance. Biodegradation 15, 49.

Graedel, T. E., Nassau, K., and Franey,
J. P. (1987). Copper patinas formed
in the atmosphere – I. Introduction.
Corros. Sci. 27, 639.

Grifﬁn, D. H., Timberlake, W. E., and
Cheney, J. C. (1974). Regulation
of macromolecular synthesis, colony
development, and speciﬁc growth

rate of Achlya bisexualis during bal-
anced growth. J. Gen. Microbiol. 80,
381–388.

Henisch, H. (1988). Crystals in Gels
and Liesegang Rings: In vitro Veritas.
Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Ingle, A., Rai, M., Gade, A., and
Bawaskar, M.
(2009). Fusarium
solani: a novel biological agent for
the extracellular synthesis of silver
nanoparticles. J. Nanopart. Res. 11,
2079–2085.

Joseph, E., Simon, A., Prati, S., Wörle,
M., Job, D., and Mazzeo, R. (2011).
Development of an analytical proce-
dure for evaluation of the protective
behaviour of innovative fungal pati-
nas on archaeological and artistic
metal artefacts. Anal. Bioanal. Chem.
399, 2899–2907.

Landeweert, R., Hofﬂand, E., Fin-
lay, R. D., Kuyper, T. W., and
Van Breemen, N.
(2001). Link-
ing plants to rocks: ectomycorrhizal
fungi mobilize nutrients from min-
erals. Trends Ecol. Evol. (Amst.) 16,
248–254.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 270 | 7

Joseph et al.

Protection of metal artifacts by Beauveria bassiana

Marabelli, M., and Mazzeo, R. (1993).
La corrosione dei bronzi esposti
all’aperto: problemi di caratteriz-
zazione. La Metallurgia Italiana 85,
247–254.

Pourmortazavi, S. M., Hajimirsadeghi,
S. S., Kohsari, I., Fareghi Alam-
dari, R., and Rahimi-Nasrabadi,
of
M.
the
for
synthesis
oxalate
nanorods. Chem. Eng. Technol. 31,
1532–1535.
I.

(2008). Determination
optimal
of

conditions
silver

in Growing Fungus,

(1994). “Kinetics of
ﬁlamentous growth and branch-
ing,”
eds
N. A. R. Gow and G. M. Gadd
(London: Chapman & Hall),
301–318.

Prosser,

J.

Rai, M., Yadav, A., and Gade, A. (2009).
Silver nanoparticles as a new gener-
ation of antimicrobials. Biotechnol.
Adv. 27, 76–83.

Rymowicz, W., and Lenart, D. (2003).
Oxalic acid production from lipids
by a mutant of Aspergillus niger at
different pH. Biotechnol. Lett. 25,
955–958.

Sayer, J. A., and Gadd, G. M. (1997).
Solubilization and transformation
of insoluble inorganic metal com-
pounds to insoluble metal oxalates
by Aspergillus niger. Mycol. Res. 101,
653–661.

Sharkey, J. B., and Lewin, S. Z. (1971).
Conditions governing the formation
of atacamite and paratacamite. Am.
Mineral. 56, 181–194.

Tanaka, H., Kawano, M., and Koga,
N. (1991). Thermogravimetry of
basic copper(II) sulphates obtained
by titrating NaOH solution with
CuSO4 solution. Thermochim. Acta
182, 281.

Trinci, A. P.

J.

of

the width of

(1971).

Inﬂuence
the peripheral

growth zone on the radial growth
fungal colonies on solid
rate of
media.
J. Gen. Microbiol.
67,
325–344.

Vigneshwaran, N., Kathe, A. A.,
Varadarajan, P. V., Nachane, R.
P., and Balasubramanya, R. H.
(2007). Silver-protein (core-shell)
nanoparticle production using spent
mushroom substrate. Langmuir 23,
7113–7117.

Zuo, R.

(2007). Bioﬁlms:

strate-
for metal corrosion inhibi-
gies
tion employing microorganisms.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
76,
1245–1253.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 04 November 2011; accepted:
20 December 2011; published online: 09
January 2012.
Joseph E, Cario S, Simon
Citation:
Junier P
A, Wörle M, Mazzeo R,
and
Job D (2012) Protection of
metal artifacts with the formation of
metal–oxalates complexes by Beauveria
bassiana. Front. Microbio. 2:270. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2011.00270
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Microbiotechnology, Ecotoxicology and
Bioremediation, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Joseph, Cario, Simon,
Wörle, Mazzeo, Junier and Job. This is an
open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiotechnology, Ecotoxicology and Bioremediation

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 270 | 8

