Iron utilization in marine cyanobacteria and eukaryotic
algae

REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 07 March 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00043

Joe Morrissey and Chris Bowler *

Ecole Normale Supérieur, Institut de Biologie de l’ENS, Paris, France
Inserm U1024, Paris, France
CNRS UMR 8197, Paris, France

Edited by:
Martha Gledhill, University of
Southampton, UK
Reviewed by:
Tom Bibby, University of
Southampton, UK
Adrian Marchetti, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA
*Correspondence:
Chris Bowler , Institut de Biologie de
l’ENS, 46 Rue d’Ulm, 75005 Paris,
France.
e-mail: cbowler@biologie.ens.fr

Iron is essential for aerobic organisms. Additionally, photosynthetic organisms must main-
tain the iron-rich photosynthetic electron transport chain, which likely evolved in the iron-
replete Proterozoic ocean.The subsequent rise in oxygen since those times has drastically
decreased the levels of bioavailable iron, indicating that adaptations have been made to
maintain sufﬁcient cellular iron levels in the midst of scarcity. In combination with physiolog-
ical studies, the recent sequencing of marine microorganism genomes and transcriptomes
has begun to reveal the mechanisms of iron acquisition and utilization that allow marine
microalgae to persist in iron limited environments.

Keywords: iron, cyanobacteria, diatoms, algae, phytoplankton, genomics, prasinophytes

INTRODUCTION
Iron is essential for all aerobic organisms, but is highly reac-
tive and toxic via the Fenton reaction (Halliwell and Gutteridge,
1992). Consequently, organisms tightly control iron homeostasis
and have highly coordinated responses to iron deﬁciency and iron
overload. Photosynthetic organisms must also maintain the iron-
rich photosynthetic electron transport chain, which likely evolved
in the iron-replete reducing environments of the Proterozoic ocean
(Falkowski, 2006). The levels of bioavailable iron have decreased
drastically over time, concurrent with the rise in oxygen, indicat-
ing adaptations have been made to maintain sufﬁcient iron levels
in the midst of scarcity.

Still, limited iron availability impairs phytoplankton growth in
as much as 40% of the ocean, notably in the Southern Ocean,
equatorial Paciﬁc Ocean, and north Paciﬁc Ocean (Moore et al.,
2001). As the levels of other nutrients are sufﬁcient, these areas
are categorized as high-nutrient, low-carbon (HNLC). This iron
limitation has been evidenced by iron fertilization experiments of
HNLC waters, which can produce rapidly growing algal blooms
(Boyd et al., 2007; Figure 1), and ultimately, speculation that
these blooms could be utilized to capture and sequester carbon
from the atmosphere (Chisholm et al., 2001). At the same time,
elevated atmospheric carbon will likely acidify the ocean, almost
certainly altering iron bioavailability, and thus algal productivity
(Shi et al., 2010). Consequently, much effort has been made to
predict how climate change will affect iron availability and phy-
toplankton growth, and how altered phytoplankton growth will
itself affect climate change.

Despite the large-scale experiments related to iron and the
the underlying mech-
ocean, our current understanding of
anisms of
iron homeostasis in phytoplankton remains lim-
ited. Earlier work has shown that iron quotas are often opti-
mized in marine phytoplankton, yet the mechanisms of iron
uptake in these organisms remain obscure. The sequencing of

marine phytoplankton genomes and community metagenomes
has revealed a plethora of genes of unknown function, many of
which are species-speciﬁc (e.g., Rocap, 2003; Venter et al., 2004;
Allen et al., 2008; Frias-Lopez et al., 2008; Maheswari et al., 2010).
Thus it is proposed that phytoplankton survival in iron-starved
waters could rely on novel adaptations encoded by these genes.
Indeed, it was recently found that the newly cultured marine
species Chromera velia appears to lack any of the currently char-
acterized systems of iron uptake (Sutak et al., 2010); while the
halophilic green alga Dunaliella salina was found to utilize a
transferrin, an uptake system well-characterized in mammals, but
otherwise unknown in plants (Paz et al., 2007). This review will
focus on the recent advances in genomics in marine phytoplank-
ton models that have begun to shed light on the adaptations that
allow survival in environments where iron is vanishingly rare.

MARINE CYANOBACTERIA
Cyanobacteria, modern examples of the oldest oxygenic pho-
totrophs, are proposed to have begun the great oxidation event –
the initial oxygenation of the earth’s atmosphere around 2.4 bil-
lion years ago (Kasting and Siefert, 2002). While metagenomic
approaches have begun to reveal the diversity of bacteria in the
oceans (e.g., Venter et al., 2004; Frias-Lopez et al., 2008; Zehr et al.,
2008), the physiological characterization of iron homeostasis in
free-living marine cyanobacteria has been primarily limited to the
diazotrophs Trichodesmium and Crocosphaera watsonii, and the
non-diazotrophs Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus. The genome
sequencing and expression analysis in these genera, combined with
physiological characterization, suggest that several mechanisms to
survive iron limitation exist across marine cyanobacteria species
(Table 1):

1. Iron uptake is likely mediated by the FutA/IdiA-based ABC
transporter system (Figure 2), genes for which have been

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 1

Morrissey and Bowler

Iron and marine phytoplankton

FIGURE 1 | Examples of iron limitation in the ocean as evidenced by
rapid growth of diatoms and other plankton after iron fertilization
experiments. Circle color indicates dominant plankton in resultant blooms:
orange – diatoms; green – picophytoplankton; pink – zooplankton. 1 – IronEx-I,

1993; 2 – IronEx-II, 1995; 3 – SOIREE, 1999; 4 – EisenEx, 2000; 5 – SEEDS-I,
2001; 6 – SERIES, 2002; 7 – SOFeX North, 2002; 8 – SOFeX South, 2002;
9 – SEEDS-II, 2004; 10 – EIFEX, 2004; 11 – SAGE, 2004; 12 – PAPA-SEEDS,
2006; 13 – LOHAFEX, 2009. Adapted from Trick et al. (2010).

found in 28 unicellular cyanobacteria genomes of Prochloro-
coccus, Synechococcus, and Synechocystis (Rivers et al., 2009).
futa/idia is predicted to encode a periplasmic iron binding pro-
tein; futb likely encodes a Fe(III) permease; and futC an ATPase
binding protein. Levels of FutA/IdiA protein increase under
iron starvation in Prochlorococcus (Bibby et al., 2003; Thomp-
son et al., 2011), Trichodesmium sp. IMS 101, Crocosphaera
sp. WH8501, and Synechococcus spp. WH8103 and WH7803
(Webb et al., 2001). Work in freshwater cyanobacteria found
that the futA/idia ortholog futA2 encodes a periplasmic iron
concentrating protein essential for Fe(III) uptake (Katoh et al.,
2001; Badarau et al., 2008). Additionally, freshwater cyanobac-
teria possess FutA1, which also functions in iron uptake (Katoh
et al., 2001) but is found to localize to the thylakoid mem-
brane and plays an unknown role in the protection of PSII
(Michel et al., 1998; Exss-Sonne et al., 2000; Tölle et al., 2002).
The role, if any, of FutA1 in marine cyanobacteria remains
uninvestigated.

2. Iron limitation remodels the machinery of photosynthesis
(Barber et al., 2006). Speciﬁcally, the number of photosynthetic
complexes is reduced: iron-rich PSI (12 iron atoms) decreases,
in favor of PSII (three iron atoms), and the number of phyco-
bilisomes (which are synthesized by iron-containing proteins)
decreases.

3. Finally, genome analysis of Prochlorococcus, Synechococcus, Cro-
cosphaera, and Trichodesmium species suggests that nickel
superoxide dismutase (SOD) is utilized in place of iron SOD
to remove reactive oxygen species (ROS; Dufresne et al., 2003;
Palenik et al., 2003; Rocap, 2003; Eitinger, 2004).

NON-DIAZOTROPHS
Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus are the two most prominent
genera of picoplanktonic marine cyanobacteria (Partensky et al.,
1999a). Although they overlap in some ecosystems and may
have participated in lateral gene transfer (Beiko et al., 2005;

Zhaxybayeva et al., 2009), Synechococcus has a broader global dis-
tribution, especially in temperate latitudes and coastal regions,
while Prochlorococcus is more abundant in tropical latitudes and
oligotrophic environments (Zwirglmaier et al., 2008). Synechococ-
cus and Prochlorococcus also differ in their light-harvesting appa-
ratus: Synechococcus utilizes chlorophyll a, while Prochlorococcus
utilizes divinyl chlorophylls a and b (Partensky et al., 1999b). The
sequencing of these genomes is beginning to reveal the diverse
genetic adaptations that allow survival in a range of nutrient
environments.

Prochlorococcus
Prochlorococcus is a very small cyanobacteria (0.5–0.7 μm in diam-
eter), ubiquitous within the latitudes 40˚S to 40˚N, and perhaps
the most abundant photosynthetic organism on earth (Partensky
et al., 1999b). Some natural populations have been shown to be
somewhat iron-starved, as iron addition experiments have resulted
in increased Prochlorococcus cell division, cell size, and chloro-
phyll levels (Cavender-Bares et al., 1999; Mann and Chisholm,
2000), and Prochlorococcus dominates Synechococcus in the iron
limited equatorial Paciﬁc (Campbell et al., 1997). Prochlorococcus
populations, however, have been shown to be much less iron-
starved than larger cells such as diatoms (Partensky et al., 1999b).
The high surface-to-volume ratio of the small Prochlorococcus
cell presumably aids nutrient uptake in these iron limited envi-
ronments (Chisholm, 1992), although the MIT9313 ecotype was
found to be more tolerant of iron limitation than the smaller-
sized MED4 (Thompson et al., 2011). Presumably, this is because
MIT9313 is from waters with 25-fold less total iron levels than
MED4.

Prochlorococcus has a small genome of less than 2000 genes
(Rocap et al., 2002), and the sequences of over a dozen strains
have now been published. Several Prochlorococcus ecotypes possess
iron homeostasis genes missing in some species of Synechococ-
cus (Rocap, 2003), suggesting that they could be environmental
adaptations. These include (Table 1):

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 2

Morrissey and Bowler

Iron and marine phytoplankton

Table 1 | Iron-related genes and proteins mentioned in the review (see text for reference).

ELECTRON TRANSPORT
isiA
isiB (ﬂavodoxin)
petF (ferredoxin)

petE (plastocyanin)

petJ (cytochrome
c6)
cytochrome cm

Novel chlorophyll-binding protein that forms chlorophyll-protein-antenna super-complexes during Fe-starvation
Fe-free electron transfer protein that can replace ferrodoxin during Fe-starvation.
Fe–S cluster based electron transfer protein used in a wide variety of reactions, including electron transfer to NADP+ reductase
during photosynthesis.
Cu-based electron transfer protein that can replace cytochrome c6 during Fe-starvation; transfers electrons from cytochrome
b6f complex to PSI.
Cyanobacterial heme-based electron transport protein in thylakoid lumen downregulated during Fe-starvation; transfers electrons
from cytochrome b6f complex to PSI.
Cyanobacterial heme-based electron transport protein downregulated during Fe-starvation; may function in PS and respitory
electron transport chains.
Fe-rich electron transfer and proton pumping complex in thylakoid membrane, down-regulated during Fe-starvation; mediates
electron movement from PSII to PSI.

cytochrome b6f
complex
IRON TRANSPORT
Bacterial Fe(III) transport system
Fe(III) binding protein
idiA/futA/afuA
Permease
idiB/futB
ATPase
idiC/futC
Bacterial Fe(II) transport system
feoA
feoB
feoC
Divalent metal transporters
ZIP
NRAMP

Small soluble protein
Predicted Fe(II) permease
Predicted regulator

Oxidase-permease based transport system
FRE
FET3
FTR
OTHER
Fur
FER

ZRT, IRT-like proteins – transports divalent transistion metals into cytoplasm, e.g., Fe(II), Zn, Mn, Cu(II), Co, Ni, Cd
Natural resistance-associated macrophage proteins – transports divalent transistion metals into cytoplasm, e.g., Fe(II), Zn, Mn,
Cu(II), Co, Cd

Ferric chelate reductase – transfers electrons from NADH via heme to reduce Fe(III)
Multicopper ferroxidase that oxidizes Fe(II) from ferric reductases and passes Fe(III) to FTR
High afﬁnity iron permease – transports Fe(III) across the plasma membrane, in complex with Fet3

Canonical bacterial transcriptional regulator that represses iron uptake genes
Ferritin – sequesters and oxidizes Fe(II) in a multimer; found in the plastid and mitochondria of plants, and the cytosol and
mitochondria of human; expression is induced by excess iron, thus mitigating oxidative stress.
Bacterial ferritin.
DNA-binding proteins from starved cells – bacterial Fe-sequestering protein, that can also bind DNA.

Ftn
Dps

• Flavodoxin (isiB), an iron-free electron transfer protein that
can replace the functionally equivalent Fe–S protein ferredoxin
(petF) under iron limitation (Erdner and Anderson, 1999).
• One to two ferritin genes (Figure 2). Ferritin is an iron storage
protein associated with survival in low iron marine environ-
ments (Marchetti et al., 2009), and prevention of iron-induced
oxidative stress in terrestrial organisms, e.g., Arabidopsis (Ravet
et al., 2009) and humans (Corsi et al., 1998; Orino et al., 2001);
• Two to three fur genes, the canonical bacterial transcriptional
regulator that represses iron uptake genes.
• Candidates for a high afﬁnity iron scavenging system (Rocap
et al., 2002).

The Prochlorococcus core genome lacks Fe–siderophore complex-
related genes, but has components of a bacterial Fe(III) ABC
transporter encoded by idiA/futA/afuA, futB, and futC (Rocap
et al., 2003). However, it remains unclear what iron species

Prochlorococcus is able to transport. MIT9313 is more sensitive to
copper than MED4 and possesses putative iron transport genes
that are missing in MED4, suggesting variation exists in sub-
strate speciﬁcity of iron uptake systems between the ecotypes
(Thompson et al., 2011).

Examination of the transcriptional response to iron starva-
tion using qPCR and microarrays found that ﬂavodoxin (isiB)
is upregulated and that ferredoxin (petF) is downregulated (Bibby
et al., 2003; Thompson et al., 2011), while some genes associ-
ated with the iron-rich PSI and cytochrome b6f complexes are
downregulated, presumably allowing the reallocation of iron. To
increase iron uptake, idiA is upregulated (although futB and futC
are constitutively expressed under both iron-sufﬁciency and deﬁ-
ciency; Thompson et al., 2011). Finally, hli genes are upregulated,
presumably to protect the photosystems from oxidative stress.

Comparisons of different Prochlorococcus “ecotypes” have
found that there are differences in expression of iron-regulated

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 3

Morrissey and Bowler

Iron and marine phytoplankton

FIGURE 2 | Potential iron homeostasis systems in marine
cyanobacteria, as predicted by genomic analyses. At least in part, iron
uptake in cyanobacteria is likely facilitated by the concentration of Fe(III) in
the periplasmic space by FutA, followed by transport into the cytoplasm by
the FutB/FutC ABC transporter system. The presence of FeoA/B genes in

marine cyanobacteria genomes suggests Fe(II) uptake could also occur.
Finally, the Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 genome contains genes for
siderophore biosynthesis, as well as Fe-siderophore (Fe-S.) uptake via a
TonB dependent receptor system. Within the cell, iron could be
sequestered by bacterioferritin and Dps.

genes, indicating there is natural variation in the iron deﬁciency
response (Bibby et al., 2003; Thompson et al., 2011). An exam-
ination of MIT9313 and MED4 found that the iron-regulated
transcriptome was enriched with genes from the genomic islands
and genes outside the core genome (Thompson et al., 2011).
It was previously shown that Prochlorococcus ecotypes use gene
islands with nutrient transport and assimilation genes, perhaps
gained by lateral gene transfer, to adapt to the phosphate and
nitrogen availability of their environment (Martiny et al., 2006,
2009), so it is plausible that lateral gene transfer has also pro-
vided adaptations to iron limitation. Another potential adaptation
strategy was identiﬁed in two ecotypes from low iron regions of
the Eastern Equatorial Paciﬁc upwelling and the tropical Indian
Ocean through reconstruction of putative genomes of previously
unidentiﬁed ecotypes from the 73 metagenomic samples of the
Global Ocean Sampling expedition (Rusch et al., 2010). These two
new genomes had the same assortment of iron uptake and stress
genes as other ecotypes; however, six iron-containing proteins
were absent. Assuming that the absence from these metagenomic
data sets represents the absence from these actual genomes, this
would indicate that the iron quotas are minimized via the loss
of approximately 10% of the genes for iron-based proteins found
in other Prochlorococcus ecotypes (Rusch et al., 2010). The miss-
ing iron-containing proteins include nitrate reductase, and several
electron transfer proteins that are associated with the optimiza-
tion of photosynthetic efﬁciency: two ferredixins, plastoquinol
oxidase (PTOX), and cytochrome cm (Table 1). It was proposed
that this reduces the maximum photosynthetic efﬁciency of these

ecotypes, but allows survival in a low iron environment. At the
same time, this likely limits the ability of these ecotypes to respond
and grow rapidly following the appearance of iron, as iron addition
experiments in this part of the ocean show only a minimal response
from Prochlorococcus (Rusch et al., 2010).

Synechococcus
Iron starvation of marine Synechococcus results in accumulation of
glycogen granules, decreased chlorophyll a and thylakoid leaﬂets,
and decreased protein levels of phycocyanin, allophycocyanin, and
the PSII reaction center D1 peptide PsbA (Sherman and Sherman,
1983; Webb et al., 1994; Michel et al., 2003). The iron quota is
likely minimized by the use of (Table 1):
• The copper-containing plastocyanin in place of the iron–protein
cytochrome c 6 for electron transport from cytochrome b6f
complex to PSI.
• A cobalt-dependent ribonucleotide reductase.
• A putative nickel SOD (Rivers et al., 2009).

Flavodoxin (isiB) is present in all Prochlorococcus examined so
far, but absent in nearly two-thirds of the marine Synechococcus
genomes currently available. Finally, the gene isiA is present in the
genomes of three out of the four marine Synechococcus species
from environments that are perhaps iron limited (Bibby et al.,
2009); thus it has been proposed to be an adaptation to low iron
environments, although it is absent from the oligotrophic strain
WH8102 (Dufresne et al., 2008). In the thermophilic freshwater

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 4

Morrissey and Bowler

Iron and marine phytoplankton

species S. elongates, isiA is upregulated in response to iron star-
vation (Park et al., 1999; Bibby et al., 2001a), resulting in the
formation of giant PSI-IsiA-chlorophyll–protein–antenna super-
complexes (Bibby et al., 2001a,b; Boekema et al., 2001). Disruption
of isiA in the freshwater species results in increased photoinhibi-
tion and reduced growth under iron starvation (Michel et al., 1996;
Park et al., 1999), suggesting it is an important component of the
iron deﬁciency response. Again, the relationship of freshwater IsiA
to that found in marine species has not yet been investigated.

How iron moves through the outer membrane is unknown,
although the Synechococcus genome is heavily enriched with genes
predicted to encode transporters (Palenik et al., 2003). Both a
coastal (PCC 7002) and open ocean (CCMP 1334/WH7803)
species of Synechococcus can utilize a variety of siderophores
(Hutchins et al., 1999), although siderophore uptake genes have
not been identiﬁed in the WH8102 genome (Palenik et al.,
2003). However, it was observed that the freshwater cyanobacteria
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 utilizes Fe(III)-siderophores through
reduction, and then presumably transport of Fe(II) (Kranzler
et al., 2011). Some coastal marine Synechococcus species produce
siderophores (Wilhelm and Trick, 1994; Ito and Alison, 2005), and
the genome of one of these, PCC 7002, contains genes related to
siderophore biosynthesis and uptake via putative TonB dependent
receptors (Hopkinson and Morel, 2009). However, siderophore
secretion has not been found in oligotrophic Synechococcus, and
siderophore synthesis and uptake genes have not been identiﬁed
in WH8102 (Palenik et al., 2003), nor in genomes from other open
ocean strains, including CCMP 1334/WH7803 (Hopkinson and
Morel, 2009).

Further sequencing has revealed variation between genomes
of coastal and open ocean Synechococcus, perhaps represent-
ing environment-speciﬁc adaptations for metal homeostasis. The
open ocean is a more constant environment with lower nutri-
ent levels, while wind-driven nutrient upwellings and inputs from
land result in higher total iron concentrations in coastal environ-
ments (Ryther and Kramer, 1961). Appropriately, coastal species
have higher iron quotas (Sunda et al., 1991), and the genome of
the coastal species CC9311 was found to possess more genes for
iron-containing proteins than the open ocean WH8102 (Palenik
et al., 2006). Also unique to the coastal genome was feoA/B, pre-
dicted to encode putative Fe(II) transporters absent from WH8102
(Figure 2). This is of interest because it is proposed that bioavail-
able Fe(II) may be more abundant in the coastal ocean through
photochemical reactions with organic matter (Kuma et al., 1992).
In the CC9311 genome, feoA/B was located in islands of atypi-
cal trinucleotide composition, suggesting it was acquired through
horizontal gene transfer (Palenik et al., 2006). Further examination
of the genomes of several coastal Synechococcus species (WH5701,
RS9917, and CC9311) again found feoB, while it is absent from
Prochlorococcus genomes (Rivers et al., 2009).

The CC9311 genome also contains ﬁve copies of a bacterial
ferritin, including one in an island suggestive of horizontal gene
transfer (Palenik et al., 2006). Also present is dpsA (Palenik et al.,
2006; Figure 2), a divergent member of the bacterioferritin super-
family found in most marine Synechococcus genomes, and absent
from most Prochlorococcus genomes (Rivers et al., 2009). In bac-
teria and Archaea, dps genes are often expressed during periods

of oxidative stress, long term nutrient deﬁciency, and station-
ary growth phase. In freshwater S. elongates species, disruption
of dpsA results in death under iron starvation (Sen et al., 2000).
Although its function remains unclear, DpsA from freshwater
Synechococcus PCC 7942 contains heme and has weak catalase
activity in vitro (Peña and Bullerjahn, 1995), is localized to the
photosynthetic membranes (Durham and Bullerjahn, 2002), and
can bind chromosomal DNA in vitro (Peña et al., 1995).

DIAZOTROPHS
Nitrogen ﬁxation by diazotrophs allows growth in nitrogen starved
waters; however this process is iron intensive, as the nitroge-
nase protein complex is composed of the iron-rich proteins NifH
(four iron atoms per homodimer) and NifDK (15 iron atoms
per homodimer; Rubio and Ludden, 2008). Biological nitro-
gen ﬁxation in cyanobacteria is believed to have evolved in the
anoxic ocean where Fe(II) was soluble and thus more bioavailable
(Falkowski, 1997). Consequently, the scarcity of readily available
iron in the modern ocean limits nitrogen ﬁxation (Berman-Frank
et al., 2001; Moore et al., 2009). At the same time, oxygenic
photosynthesis and nitrogen ﬁxation must be separated due to
the extreme sensitivity of the nitrogenase Fe–S clusters to oxy-
gen (Fay, 1992). Thus, diazotrophs must balance nitrogen and
iron metabolism, both in terms of iron utilization, and the spa-
tial and temporal arrangement of these incompatible reactions.
Metagenomic analysis of oligotrophic seawater identiﬁed perhaps
the most extreme adaptation to this dilemma in the ostensible
absence of PSII genes from the genome of UCYN-A, an uncul-
tured nitrogen-ﬁxing cyanobacteria (Zehr et al., 2008; Tripp et al.,
2010).

Trichodesmium
Trichodesmium is a nitrogen-ﬁxing, ﬁlamentous, non-heterocystous
cyanobacteria. Abundant in tropical and subtropical surface
waters, Trichodesmium forms blooms thousands of kilometers
wide and completes more marine nitrogen ﬁxation than any other
organism (Capone et al., 1997). However, the combination of
iron-rich photosynthetic complexes and nitrogenase results in
higher intracellular iron quotas for Trichodesmium than other
phytoplankton (Kustka et al., 2003a). Iron limitation in T. ery-
thraeum IMS101 results in decreased growth, ﬁlament length, and
chlorophyll levels, in addition to decreased nitrogen ﬁxation and
photosynthetic efﬁciency (Shi et al., 2007; Küpper et al., 2008).
Similar changes were seen in four other Trichodesmium species
(Chappell and Webb, 2010). A unique adaptation to this high iron
quota is found in puff colonies of Trichodesmium collected from
the Red Sea (although not in laboratory cultures), which actively
acquire desert dust and utilize the iron (Rubin et al., 2011). Striking
movies show that dust particles quickly move along the cell sur-
face of the trichome from the colony periphery to the core, where
dust and oxides are actively dissolved by an unknown mechanism.
As dust inputs are correlated with Trichodesmium abundance, the
ability to directly and efﬁciently utilize wind-blown desert dust
could fuel the giant blooms.

In the iron deﬁciency response, a “hierarchy of iron demand”
is proposed to exist in Trichodesmium, with mRNA associated
with nitrogen ﬁxation being downregulated more quickly than

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 5

Morrissey and Bowler

Iron and marine phytoplankton

photosynthesis genes (Shi et al., 2007). In terms of upregulation,
idiA and isiA expression were induced in response to iron starva-
tion (Webb et al., 2001; Küpper et al., 2008), in addition to isiB
(ﬂavodoxin) and feoB (Chappell and Webb, 2010). The genomes
of Trichodesmium species also contain multiple copies for the iron
uptake regulator fur, and genes for bacterial ferritin and dps (Chap-
pell and Webb, 2010). Additionally, the presence of TonB related
genes suggests that Trichodesmium may have the ability to actively
transport siderophores.

Crocosphaera watsonii
The unicellular diazotroph C. watsonii is found in the tropical and
subtropical open ocean. Intracellular iron levels change through-
out the day, increasing at night with the expression of nitrogenase
(Tuit et al., 2004). Analysis of the C. watsonii transcriptomes by
qPCR revealed a temporal pattern to iron demand, correlating
with increased expression of ﬂavodoxin and the iron homeostasis
genes feoAB, and fur in the evening (Shi et al., 2009). This sug-
gests coordination with nitrogenase activity. Indeed, one feoAB
operon is found within the nif cluster. A similar increase in evening
expression of these iron-related genes is also seen in the unicellular
diazotrophic cyanobacteria Cyanothece (Stockel et al., 2008).

Absolute quantitation of the protein levels (using selected
reaction monitoring mass spectrometry with isotopically labeled
peptide standards) across the diel cycle found that the synthe-
sis of photosynthesis related proteins peaks in the day, and that
the proteins are degraded as evening approaches. Conversely, the
nitrogenase complex proteins are absent in the day and synthe-
sized at night (Saito et al., 2011). At the same time, bacterioferritin
protein levels cycle, with peaks matching both the maximum iron
utilization points for photosynthesis and nitrogen ﬁxation. This
could suggest a role in handling the iron being transferred between
the two systems. Thus, it is proposed that by shifting iron from
photosynthesis in the day to nitrogen ﬁxation at night, C. wat-
sonii minimizes its iron quota and creates temporal separation of
the two incompatible systems. Indeed, C. watsonii is predicted to
have half the cellular iron concentration (relative to carbon) as
Trichodesmium, which ﬁxes nitrogen during the day (Kustka et al.,
2003b; Saito et al., 2011).

EUKARYOTES
As described above for cyanobacteria, metagenomic approaches
are uncovering a wealth of unknown marine eukaryotic phyto-
plankton species. In particular, alveolates and stramenopiles of
great diversity and novelty are detected in almost all metagenome
surveys (Massana and Pedrós-Alió, 2008). Community interac-
tions may also be relevant to iron homeostasis. For example, a
potential alga–bacteria mutualism in iron uptake between the
dinoﬂagellate Scrippsiella trochoidea and Marinobacter could be
representative of a more common iron uptake strategy among
other phytoplankton (Amin et al., 2009). At the other end of
the size spectrum, iron-rich whale feces also appears to serve as
an important source of iron for phytoplankton in the Southern
Ocean (Lavery et al., 2010). Additionally, the role of zooplank-
ton grazing during iron fertilization experiments is of particular
interest (Figure 1), as it may prevent the long term sequestration
of carbon on the seaﬂoor by diatoms (Bishop and Wood, 2009;

Mazzocchi et al., 2009). The haptophyte Phaeocystis also appears
to play an important role in blooms from polar iron fertiliza-
tion experiments (Pollard et al., 2009). However, relatively little is
known about the physiologies of many of these organisms, and
the genome sequences of most of them are not yet available.

Most progress to date has been made in understanding the
genetic underpinnings of iron homeostasis in green algae and
diatoms. Signiﬁcantly, genome and transcriptome data, combined
with the development of stable transformants to overexpress and
knockdown genes in diatoms (Poulsen and Kröger, 2005; Siaut
et al., 2007; De Riso et al., 2009) and the green alga Ostreococcus
tauri (Corellou et al., 2009) will likely accelerate our understand-
ing of iron homeostasis in eukaryotic phytoplankton through
functional genetics.

OSTREOCOCCUS
Ostreococcus are marine green algae belonging to the prasino-
phytes, and are described as the smallest free-living eukaryotes.
Ostreococcus species possess very small, dense nuclear genomes of
12.5–13.0 Mbp. For comparison, the diatom Phaeodactylum tricor-
nutum genome is 27.4 Mbp, and the Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
genome is 120 Mbp. The two species of Ostreococcus that have
been sequenced are from contrasting environments: O. lucimar-
inus from the open coastal waters of the Paciﬁc Ocean (Worden
et al., 2004); and O. tauri from a more nutrient-replete oyster
production lagoon on the Mediterranean coast of France. Trans-
portDB (www.membranetransport.org) predicts the presence of
genes for divalent metal transporters ZIP and NRAMP (Ren et al.,
2006; Table 1; Figure 3). Genes with similarity to prokaryotic
siderophore uptake are present, and O. lucimarinus has genes that
could represent a siderophore biosynthesis pathway (Palenik et al.,
2007). Much like other marine phytoplankton, the iron quota is
minimized: iron-free plastocyanin substitutes for cytochrome c 6;
ﬂavodoxin is present; and Ni–SOD, Cu/Zn–SOD, and Mn–SODs
appear to replace Fe–SOD (Palenik et al., 2007). Transcript levels
of ferritin and a ferredoxin family protein in O. tauri are clock reg-
ulated, both peaking at dusk (Monnier et al., 2010). It would thus
be worthwhile to investigate the relationship between free iron and
the recently identiﬁed O. tauri redox clock (O’Neill et al., 2011).

There are species-speciﬁc differences in the repertoire of iron
homeostasis genes, although it is unclear how these relate to the
different nutrient proﬁles of their respective environments. The O.
tauri genome has genes that could encode a multi-copper oxidase
and two putative ferric reductases lacking in O. lucimarinus, while
O. lucimarinus has two copies of ferritin genes and O. tauri has
only one (Palenik et al., 2007; Jancek et al., 2008).

MARINE DIATOMS
Diatoms, which carry out nearly 20% of photosynthesis on earth
(Tréguer et al., 1995), are often found in the most iron limited
regions of the ocean (Moore et al., 2001). Iron fertilization exper-
iments often result in blooms dominated by diatoms, suggesting
diatoms have adaptations that allow survival in iron limited waters
and a subsequent rapid multiplication when iron becomes avail-
able. The recent metatranscriptomic analysis of iron fertilization
bottle experiments found that diatoms possess a unique transcrip-
tional response to the sudden appearance of iron (Marchetti et al.,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 6

Morrissey and Bowler

Iron and marine phytoplankton

FIGURE 3 | Potential iron homeostasis systems in marine diatoms,
as predicted by genomic analyses. Iron-regulated ferric reductase
genes have been identiﬁed in T. pseudonana and P. tricornutum. These
could reduce Fe(III) and Fe bound by siderophores (Fe–S), as could
photoreduction (hv ). Fe(II) could then enter the cytoplasm through
iron-regulated transporters: ZIP in P. tricornutum, and NRAMP in T.
pseudonana (although if TpNRAMP is localized to the tonoplast, it could

also serve to release iron from the vacuole during iron starvation). In
T. pseudonana, extracellular Fe(II) could also be reoxidized and
transported through a yeast-like Fe(III) uptake system, utilizing the
iron-regulated multi-copper ferroxidase (TpFET3) and Fe(III) permeases
(TpFTR1 and TpFTR2). If ferritin is present (it is present in some
pennate diatom genomes, but not in T. pseudonana), it can store iron,
likely in the plastid.

2012). While other phytoplankton in the community increase
gene expression for a broad array of iron–proteins like ferre-
doxin, cytochrome c 6, and Fe–SOD, diatoms appear to prioritize
expression of genes related to photosynthesis and nitrate uptake,
reduction, and assimilation. Ostensibly, this strategy allows rapid
diatom growth and bloom domination.

Representatives of the pennate and centric diatom lineages,
Thalassiosira pseudonana and P. tricornutum, respectively, have
been sequenced, and extensive molecular biology tools have been
developed. Additionally, the publication of the polar pennate
diatom Fragilariopsis cylindrus genome is imminent, and the
bloom-forming pennate Pseudo-nitzschia multiseries is currently
being sequenced. Despite these resources, predicting how diatom
iron homeostasis systems function is complicated by the preva-
lence of unique genes of unknown function and by horizontal
gene transfer. Currently, less than 50% of diatom genes have a
putative function (Bowler et al., 2008; Maheswari et al., 2010),
and the nuclear genome of P. tricornutum contains at least 587
genes predicted to be of bacterial origin (of which, around 60%
are shared with T. pseudonana; Bowler et al., 2008).

Thalassiosira pseudonana
Thalassiosira pseudonana was the ﬁrst eukaryotic marine phyto-
plankton sequenced. T. pseudonana has a small genome and has
served as a model for marine centric diatom physiology experi-
ments. T. pseudonana is often described as a marine coastal diatom,
although recent phylogenetic analysis suggests T. pseudonana is

more closely related to the freshwater and marine diatom genus
Cyclotella (Alverson et al., 2011). Consequently, it was postulated
that T. pseudonana may be a freshwater diatom that is adapted to
salinity, rather than a marine Thalassiosira species (Alverson et al.,
2011).

Iron limitation of T. pseudonana results in:

• Decreased growth (Sunda and Huntsman, 1995) and photosyn-
thetic efﬁciency (Bidle and Bender, 2007).
• Increased cell aggregation and silica deposition on the cell wall
(Mock et al., 2008), with the relative proportion of iron in the
cell wall increasing (Ellwood and Hunter, 2000).
• Increased oxidative stress and caspase activity, ultimately result-
ing in programmed cell death (Bidle and Bender, 2007; Thama-
trakoln et al., 2011).

The sequencing of T. pseudonana revealed possible components of
a yeast-like Fe(III) uptake system, including a multi-copper ferrox-
idase (TpFET3) and two iron permeases (TpFTR1 and TpFTR2;
Table 1; Figure 3; Armbrust et al., 2004). Additionally, there are
at least two putative ferric reductases (TpFRE1 and TpFRE2) and
a putative divalent metal transporter (TpNRAMP), which could
suggest a second, reduction-based uptake system, similar to those
in Arabidopsis and humans. A similar combination of systems has
been predicted to exist in C. reinhardtii (Merchant et al., 2006).

Transcript levels of FRE1, FTR1, FTR2, and NRAMP increase
in response to iron limitation (Kustka et al., 2007), as does the

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 7

Morrissey and Bowler

Iron and marine phytoplankton

transcript for ﬂavodoxin, and those of several genes associated
with oxidative stress and programmed cell death (Thamatrakoln
et al., 2011). The upregulation of the ferric reductases is of addi-
tional interest, as T. pseudonana, T. weissﬂogii, and T. oceanica can
utilize iron–siderophores via reduction (Hutchins et al., 1999; Mal-
donado and Price, 2001; Shaked et al., 2005). Finally, microarray
analysis found that more than a third of iron-regulated genes were
genes of unknown function and hypothetical proteins (Thama-
trakoln et al., 2011), suggesting the existence of novel adapta-
tions to iron starvation. Of the genes upregulated in response to
iron limitation, 84 were also upregulated under silicon limitation,
providing further evidence that the iron and silicon starvation
pathways are interconnected, particularly at the point of cell wall
synthesis (Mock et al., 2008). It was thus proposed that iron is
incorporated with silicon into the cell wall, or that iron–proteins
could play a role in cell wall deposition (Mock et al., 2008). X-ray
ﬂuorescence tomography of the diatom Cyclotella meneghiniana
revealed distinct iron bands girding the frustules, supporting the
idea that iron has a specialized function in the cell wall (de Jonge
et al., 2010). Unfortunately, it is difﬁcult to draw conclusions for T.
pseudonana from this interesting result, as the sample tested was a
desiccated, freshwater diatom.

Thalassiosira oceanica
Relative to other Thalassiosira species, the open ocean species
T. oceanica is more adapted to iron limitation, growing faster
under these conditions than the coastal species T. pseudonana
(Sunda et al., 1991; Maldonado and Price, 1996) and T. weiss-
ﬂogii (Strzepek and Harrison, 2004). Biochemical measurements
found that a novel photosynthetic architecture minimizes the iron
quota of T. oceanica, decreasing the concentrations of the iron-
rich PSI (12 iron atoms) and cytochrome b6f complexes (six iron
atoms) by ﬁvefold and sevenfold, respectively (Strzepek and Har-
rison, 2004). Additionally, the cytochrome c 6 complex (one iron
atom) is replaced by the copper-protein plastocyanin – a protein
not found in T. weissﬂogii nor T. pseudonana (Peers and Price,
2006; Table 1). While photosynthetic efﬁciency of T. oceanica is
not altered under normal light conditions, under high light it is
more susceptible to photoinhibition and photosynthesis becomes
nearly half as efﬁcient as in T. weissﬂogii. The utilization of plasto-
cyanin makes T. oceanica much more sensitive to copper limitation
than T. weissﬂogii (Peers and Price, 2006). Thus, it is proposed that
these adaptations to its low iron environment impair adjustment
to rapid ﬂuctuations in light intensity and copper limitation –
environmental characteristics less common in the open ocean.
Further adaptations to iron starvation likely exist in T. oceanica,
because during iron limitation it is estimated that 100% of cellular
iron is utilized by the electron transport carriers of photosynthe-
sis, compared to only 50% in T. weissﬂogii (Strzepek and Harrison,
2004). The fate of the mitochondrial electron transport chain and
other iron-containing proteins in iron-starved T. oceanica is worth
investigating.

Finally, sequencing of the T. oceanica chloroplast genome
revealed that the ferredoxin gene (petF) appears to have been
transferred from the chloroplast genome to the nuclear genome
(Lommer et al., 2010). Because the ferredoxin gene remains in
the T. pseudonana and T. weissﬂogii chloroplast genomes, it is
proposed that this change could alter regulation of ferredoxin

expression under iron limitation, presumably contributing to
the observed tolerance to iron limitation (Lommer et al., 2010);
although under iron limitation the ratio of ferredoxin to ﬂavo-
doxin in T. oceanica is not signiﬁcantly lower than in T. weissﬂogii
(Strzepek and Harrison, 2004).

Phaeodactylum tricornutum
Phaeodactylum tricornutum can grow at iron levels 50 times lower
than T. pseudonana (Kustka et al., 2007). P. tricornutum appears to
use a fundamentally different iron uptake system than T. pseudo-
nana, raising the possibility that it could be more effective at iron
uptake under limiting conditions. The ferroxidase and iron per-
meases indicative of a yeast-like system in T. pseudonana have not
been identiﬁed in the P. tricornutum genome (Kustka et al., 2007;
Bowler et al., 2008). Examination of genes upregulated in response
to iron starvation using expressed sequenced tags revealed two fer-
ric reductases, PtFRE1 and PtFRE2(Allen et al., 2008; Figure 3).
The predicted PtFRE2 protein appears highly similar to the root
epidermal ferric reductase required for iron uptake in Arabidopsis,
AtFRO2 (Robinson et al., 1999; Bowler et al., 2008). Also highly
upregulated is a putative ZIP family transporter that could serve
to transport Fe(II) (Allen et al., 2008), as AtIRT1 does in Arabidop-
sis (Palmer and Guerinot, 2009). Finally, the presence of PtFBP,
a gene orthologous to the bacterial ferrichrome binding pro-
tein FhuD, raises the possibility of iron–siderophore utilization,
perhaps through the scavenging of cyanobacteria siderophores.
FRE and FBP may thus play a role in the ability of P. tri-
cornutum to utilize iron–siderophore complexes, both through
reduction (Figure 3) and the apparent uptake of intact complexes
(Soria-Dengg and Horstmann, 1995).

At the same time, iron limitation results in a decrease in tran-
scripts associated with iron intensive processes like photosynthesis,
mitochondrial electron transport, and nitrate assimilation (Allen
et al., 2008). At the protein level, the ratio of PSII to PSI increases,
cytochrome b6f and cytochrome c 6 proteins decrease (Allen et al.,
2008), and the activity of the iron-rich mitochondrial electron
chain decreases (Kudo et al., 2000). The upregulation of transcript
encoding the mitochondrial alternative oxidase (AOX) in response
to iron limitation is proposed to mitigate the ROS presumably
generated by iron-compromised electron transport chains (Allen
et al., 2008). About 32% of genes regulated by iron in P. tricornutum
have no ortholog in T. pseudonana, and iron starvation upregulates
expression of several unique gene clusters in P. tricornutum (Allen
et al., 2008). Of these genes, all but FRE2 are present in P. tricornu-
tum but not T. pseudonana, and many are of unknown function.
Indeed, the most highly expressed transcript under iron limitation,
ISIP1, encodes a predicted protein of unknown function found in
metatranscriptomic samples from iron limited waters (Marchetti
et al., 2012), and with no ortholog in T. pseudonana (Allen et al.,
2008). And like T. pseudonana, there is a subset of silicon starva-
tion regulated genes that are also regulated by iron (38 out of 223
Si-sensitive genes), although there is no apparent overlap between
the P. tricornutum and T. pseudonana subsets (Sapriel et al., 2009).

Pseudo-nitzschia spp.
Pseudo-nitzschia is a ubiquitous genus of pennate diatom,
frequently dominating blooms in iron addition experiments
(Hutchins and Bruland, 1998; de Baar, 2005; Trick et al., 2010).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 8

Morrissey and Bowler

Iron and marine phytoplankton

Among Pseudo-nitzschia species, the oceanic P. granii is more
tolerant of iron limitation than the coastal species P. multiseries
(Marchetti et al., 2009). P. granii is also more tolerant to iron
starvation than T. oceanica, presumably because P. granii utilizes
ferritin (Figure 3) to store iron during times of iron availability.
Ferritin has not been detected in T. oceanica (Marchetti et al.,
2009) and is absent from the T. pseudonana genome (Armbrust
et al., 2004).

In addition to the utilization of ferritin, Pseudo-nitzschia is of
interest because it is a eukaryotic marine phytoplankton which
secretes the phytosiderophore-like compound domoic acid (DA),
which is also a neurotoxin, and is causative of wildlife death and
amnesic shellﬁsh poisoning in humans. DA binds iron and cop-
per (Rue and Bruland, 2001), and is structurally similar to the
plant siderophore mugineic acid, which is secreted into soil by
graminaceous plants. Because of its similarity to mugineic acid,
it is proposed that DA could facilitate the extraction of iron from
terrestrial sediments found in coastal waters (Rue and Bruland,
2001). The addition of exogenous DA to natural seawater samples
increases iron uptake and growth of Pseudo-nitzschia (Maldon-
ado et al., 2002; Wells et al., 2005), suggesting it is part of a
Pseudo-nitzschia speciﬁc iron uptake system.

Domoic acid production has been observed to be induced
by both metal availability and limitation: elevated copper (Rue
and Bruland, 2001), copper limitation (Wells et al., 2005), iron
limitation (Rue and Bruland, 2001), and iron fertilization (Sil-
ver et al., 2010; Trick et al., 2010). This suggests DA plays a role
in both metal uptake during rapidly growing blooms and sur-
vival during limitation. DA binds iron with a low afﬁnity, but
the concentrations of DA in naturally occurring blooms are pre-
dicted to be sufﬁcient to facilitate iron uptake (Rue and Bruland,
2001). The ability to monopolize iron availability via a species-
speciﬁc phytosiderophore could thus explain the dominance of
Pseudo-nitzschia in blooms.

CONCLUSION AND QUESTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Other marine phytoplankton species have been sequenced (e.g.,
Emiliania huxleyi, F. cylindrus), and ever more will be. Presum-
ably, transcriptome level analysis similar to those described above
will be performed to determine which genes play a role in iron
homeostasis. Additionally, metagenomic transcriptional analysis
could be further applied to both classical bottle enrichment exper-
iments (Marchetti et al., 2012), and large-scale iron fertilization
experiments to elucidate the expression changes that underlie iron
utilization during bloom formation.

REFERENCES
Allen, A., LaRoche, J., Maheswari, U.,
Lommer, M., Schauer, N., Lopez, P.,
Finazzi, G., Fernie, A., and Bowler,
C. (2008). Whole-cell response of
the pennate diatom Phaeodacty-
lum tricornutum to iron starvation.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
10438–10443.

Alverson, A., Beszteri, B., Julius, M.,
and Theriot, E. (2011). The model
marine diatom Thalassiosira pseudo-
nana
likely descended from a
freshwater ancestor in the genus

Cyclotella. BMC Evol. Biol. 11, 125.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-11-125

Amin, S. A., Green, D. H., Hart, M.
C., Küpper, F. C., Sunda, W. G.,
and Carrano, C. J. (2009). Pho-
tolysis of iron–siderophore chelates
promotes bacterial–algal mutual-
ism. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106,
17071–17076.

Armbrust, E. V., Berges, J. A., Bowler, C.,
Green, B. R., Martinez, D., Putnam,
N. H., Zhou, S., Allen, A. E., Apt,
K. E., Bechner, M., Brzezinski, M.
A., Chaal, B. K., Chiovitti, A., Davis,

Genome level studies have offered hints about the genes respon-
sible for iron acquisition. This has allowed the leveraging of the
extensive research done in organisms like Arabidopsis, Chlamy-
domonas, yeast, and humans, to identify and predict the function
of marine orthologs. Nevertheless, the mechanisms of iron uptake
utilized by eukaryotic marine phytoplankton ultimately remain
unclear. Predicting which genes comprise the marine iron uptake
systems using the well-characterized terrestrial models is compli-
cated by the unique nature of the ocean environment, both in
terms of iron–ligand chemistry (Volker and Wolf-Gladrow, 1999;
Morel, 2008; Hassler et al., 2011), and in terms of the convo-
luted evolutionary path of organisms like diatoms (Moustafa et al.,
2009).

A more daunting gap in our understanding of iron homeostasis
is the abundance of genes of unknown function. These are often
species-speciﬁc, and found to comprise large portions of the ever
growing number of genomic and metagenomic data sets. This is
further complicated by the inability to cultivate and genetically
transform many of the new species that metagenomic surveys are
uncovering (e.g., UCYN-A, with its apparent lack of PSII genes;
Zehr et al., 2008). Additionally, the absence of canonical genes does
not necessarily prove the absence of a pathway, as was recently
demonstrated in freshwater cyanobacteria. Since the late 1960s,
cyanobacteria were believed to lack a complete TCA cycle, as the 2-
oxoglutarate dehydrogenase protein was undetected and the gene
was missing from freshwater and marine cyanobacteria genomes.
However, the recent functional characterization of candidate genes
from Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 identiﬁed two enzymes that per-
form the same role as 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase, completing
the TCA cycle (Zhang and Bryant, 2011). It also appears that fur-
ther divergence is possible, as these two genes are present in all
cyanobacteria genomes except those of marine Synechococcus and
Prochlorococcus.

Thus, functional characterization of putative uptake genes in
model organisms is required to establish even the most basic mech-
anisms for iron transport in marine phytoplankton, while genetic
screening (e.g., mutagenesis, expression of gene libraries derived
from marine microorganisms in heterologous systems, etc.) could
be utilized to identify novel iron homeostasis systems that have
evolved in iron limited ocean environments.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the reviewers for their helpful comments. Funding
in the laboratory is supported by the Agence Nationale de la
Recherche.

A. K., Demarest, M. S., Detter, J.
C., Glavina, T., Goodstein, D., Hadi,
M. Z., Hellsten, U., Hildebrand, M.,
Jenkins, B. D., Jurka, J., Kapitonov, V.
V., Kröger, N., Lau, W. W. Y., Lane, T.
W., Larimer, F. W., Lippmeier, J. C.,
Lucas, S., Medina, M., Montsant, A.,
Obornik, M., Parker, M. S., Palenik,
B., Pazour, G.
J., Richardson, P.
M., Rynearson, T. A., Saito, M. A.,
Schwartz, D. C., Thamatrakoln, K.,
Valentin, K., Vardi, A., Wilkerson, F.
P., and Rokhsar, D. S. (2004). The
genome of the diatom Thalassiosira

pseudonana: ecology, evolution, and
metabolism. Science 306, 79–86.

Badarau, A., Firbank, S. J., Waldron, K.
J., Yanagisawa, S., Robinson, N. J.,
Banﬁeld, M. J., and Dennison, C.
(2008). FutA2 is a ferric binding pro-
tein from Synechocystis PCC 6803. J.
Biol. Chem. 283, 12520–12527.

Barber, J., Nield, J., Duncan, J., and
(2006). “Accessory
Bibby, T. S.
chlorophyll proteins in cyanobac-
terial photosystem I,” in Photosys-
tem I, ed. J. H. Golbeck (Dordrecht:
Springer), 99–117.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 9

Morrissey and Bowler

Iron and marine phytoplankton

Beiko, R. G., Harlow, T. J., and Ragan, M.
A. (2005). Highways of gene sharing
in prokaryotes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 102, 14332–14337.

Berman-Frank, I., Cullen, J. T., Shaked,
Y., Sherrell, R. M., and Falkowski, P.
G. (2001). Iron availability, cellular
iron quotas, and nitrogen ﬁxation in
Trichodesmium. Limnol. Oceanogr.
46, 1249–1260.

Bibby, T., Nield, J., Partensky, F., and Bar-
ber, J. (2001a). Antenna ring around
photosystem I. Nature 413, 590.

Bibby, T. S., Nield, J., and Barber, J.
(2001b). Iron deﬁciency induces the
formation of an antenna ring around
trimeric photosystem I in cyanobac-
teria. Nature 412, 743–745.

Bibby, T. S., Mary, I., Nield, J., Partensky,
F., and Barber, J. (2003). Low-light-
adapted Prochlorococcus species pos-
sess speciﬁc antennae for each pho-
tosystem. Nature 424, 1051–1054.

Bibby, T. S., Zhang, Y., and Chen,
M. (2009). Biogeography of pho-
tosynthetic light-harvesting genes
in marine phytoplankton. PLoS
ONE 4, e4601. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0004601

Bidle, K. D., and Bender, S. J. (2007).
Iron starvation and culture age acti-
vate metacaspases and programmed
cell death in the marine diatom Tha-
lassiosira pseudonana. Eukaryot. Cell
7, 223–236.

Bishop, J. K. B., and Wood, T. J. (2009).
Year-round observations of carbon
biomass and ﬂux variability in the
Southern Ocean. Global Biogeochem.
Cycles 23, GB2019.

Boekema, E. J., Hifney, A., Yakushevska,
A. E., Piotrowski, M., Keegstra,
W., Berry, S., Michel, K. P., Pisto-
rius, E. K., and Kruip, J. (2001).
A giant chlorophyll-protein com-
plex induced by iron deﬁciency in
cyanobacteria. Nature 412, 745–748.
Bowler, C., Allen, A., Badger, J., Grim-
wood, J., Jabbari, K., Kuo, A., Mah-
eswari, U., Martens, C., Maumus, F.,
and Otillar, R. (2008). The Phaeo-
dactylum genome reveals the evolu-
tionary history of diatom genomes.
Nature 456, 239–244.

Boyd, P., Jickells, T., Law, C., Blain,
S., Boyle, E., Buesseler, K., Coale,
K., Cullen, J., de Baar, H., Fol-
lows, M., Harvey, M., Lancelot, C.,
Levasseur, M., Owens, N., Pollard,
R., Rivkin, R., Sarmiento, J., Schoe-
mann, V., Smetacek, V., Takeda, S.,
Tsuda, A., Turner, S., and Watson,
A. (2007). Mesoscale iron enrich-
ment experiments 1993–2005: syn-
thesis and future directions. Science
315, 612–617.

Campbell, L., Liu, H., Nolla, H. A.,
(1997). Annual

and Vaulot, D.

variability of phytoplankton and
bacteria in the subtropical North
Paciﬁc Ocean at Station ALOHA
during the 1991–1994 ENSO event.
Deep Sea Res. Part I Oceanogr. Res.
Pap. 44, 167–192.

Capone, D. G., Zehr, J. P., Paerl, H.
W., Bergman, B., and Carpenter, E.
J. (1997). Trichodesmium, a globally
signiﬁcant marine cyanobacterium.
Science 276, 1221–1229.

Cavender-Bares, K. K., Mann, E. L.,
Chisholm, S. W., Ondrusek, M. E.,
and Bidigare, R. R. (1999). Differ-
ential response of equatorial Paciﬁc
phytoplankton to iron fertilization.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 44, 237–246.

Chappell, P. D., and Webb, E. A. (2010).
A molecular assessment of the iron
stress response in the two phyloge-
netic clades of Trichodesmium. Env-
iron. Microbiol. 12, 13–27.

Chisholm, S. W. (1992). “Phytoplank-
ton size,”in Primary Productivity and
Biogeochemical Cycles in the Sea, eds
P. G. Falkowski and A. D. Wood-
head (New York, NY: Plenum Press),
213–237.

Chisholm, S. W., Falkowski, P. G., and
Cullen, J. J. (2001). Dis-crediting
ocean fertilization. Science 294,
309–310.

Corellou, F., Schwartz, C., Motta, J.-
P., Djouani-Tahri, E. B., Sanchez, F.,
and Bouget, F.-Y. (2009). Clocks in
the green lineage: comparative func-
tional analysis of the circadian archi-
tecture of the picoeukaryote Ostreo-
coccus. Plant Cell 21, 3436–3449.

Corsi, B., Perrone, F., Bourgeois, M.,
Beaumont, C., Panzeri, M. C., Cozzi,
A., Sangregorio, R., Santambrogio,
P., Albertini, A., and Arosio, P.
(1998). Transient overexpression of
human H-and L-ferritin chains in
COS cells. Biochem. J. 330, 315.

de Baar, H. J. W. (2005). Synthesis of
iron fertilization experiments: from
the iron age in the age of enlighten-
ment. J. Geophys. Res. 110, C09S16.
de Jonge, M. D., Holzner, C., Baines,
S. B., Twining, B. S., Ignatyev, K.,
Diaz, J., Howard, D. L., Legnini, D.,
Miceli, A., McNulty, I., Jacobsen, C.
J., and Vogt, S. (2010). Quantita-
tive 3D elemental microtomography
of Cyclotella meneghiniana at 400-
nm resolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 107, 15676–15680.

De Riso, V., Raniello, R., Maumus, F.,
Rogato, A., Bowler, C., and Falcia-
tore, A. (2009). Gene silencing in
the marine diatom Phaeodactylum
tricornutum. Nucleic Acids Res. 37,
e96.

Dufresne,A., Ostrowski, M., Scanlan, D.,
Garczarek, L., Mazard, S., Palenik, B.,
Paulsen, I., de Marsac, N., Wincker,

P., Dossat, C., Ferriera, S., Johnson,
J., Post, A., Hess, W., and Partensky,
F. (2008). Unraveling the genomic
mosaic of a ubiquitous genus of
marine cyanobacteria. Genome Biol.
9, R90.

Dufresne, A., Salanoubat, M., Partensky,
F., Artiguenave, F., Axmann, I. M.,
Barbe, V., Duprat, S., Galperin, M. Y.,
Koonin, E. V., Le Gall, F., Makarova,
K. S., Ostrowski, M., Oztas, S.,
Robert, C., Rogozin, I. B., Scanlan,
D. J., de Marsac, N. T., Weissenbach,
J., Wincker, P., Wolf, Y. I., and Hess,
W. R. (2003). Genome sequence
of
the cyanobacterium Prochloro-
coccus marinus SS120, a nearly
minimal oxyphototrophic genome.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100,
10020–10025.

Durham, K. A., and Bullerjahn, G. S.
(2002). Immunocytochemical local-
ization of the stress-induced DpsA
protein in the cyanobacterium Syne-
chococcus sp. strain PCC 7942. J.
Basic Microb. 42, 367–372.

Eitinger, T. (2004). In vivo production
of active nickel superoxide dismu-
tase from Prochlorococcus marinus
MIT9313 is dependent on its cognate
peptidase. J. Bacteriol. 186, 7821.

Ellwood, M.

J., and Hunter, K. A.
(2000). The incorporation of zinc
and iron into the frustule of the
marine diatom Thalassiosira pseudo-
nana. Limnol. Oceanogr. 1517–1524.
Erdner, D. L., and Anderson, D. M.
(1999). Ferredoxin and ﬂavodoxin
as biochemical
iron
limitation during open-ocean iron
enrichment. Limnol. Oceanogr. 44,
1609–1615.

indicators of

hydroxyl

ion-dependent
radical
generation, an update. FEBS Lett.
307, 108–112.

Hassler, C. S., Schoemann, V., Nichols,
C. M., Butler, E. C. V., and Boyd, P.
W. (2011). Saccharides enhance iron
bioavailability to Southern Ocean
phytoplankton. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 108, 1076–1081.

Hopkinson, B., and Morel, F. (2009).
The role of siderophores in iron
acquisition
photosynthetic
marine microorganisms. Biometals
22, 659–669.

by

(1998).

Hutchins, D. A., and Bruland, K.
W.
Iron-limited diatom
growth and Si:N uptake ratios in
a coastal upwelling regime. Nature
393, 561–564.

Hutchins, D. A., Witter, A. E., Butler, A.,
and Luther, G. W. (1999). Competi-
tion among marine phytoplankton
for different chelated iron species.
Nature 400, 858–861.

of

synechobactins,

Ito, Y., and Alison, B. (2005). Struc-
new
ture
the marine
siderophores
cyanobacterium
Synechococcus
sp. PCC 7002. Limnol. Oceanogr. 50,
1918–1923.

of

Jancek, S., Gourbière, S., Moreau, H.,
and Piganeau, G. (2008). Clues
about the genetic basis of adap-
tation emerge
from comparing
the proteomes of
two Ostreococ-
cus ecotypes (Chlorophyta, Prasino-
phyceae). Mol. Biol. Evol.
25,
2293–2300.

Kasting,

J. F.,

and Siefert,

J. L.
(2002). Life and the evolution of
Earth’s atmosphere. Science 296,
1066–1068.

Exss-Sonne, P., Toelle, J., Bader, K., Pis-
torius, E., and Michel, K. P. (2000).
The IdiA protein of Synechococcus
sp. PCC 7942 functions in protect-
ing the acceptor side of photosystem
II under oxidative stress. Photosynth.
Res. 63, 145–157.

Falkowski, P. G. (1997). Evolution of the
nitrogen cycle and its inﬂuence on
the biological sequestration of CO2
in the ocean. Nature 387, 272–275.

Falkowski, P. G. (2006). Tracing oxy-
gen’s imprint on Earth’s metabolic
evolution. Science 311, 1724.

Fay, P. (1992). Oxygen relations of nitro-
gen ﬁxation in cyanobacteria. Micro-
biol. Rev. 56, 340–373.

Frias-Lopez, J., Shi, Y., Tyson, G. W.,
Coleman, M. L., Schuster, S. C.,
Chisholm, S. W., and DeLong, E. F.
(2008). Microbial community gene
expression in ocean surface waters.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
3805–3810.
Halliwell, B.,

J.
(1992). Biologically relevant metal

and Gutteridge,

Katoh, H., Hagino, N., and Ogawa,
T. (2001). Iron-binding activity of
FutA1 subunit of an ABC-type iron
transporter in the cyanobacterium
Synechocystis sp. strain PCC 6803.
Plant Cell Physiol. 42, 823.

Kranzler, C., Lis, H., Shaked, Y., and
Keren, N. (2011). The role of reduc-
tion in iron uptake processes in
a unicellular, planktonic cyanobac-
terium. Environ. Microbiol.
13,
2990–2999.

Kudo, I., Miyamoto, M., Noiri, Y., and
Maita, Y. (2000). Combined effects
of
temperature and iron on the
growth and physiology of the marine
diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum
(Bacillariophyceae).
J. Phycol. 36,
1096–1102.

Kuma, K., Nakabayashi, S., Suzuki, Y.,
Kudo, I., and Matsunaga, K. (1992).
Photo-reduction of Fe(III) by dis-
solved organic substances and exis-
tence of Fe(II) in seawater dur-
ing spring blooms. Mar. Chem. 37,
15–27.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 10

Morrissey and Bowler

Iron and marine phytoplankton

Küpper, H., Šetlík,

I., Seibert, S.,
Prášil, O., Šetlikova, E., Strittmat-
ter, M., Levitan, O., Lohschei-
der, J., Adamska, I., and Berman-
Frank, I. (2008). Iron limitation
in the marine cyanobacterium Tri-
chodesmium reveals new insights
into regulation of photosynthesis
and nitrogen ﬁxation. New Phytol.
179, 784–798.

Kustka, A., Allen, A., and Morel, F.
(2007). Sequence analysis and tran-
scriptional regulation of iron acqui-
sition genes in two marine diatoms.
J. Phycol. 43, 715–729.

Kustka, A., Sañudo-Wilhelmy, S., Car-
penter, E. J., Capone, D. G., and
Raven, J. A. (2003a). A revised esti-
mate of the iron use efﬁciency of
nitrogen ﬁxation, with special refer-
ence to the marine cyanobacterium
Trichodesmium spp. (Cyanophyta).
J. Phycol. 39, 12–25.

Kustka, A. B., Sanudo-Wilhelmy, S.
A., Carpenter, E. J., Capone, D.,
Burns, J., and Sunda, W. G. (2003b).
Iron requirements for dinitrogen-
and ammonium-supported growth
in cultures of Trichodesmium (IMS
101): comparison with nitrogen ﬁx-
ation rates and iron: carbon ratios of
ﬁeld populations. Limnol. Oceanogr.
48, 1869–1884.

Lavery, T. J., Roudnew, B., Gill, P., Sey-
mour, J., Seuront, L., Johnson, G.,
Mitchell, J. G., and Smetacek, V.
(2010). Iron defecation by sperm
whales stimulates carbon export in
the Southern Ocean. Proc. R. Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 277, 3527–3531.

Lommer, M., Roy, A.-S., Schilhabel,
M., Schreiber, S., Rosenstiel, P., and
LaRoche, J. (2010). Recent transfer
of an iron-regulated gene from the
plastid to the nuclear genome in an
oceanic diatom adapted to chronic
iron limitation. BMC Genomics 11,
718. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-718
Maheswari, U., Jabbari, K., Petit, J.-
L., Porcel, B., Allen, A., Cadoret,
J.-P., De Martino, A., Heijde, M.,
Kaas, R., La Roche, J., Lopez, P.,
Martin-Jezequel, V., Meichenin, A.,
Mock, T., Schnitzler Parker, M.,
Vardi, A., Armbrust, E. V., Weis-
senbach, J., Katinka, M., and Bowler,
C. (2010). Digital expression pro-
ﬁling of novel diatom transcripts
provides insight into their biolog-
ical
functions. Genome Biol. 11,
R85.

Maldonado, M. T., Hughes, M. P., Rue,
E. L., and Wells, M. L. (2002). The
effect of Fe and Cu on growth and
domoic acid production by Pseudo-
nitzschia multiseries and Pseudo-
nitzschia australis. Limnol. Oceanogr.
47, 515–526.

Maldonado, M. T., and Price, N. M.
(1996). Inﬂuence of N substrate on
Fe requirements of marine centric
diatoms. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 141,
161–172.

Maldonado, M. T., and Price, N. M.
(2001). Reduction and transport of
organically bound iron by Thalas-
siosira oceanica (Bacillariophyceae).
J. Phycol. 37, 298–310.

Mann, E. L., and Chisholm, S. W. (2000).
Iron limits the cell division rate of
Prochlorococcus in the eastern equa-
torial Paciﬁc. Limnol. Oceanogr. 45,
1067–1076.

Marchetti, A., Parker, M. S., Moccia, L.
P., Lin, E. O., Arrieta, A. L., Ribalet, F.,
Murphy, M. E. P., Maldonado, M. T.,
and Armbrust, E. V. (2009). Ferritin
is used for iron storage in bloom-
forming marine pennate diatoms.
Nature 457, 467–470.

Marchetti, A., Schruth, D. M., Durkin,
C. A., Parker, M. S., Kodner, R.
B., Berthiaume, C. T., Morales, R.,
Allen, A. E., and Armbrust, E. V.
(2012). Comparative metatranscrip-
tomics identiﬁes molecular bases for
the physiological responses of phy-
toplankton to varying iron availabil-
ity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109,
E317–E325.

Martiny, A. C., Coleman, M. L., and
Chisholm, S. W. (2006). Phosphate
acquisition genes in Prochlorococ-
cus ecotypes: evidence for genome-
wide adaptation. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 103, 12552–12557.

Martiny, A. C., Kathuria, S., and Berube,
P. M. (2009). Widespread meta-
bolic potential for nitrite and nitrate
assimilation among Prochlorococcus
ecotypes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
106, 10787–10792.

Massana, R., and Pedrós-Alió, C. (2008).
Unveiling new microbial eukaryotes
in the surface ocean. Curr. Opin.
Microbiol. 11, 213–218.

Mazzocchi, M. G., González, H. E., Van-
dromme, P., Borrione, I., DeAlcala,
M., Gauns, M., Assmy, P., Fuchs, B.,
Klaas, C., and Martin, P. (2009). A
non-diatom plankton bloom con-
trolled by copepod grazing and
amphipod predation: preliminary
results from the LOHAFEX iron-
fertilisation experiment. GLOBEC
International Newsletter 15, 3–6.

Merchant, S. S., Allen, M. D., Kropat,
J., Moseley, J. L., Long, J. C., Tottey,
S., and Terauchi, A. M. (2006).
Between a rock and a hard place:
trace element nutrition in Chlamy-
domonas. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1763, 578–594.

Michel, K.-P., Berry, S., Hifney, A.,
Kruip, J., and Pistorius, E. (2003).
Adaptation to iron deﬁciency: a

comparison between the cyanobac-
terium Synechococcus elongatus PCC
7942 wild-type and a DpsA-free
mutant. Photosynth. Res. 75, 71–84.
Michel, K.-P., Exss-Sonne, P., Scholten-
Beck, G., Kahmann, U., Rup-
pel, H. G., and Pistorius, E. K.
(1998). Immunocytochemical local-
ization of IdiA, a protein expressed
under iron or manganese limita-
tion in the mesophilic cyanobac-
terium Synechococcus PCC 6301 and
the thermophilic cyanobacterium
Synechococcus elongatus. Planta 205,
73–81.

Michel, K.-P., Thole, H. H., and Pisto-
rius, E. K. (1996). IdiA, a 34 kDa
protein in the cyanobacteria Syne-
chococcus sp. strains PCC 6301 and
PCC 7942, is required for growth
under iron and manganese limita-
tions. Microbiology 142, 2635–2645.
Mock, T., Samanta, M. P., Iverson,
V., Berthiaume, C., Robison, M.,
Holtermann, K., Durkin, C., Bon-
Durant, S. S., Richmond, K., Rode-
sch, M., Kallas, T., Huttlin, E. L.,
Cerrina, F., Sussman, M. R., and
Armbrust, E. V. (2008). Whole-
genome expression proﬁling of the
marine diatom Thalassiosira pseudo-
nana identiﬁes genes involved in sil-
icon bioprocesses. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 105, 1579–1584.

Monnier, A., Liverani, S., Bouvet,
R., Jesson, B., Smith, J., Mosser,
J., Corellou, F., and Bouget, F.-Y.
transcrip-
(2010). Orchestrated
tion of biological processes
in
the marine picoeukaryote Ostre-
ococcus
light/dark
cycles. BMC Genomics 11, 192.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-192

exposed

to

Moore, C. M., Mills, M. M., Achter-
berg, E. P., Geider, R. J., LaRoche,
J., Lucas, M. I., McDonagh, E. L.,
Pan, X., Poulton, A. J., Rijkenberg,
M. J. A., Suggett, D. J., Ussher, S.
J., and Woodward, E. M. S. (2009).
Large-scale distribution of Atlantic
nitrogen ﬁxation controlled by iron
availability. Nat. Geosci. 2, 867–871.
Moore, J. K., Doney, S. C., Glover, D. M.,
and Fung, I. Y. (2001). Iron cycling
and nutrient-limitation patterns in
surface waters of the World Ocean.
Deep Sea Res. Part I Oceanogr. Res.
Pap. 49, 463–507.

Morel, F. M. M. (2008). The co evolution
of phytoplankton and trace element
cycles in the oceans. Geobiology 6,
318–324.

Moustafa, A., Beszteri, B., Maier, U. G.,
Bowler, C., Valentin, K., and Bhat-
tacharya, D. (2009). Genomic foot-
prints of a cryptic plastid endosym-
biosis
in diatoms. Science 324,
1724–1726.

O’Neill, J. S., van Ooijen, G., Dixon, L. E.,
Troein, C., Corellou, F., Bouget, F.-Y.,
Reddy, A. B., and Millar, A. J. (2011).
Circadian rhythms persist without
transcription in a eukaryote. Nature
469, 554–558.

Orino, K., Lehman, L., Tsuji, Y., Ayaki,
H., Torti, S. V., and Torti, F. M.
(2001). Ferritin and the response to
oxidative stress. Biochem. J. 357, 241.
Palenik, B., Brahamsha, B., Larimer, F.
W., Land, M., Hauser, L., Chain, P.,
Lamerdin, J., Regala, W., Allen, E. E.,
McCarren, J., Paulsen, I., Dufresne,
A., Partensky, F., Webb, E. A., and
Waterbury, J. (2003). The genome
of a motile marine Synechococcus.
Nature 424, 1037–1042.

Palenik, B., Grimwood, J., Aerts, A.,
Rouze, P., Salamov, A., Putnam, N.,
Dupont, C., Jorgensen, R., Derelle,
E., and Rombauts, S. (2007). The
tiny eukaryote Ostreococcus provides
genomic insights into the paradox
of plankton speciation. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 7705–7710.

Palenik, B., Ren, Q., Dupont, C. L.,
Myers, G. S., Heidelberg, J. F., Bad-
ger, J. H., Madupu, R., Nelson, W.
C., Brinkac, L. M., Dodson, R. J.,
Durkin, A. S., Daugherty, S. C., Sul-
livan, S. A., Khouri, H., Mohamoud,
Y., Halpin, R., and Paulsen, I. T.
(2006). Genome sequence of Syne-
chococcus CC9311:
into
adaptation to a coastal environment.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103,
13555–13559.

insights

Palmer, C. M., and Guerinot, M. L.
(2009). Facing the challenges of Cu,
Fe and Zn homeostasis in plants.
Nat. Chem. Biol. 5, 333–340.

for the survival of

Park, Y.-I., Sandström, S., Gustafs-
son, P., and Öquist, G. (1999).
Expression of
the isiA gene is
essential
the
cyanobacterium Synechococcus sp.
PCC 7942 by protecting photo-
system II from excess light under
iron limitation. Mol. Microbiol. 32,
123–129.

Partensky, F., Blanchot, J., and Vaulot,
D. (1999a). Differential distribution
and ecology of Prochlorococcus and
Synechococcus in oceanic waters: a
review. Bull. Inst. Oceanogr. Monaco
Numero Spec. 19, 431–449.

Partensky, F., Hess, W., and Vaulot, D.
(1999b). Prochlorococcus, a marine
photosynthetic prokaryote of global
signiﬁcance. Microbiol. Mol. Biol.
Rev. 63, 106.

Paz, Y., Katz, A.,

and Pick, U.
(2007). A multicopper ferroxidase
involved in iron binding to trans-
ferrins in Dunaliella salina plasma
membranes.
J. Biol. Chem. 282,
8658–8666.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 11

Morrissey and Bowler

Iron and marine phytoplankton

Peers, G., and Price, N. (2006). Copper-
containing plastocyanin used for
electron transport by an oceanic
diatom. Nature 441, 341–344.

Peña, M. M. O., and Bullerjahn, G.
S. (1995). The DpsA protein of
Synechococcus sp. strain PCC7942 is
a DNA-binding hemoprotein. J. Biol.
Chem. 270, 22478–22482.

Peña, M. M. O., Burkhart, W., and
Bullerjahn, G. S. (1995). Puriﬁ-
cation and characterization of a
Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7942
polypeptide structurally similar to
the stress-induced Dps/PexB protein
of Escherichia coli. Arch. Microbiol.
163, 337–344.

Pollard, R. T., Salter, I., Sanders, R. J.,
Lucas, M. I., Moore, C. M., Mills, R.
A., Statham, P. J., Allen, J. T., Baker,
A. R., Bakker, D. C. E., Charette,
M. A., Fielding, S., Fones, G. R.,
French, M., Hickman, A. E., Hol-
land, R. J., Hughes, J. A., Jickells,
T. D., Lampitt, R. S., Morris, P.
J., Nedelec, F. H., Nielsdottir, M.,
Planquette, H., Popova, E. E., Poul-
ton, A. J., Read, J. F., Seeyave, S.,
Smith, T., Stinchcombe, M., Tay-
lor, S., Thomalla, S., Venables, H. J.,
Williamson, R., and Zubkov, M. V.
(2009). Southern Ocean deep-water
carbon export enhanced by nat-
ural iron fertilization. Nature 457,
577–580.

Poulsen, N., and Kröger, N. (2005). A
new molecular tool for transgenic
diatoms. FEBS J. 272, 3413–3423.

Ravet, K., Touraine, B., Boucherez, J.,
Briat, J.-F., Gaymard, F., and Cellier,
F. (2009). Ferritins control interac-
tion between iron homeostasis and
oxidative stress in Arabidopsis. Plant
J. 57, 400–412.

Ren, Q., Chen, K., and Paulsen, I.
T. (2006). TransportDB: a compre-
hensive database resource for cyto-
plasmic membrane transport sys-
tems and outer membrane channels.
Nucleic Acids Res. 35, D274.

Rivers, A. R., Jakuba, R. W., and Webb,
E. A. (2009). Iron stress genes in
marine Synechococcus and the devel-
opment of a ﬂow cytometric iron
stress assay. Environ. Microbiol. 11,
382–396.

Robinson, N. J., Procter, C. M., Con-
nolly, E. L., and Guerinot, M. L.
(1999). A ferric-chelate reductase for
iron uptake from soils. Nature 397,
694–697.

Rocap, G. (2003). Genome divergence
in two Prochlorococcus
ecotypes
reﬂects oceanic niche differentia-
tion. Nature. 424, 1042–1047.

Rocap, G., Distel, D. L., Waterbury, J.
B., and Chisholm, S. W. (2002).
Resolution of Prochlorococcus and

Synechococcus ecotypes by using
16S-23S rDNA internal transcribed
spacer (ITS) sequences. Appl. Envi-
ron. Microbiol. 68, 1180–1191.

Rocap, G., Larimer, F. W., Lamerdin,
J., Malfatti, S., Chain, P., Ahlgren,
N. A., Arellano, A., Coleman, M.,
Hauser, L., Hess, W. R., Johnson,
Z. I., Land, M., Lindell, D., Post,
A. F., Regala, W., Shah, M., Shaw,
S. L., Steglich, C., Sullivan, M. B.,
Ting, C. S., Tolonen, A., Webb, E.
A., Zinser, E. R., and Chisholm, S.
W. (2003). Genome divergence in
two Prochlorococcus ecotypes reﬂects
oceanic niche differentiation. Nature
424, 1042–1047.

Rubin, M., Berman-Frank,

Shaked, Y.
(2011). Dust-
mineral-iron utilization by
marine
chodesmium. Nat.
529–534.

dinitrogen-ﬁxer

Geosci.

I., and
and
the
Tri-
4,

Rubio, L. M., and Ludden, P. W.
(2008). Biosynthesis of
the iron-
molybdenum cofactor of nitroge-
nase. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 62,
93–111.

Rue, E., and Bruland, K. (2001). Domoic
acid binds iron and copper: a possi-
ble role for the toxin produced by
the marine diatom Pseudo-nitzschia.
Mar. Chem. 76, 127–134.

Rusch, D. B., Martiny, A. C., Dupont,
C. L., Halpern, A. L., and Ven-
ter, J. C. (2010). Characterization
of Prochlorococcus clades from iron-
depleted oceanic regions. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107, 16184–16189.
Ryther, J. H., and Kramer, D. D. (1961).
Relative iron requirement of some
coastal and offshore plankton algae.
Ecology 42, 444–446.

Saito, M. A., Bertrand, E. M.,
Dutkiewicz, S., Bulygin, V. V.,
Moran, D. M., Monteiro, F. M.,
Follows, M. J., Valois, F. W., and
Waterbury,
Iron
conservation by reduction of metal-
loenzyme inventories in the marine
diazotroph Crocosphaera watsonii.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108,
2184–2189.

(2011).

J. B.

Sapriel, G., Quinet, M., Heijde, M.,
Jourdren, L., Tanty, V., Luo, G., Le
Crom, S., and Lopez, P. J. (2009).
Genome-wide transcriptome analy-
ses of silicon metabolism in Phaeo-
dactylum tricornutum reveal
the
multilevel regulation of silicic acid
transporters. PLoS ONE 4, e7458.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007458

Sen, A., Dwivedi, K., Rice, K. A., and
Bullerjahn, G. S. (2000). Growth
phase and metal-dependent regula-
tion of the dpsA gene in Synechococ-
cus sp. strain sp. strain PCC 7942.
Arch. Microbiol. 173, 352–357.

Shaked, Y., Kustka, A. B., and Morel,
F. M. M. (2005). A general kinetic
model
iron acquisition by
eukaryotic phytoplankton. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 50, 872–882.

for

Sherman, D., and Sherman, L. (1983).
Effect of iron deﬁciency and iron
restoration on ultrastructure of Ana-
cystis nidulans.
J. Bacteriol. 156,
393.

Shi, D., Xu, Y., Hopkinson, B. M., and
Morel, F. M. M. (2010). Effect of
ocean acidiﬁcation on iron availabil-
ity to marine phytoplankton. Science
327, 676–679.

Shi, T., Sun, Y., and Falkowski, P.
G. (2007). Effects of iron limita-
tion on the expression of meta-
bolic genes in the marine cyanobac-
terium Trichodesmium erythraeum
IMS101. Environ. Microbiol.
9,
2945–2956.

Shi, Y., Tyson, G. W., and DeLong, E. F.
(2009). Metatranscriptomics reveals
unique microbial small RNAs in the
ocean’s water column. Nature 459,
266–272.

Siaut, M., Heijde, M., Mangogna, M.,
Montsant, A., Coesel, S., Allen, A.,
Manfredonia, A., Falciatore, A., and
Bowler, C. (2007). Molecular tool-
box for studying diatom biology
in Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Gene
406, 23–35.

Silver, M. W., Bargu, S., Coale, S. L.,
Benitez-Nelson, C. R., Garcia, A.
C., Roberts, K. J., Sekula-Wood, E.,
Bruland, K. W., and Coale, K. H.
(2010). Toxic diatoms and domoic
acid in natural and iron enriched
waters of
the oceanic Paciﬁc.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
20762–20767.

Soria-Dengg, S., and Horstmann, U.
(1995). Ferrioxamines B and E as
iron sources for the marine diatom
Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Mar.
Ecol. Prog. Ser. 127, 269–277.

Stockel, J., Welsh, E. A., Liberton, M.,
Kunnvakkam, R., Aurora, R., and
Pakrasi, H. B. (2008). Global tran-
scriptomic analysis of Cyanothece
51142 reveals robust diurnal oscilla-
tion of central metabolic processes.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
6156–6161.

Strzepek, R., and Harrison, P. (2004).
Photosynthetic architecture differs
in coastal and oceanic diatoms.
Nature 431, 689–692.

Sunda, W., and Huntsman, S. A. (1995).
Iron uptake and growth limitation in
oceanic and coastal phytoplankton.
Mar. Chem. 50, 189–206.

Sunda, W. G., Swift, D. G., and Hunts-
man, S. A. (1991). Low iron require-
ment for growth in oceanic phyto-
plankton. Nature 351, 55–57.

Sutak, R., Šlapeta, J., San Roman, M.,
Camadro, J.-M., and Lesuisse, E.
(2010). Nonreductive iron uptake
mechanism in the marine alveolate
Chromera velia. Plant Physiol. 154,
991–1000.

Thamatrakoln, K., Korenovska, O.,
Niheu, A. K., and Bidle, K. D. (2011).
Whole-genome expression analysis
reveals a role for death-related genes
in stress acclimation of the diatom
Thalassiosira pseudonana. Environ.
Microbiol. 14, 67–81.

Thompson, A. W., Huang, K., Saito,
M. A., and Chisholm, S. W. (2011).
Transcriptome response of high-
and low-light-adapted Prochlorococ-
cus strains to changing iron avail-
ability. ISME J. 5, 1580–1594.

Tölle, J., Michel, K.-P., Kruip, J., Kah-
mann, U., Preisfeld,A., and Pistorius,
E. K. (2002). Localization and func-
tion of the IdiA homologue Slr1295
in the cyanobacterium Synechocys-
tis sp. strain PCC 6803. Microbiology
148, 3293–3305.

Tréguer, P., Nelson, D. M., Van Ben-
nekom, A. J., DeMaster, D. J., Ley-
naert, A., and Quéguiner, B. (1995).
The silica balance in the world ocean:
a reestimate. Science 268, 375.

Trick, C. G., Bill, B. D., Cochlan, W. P.,
Wells, M. L., Trainer, V. L., and Pick-
ell, L. D. (2010). Iron enrichment
stimulates
toxic diatom produc-
tion in high-nitrate, low-chlorophyll
areas. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
107, 5887–5892.

Tripp, H. J., Bench, S. R., Turk, K.
A., Foster, R. A., Desany, B. A.,
Niazi, F., Affourtit, J. P., and Zehr,
J. P. (2010). Metabolic streamlin-
ing in an open-ocean nitrogen-ﬁxing
cyanobacterium. Nature 464, 90–94.
J., and Rav-
izza, G. (2004). Diel variation of
molybdenum and iron in marine
diazotrophic cyanobacteria. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 49, 978–990.

Tuit, C., Waterbury,

Venter, J. C., Remington, K., Heidelberg,
J. F., Halpern, A. L., Rusch, D., Eisen,
J. A., Wu, D., Paulsen, I., Nelson, K.
E., Nelson, W., Fouts, D. E., Levy, S.,
Knap, A. H., Lomas, M. W., Neal-
son, K., White, O., Peterson, J., Hoff-
man, J., Parsons, R., Baden-Tillson,
H., Pfannkoch, C., Rogers, Y.-H.,
and Smith, H. O. (2004). Environ-
mental genome shotgun sequenc-
ing of the Sargasso sea. Science 304,
66–74.

Volker, C., and Wolf-Gladrow, D. A.
(1999). Physical
limits on iron
uptake mediated by siderophores or
surface reductases. Mar. Chem. 65,
227–244.

Webb, E. A., Moffett,

J. W., and
Waterbury, J. B. (2001). Iron stress

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 12

Morrissey and Bowler

Iron and marine phytoplankton

in open-ocean cyanobacteria (Syne-
chococcus, Trichodesmium, and Cro-
cosphaera spp.): identiﬁcation of the
IdiA protein. Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 67, 5444–5452.

Webb, R., Troyan, T., Sherman, D., and
Sherman, L. A. (1994). MapA, an
iron-regulated, cytoplasmic mem-
brane protein in the cyanobacterium
Synechococcus sp. strain PCC7942. J.
Bacteriol. 176, 4906–4913.

Wells, M. L., Trick, C. G., Cochlan, W.
P., Hughes, M. P., and Trainer, V.
L. (2005). Domoic acid: the syn-
ergy of iron, copper, and the toxic-
ity of diatoms. Limnol. Oceanogr. 50,
1908–1917.

Wilhelm, S. W., and Trick, C. G.
(1994).
Iron-limited growth of
cyanobacteria: multiple siderophore

production is a common response.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 39, 1979–1984.

Worden, A. Z., Nolan,

J. K., and
Palenik, B. (2004). Assessing the
dynamics and ecology of marine
picophytoplankton: the importance
of the eukaryotic component. Lim-
nol. Oceanogr. 49, 168–179.

Zehr, J. P., Bench, S. R., Carter, B. J., Hew-
son, I., Niazi, F., Shi, T., Tripp, H.
J., and Affourtit, J. P. (2008). Glob-
ally distributed uncultivated oceanic
N2-ﬁxing cyanobacteria lack oxy-
genic photosystem II. Science 322,
1110–1112.

Zhang, S., and Bryant, D. A. (2011). The
tricarboxylic acid cycle in cyanobac-
teria. Science 334, 1551–1553.

Zhaxybayeva, O., Doolittle, W. F.,
and Gogarten,

Papke, R. T.,

(2009).

histories

Intertwined evo-
J. P.
lutionary
of marine
Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus
marinus. Genome Biol. Evol. 1,
325–339.

Zwirglmaier, K., Jardillier, L., Ostrowski,
M., Mazard, S., Garczarek, L., and
Vaulot, D. (2008). Global phylo-
geography of marine Synechococcus
and Prochlorococcus reveals a dis-
tinct partitioning of lineages among
oceanic biomes. Environ. Microbiol.
10, 147–161.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

and

Received: 01 November 2011; paper
pending published: 25 November 2011;
accepted: 27 January 2012; published
online: 07 March 2012.
Citation: Morrissey J and Bowler C
Iron utilization in marine
(2012)
eukaryotic
cyanobacteria
3:43.
algae. Front. Microbio.
doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00043
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Microbiological Chemistry, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Morrissey and Bowler.
This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non Commercial License,
which permits non-commercial use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in other
forums, provided the original authors and
source are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 43 | 13

