MINI REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 22 December 2011
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00259

Unusual features of pomoviral RNA movement

Lesley Torrance 1*, Kathryn M. Wright 1, François Crutzen2, Graham H. Cowan1, Nina I. Lukhovitskaya3,
Claude Bragard 2 and Eugene I. Savenkov 3

1 Cell and Molecular Sciences, The James Hutton Institute, Dundee, UK
2 Applied Microbiology-Phytopathology, Earth and Life Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
3 Department of Plant Biology and Forest Genetics, Uppsala BioCentre, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden

Edited by:
Vitaly Citovsky, State University of
New York at Stony Brook, USA
Reviewed by:
Michael Taliansky, The James Hutton
Institute, UK
Valerian V. Dolja, Oregon State
University, USA
*Correspondence:
Lesley Torrance, Cell and Molecular
Sciences, The James Hutton Institute,
Invergowrie, Dundee, DD2 5DA,
Scotland, UK.
e-mail: lesley.torrance@hutton.ac.uk

Potato mop-top pomovirus (PMTV) is one of a few viruses that can move systemically in
plants in the absence of the capsid protein (CP). Pomoviruses encode the triple gene block
genetic module of movement proteins (TGB 1, 2, and 3) and recent research suggests that
PMTV RNA is transported either as ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes containingTGB1 or
encapsidated in virions containing TGB1. Furthermore, there are different requirements for
local or systemic (long-distance) movement. Research suggests that nucleolar passage of
TGB1 may be important for the long-distance movement of both RNP and virions. Moreover,
and uniquely, the long-distance movement of the CP-encoding RNA requires expression
of both major and minor CP subunits and is inhibited when only the major CP sub unit is
expressed. This paper reviews pomovirus research and presents a current model for RNA
movement.

Keywords: Pomovirus, PMTV, BVQ, BSBV, nucleus, nucleolus, microtubules,TGB

INTRODUCTION
The genus Pomovirus is classiﬁed in the family Virgaviridae and
comprises Potato mop-top virus (PMTV), the type species, Beet
soil-borne virus (BSBV), Beet virus Q (BVQ), and Broad bean necro-
sis virus (Koenig and Lesemann, 2005; Adams et al., 2009). These
viruses have tubular rod-shaped particles containing three species
of positive-sense, single-stranded RNA. The genome is organized
such that replicase, movement proteins, and capsid protein (CP)
are encoded on separate species of RNA. Pomoviruses encode a
conserved genetic module of movement proteins called the triple
gene block (TGB) which comprises three overlapping open read-
ing frames directing synthesis of proteins named TGB1, TGB2, and
TGB3 according to their position within TGB. The expression of
TGB is strictly regulated to control virus movement. Three groups
of TGB-encoding viruses have been distinguished (Verchot-Lubicz
et al., 2010) that show some variation in TGB mode of action and
detailed mechanisms of transport but in general it is thought that
TGB1 (an RNA-binding protein) interacts with viral RNA and
possibly other viral or plant factors to form a ribonucleoprotein
(RNP) complex and the integral membrane proteins TGB2 and
TGB3 facilitate RNP transport to the periphery of the cell and
delivery to plasmodesmata (PD).

Conceptually, the virus movement process has been separated
into cell-to-cell movement and long-distance (systemic) move-
ment since access to the vascular system, the plant “super highway”
that is required for systemic spread, seems to require different
factors (Lough and Lucas, 2006) and speciﬁcally entry to the
phloem by passage through PD at the companion cell-sieve ele-
ment boundary appears to constitute a particular barrier (Oparka
and Turgeon, 1999). PMTV is one of a few viruses that can move
long distance in plants without the need for capsid proteins. We
have shown that the CP and the minor capsid protein (CP-RT,
formed by suppression of the CP amber stop codon to produce

a longer polypeptide of 89 kDa) are dispensable for replication,
cell-to-cell movement, and long-distance movement of the RNAs
encoding replicase (RNA-Rep) and movement proteins (RNA-
TGB; McGeachy and Barker, 2000; Savenkov et al., 2003). CP-RT
was shown to be present at one extremity of the particle (Cowan
et al., 1997) and it is known that spontaneous deletions can occur
within the central part of the ORF including deletion of a domain
that is essential for transmission by the natural vector Spongospora
subterranea (Reavy et al., 1998; Sandgren et al., 2001).

CELL-TO-CELL MOVEMENT
The localizations of PMTV movement proteins TGB2 and TGB3
were studied by imaging living cells in which the TGB were
expressed as fusions with ﬂuorescent proteins using confocal
laser scanning microscopy (CLSM; Cowan et al., 2002; Zamy-
atnin et al., 2004; Haupt et al., 2005; Tilsner et al., 2010). The
yeast two-hybrid system and bimolecular ﬂuorescence comple-
mentation (BiFC) were also used to examine their interactions
and topology in cellular membranes (Cowan et al., 2002; Zamy-
atnin et al., 2006; Tilsner et al., 2010). These experiments showed
that TGB2 and TGB3 displayed homologous and heterologous
interactions and that they co-localized in the cortical endoplas-
mic reticulum and later in expression targeted PD and small
motile vesicles. The TGB3 contained the PD targeting signal.
When TGB2 and TGB3 were co-expressed from a bicistronic con-
struct in cells expressing GFP-TGB1 the TGB1 was localized to
PD and moved into adjacent cells, whereas TGB1 was present
in the cytoplasm and nucleus and did not spread to neighbor-
ing cells when expressed alone (Wright et al., 2010). TGB2 and
TGB3 did not move from cell-to-cell and their role in movement
appears to be the intracellular transport of RNP to PD (Zamyatnin
et al., 2004; Haupt et al., 2005; Tilsner et al., 2010; Wright et al.,
2010).

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 259 | 1

Torrance et al.

Pomoviral RNA movement

LONG-DISTANCE MOVEMENT
As stated previously, PMTV is one of a small group of viruses
that can move long distance in plants in the absence of CP. This
is somewhat unexpected since PMTV is transmitted in nature
by a soil-borne vector and the CP-RT contains a domain essen-
tial for transmission, therefore, separation of RNA-CP from the
infection would lead to a “dead end” in terms of virus spread.
In experiments to examine the role of CP and CP-RT in RNA
movement a series of mutant RNA-CP clones containing dele-
tions in the C terminus of CP-RT were prepared (Torrance et al.,
2009). RNA transcripts of these were inoculated to Nicotiana ben-
thamiana together with transcripts of the other two RNAs and
leaves were analyzed by Western and Northern blots for local
and systemic infection. The results revealed that most deletions
prevented the long-distance movement of RNA-CP to upper non-
inoculated leaves but did not impair the movement of the other
two RNA species. However, all three RNA species and CP were
detected in the inoculated leaves showing that cell-to-cell move-
ment was not affected. Interestingly, a mutant clone carrying a
deletion in a region that has been identiﬁed as a recombination
hot spot also supported the long-distance movement of RNA-CP
(Torrance et al., 2009). To identify the domain involved, further
C-terminal deletion mutants of CP-RT were prepared as well as
mutants that were designed to prevent any protein expression at
all (no protein) or to express either CP alone (CP only) or suppress
CP production so that only CP-RT is produced. Experiments with
these mutants showed that in the absence of CP (no protein or
only CP-RT), all three RNA species were detected in inoculated
and upper non-inoculated leaves. However, with either CP only or
C-terminal truncated CP-RT mutants, RNA-Rep, and RNA-TGB
were detected in the upper leaves by Northern blots but RNA-CP
was not detected. A domain between 2300 and 2730 nt near the C
terminus was shown to be required for long-distance movement
of RNA-CP. The mutations did not affect virus particle formation
as particles were observed by electron microscopy of negatively
stained extracts from leaves infected with mutants expressing only
CP and some of the CP-RT C-terminal deletion mutants (Torrance
et al., 2009).

These experiments indicate different requirements for RNA
movement and we conclude that PMTV RNA moves in two dif-
ferent forms. When no CP is present (or not expressed) then all
three RNAs can form RNP complexes presumably with TGB1 and
possibly other virus or plant components to move long distance.
However, when the capsid proteins are expressed the RNAs become
encapsidated and they also move long distance as particles. Experi-
ments have shown that particles formed by CP alone (i.e., without
CP-RT) cannot move out of the inoculated leaf and the CP-RT
has been detected at one extremity of virions. Taken together with
the CP-RT deletion mutant analysis described above, these ﬁnd-
ings suggest that the CP-RT mediates long-distance movement
through a domain at the C terminus when incorporated into the
virion.

This poses the question of how CP-RT can mediate long-
distance RNA movement. Yeast two-hybrid experiments have
shown that CP-RT interacts with itself and with TGB1 and CP,
however, CP does not interact with TGB1 (Torrance et al., 2009).
Further experiments revealed that the C-terminal portion of

CP-RT was necessary for the interaction with TGB1 and a positive
interaction was correlated with long-distance movement of RNA-
CP. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays of leaves infected with
wild type and mutant viruses suggest that TGB1 is also a compo-
nent of movement competent virions. Therefore, the results are
compatible with long-distance movement of virions that contain
CP-RT and TGB1 at the tip. In this aspect, PMTV particles dif-
fer from those potato virus X (another TGB containing virus)
where TGB1 is associated with one extremity but this interaction
is thought to promote particle instability and RNA translation
(Karpova et al., 2006; Atabekov et al., 2007). The role in virus
movement of supplementary proteins incorporated at the tip
of ﬁlamentous virus particles was ﬁrst shown for beet yellows
closterovirus (Peremyslov et al., 2004) and has also been sug-
gested for potato potyviruses (Torrance et al., 2006). It seems
that they confer polarity to helically constructed particles prob-
ably for directed translocation through the PD pore; for clostero-
and potyviruses the proteins are located at the extremity con-
taining the 5
end of the RNA and we think this is also true for
PMTV (Cowan et al., 1997; Torrance et al., 2009). Notably, three
genera of viruses with terminal structures (poty-, potex-, and clos-
teroviruses) have ﬂexuous ﬁlamentous virions whereas, PMTV is
the only example of a virus with rigid rod-shaped virions so far.
The intricate architecture of these virions suggests a new paradigm
in which ﬁlamentous and rigid virions are not just containers
with helical symmetry, but dynamic entities, which incorporate
proteins needed for efﬁcient virus transmission, cell-to-cell, and
long-distance movement.

(cid:2)

Interestingly, and uniquely, restriction of movement by CP-RT
mutants only applies to the long-distance movement of RNA-CP,
the other two RNAs can move long-distance in the presence of
the CP or mutant CP-RT proteins and all three RNAs can move
cell-to-cell. Therefore, our current hypothesis is that TGB1 tipped
particles or a RNP comprising TGB1 are required for entry to/or
exit from the vasculature.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Another question that arises is why only the RNA-CP is inhib-
ited by these mutations. Comparison of the nucleotide sequence of
PMTV RNAs reveals that while the 3
UTR regions are conserved
and form tRNA-like structures, there are differences at the 5
ends.
There is good conservation between the ﬁrst 42 nucleotides (nt)
of RNA-Rep and RNA-TGB but a much weaker relationship with
RNA-CP (Savenkov et al., 1999) and the predicted structures of
ends are different (Figure 1). It is possible that this region
the 5
contains an element that confers a stronger afﬁnity for CP bind-
ing than the other RNA species possibly out-competing them for
available CP and allowing them to escape from the cell before high
levels of CP accumulate, or that this region favors the binding
of CP over TGB1 and inhibits the formation of RNPs containing
TGB1.

(cid:2)

It has been shown previously that other rod-shaped TGB con-
taining viruses (Beet necrotic yellow vein virus, BNYVV; Peanut
clump virus, PCV; Barley stripe mosaic virus, BSMV; and BSBV)
can move cell-to-cell in the absence of CP, however, only BSMV
and PMTV can move long distance in the absence of CP. Moreover,
in all these viruses except BSBV and PMTV, the CP is encoded on
the same RNA species as the TGB and so the gene cannot be lost
from the population. Puriﬁed BSMV RNP complexes contained

Frontiers in Microbiology | Plant-Microbe Interaction

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 259 | 2

Torrance et al.

Pomoviral RNA movement

FIGURE 1 | Folding predictions for 5(cid:2) UTRs of Potato
mop-top virus (PMTV), Beet soil-borne virus (BSBV) and
Beet virus Q (BVQ) RNAs, using Mfold program with
pre-selected parameters (Zuker, 2003). Analyzed sequences
were limited to the 5(cid:2) proximal 180 nucleotides and structures
with optimal dG+ max 0.8 kcal/mol were selected. For the

RNA-Reps, the ampliﬁed sections contain conserved sequences that are
highlighted in light-gray: AAAUA in the large loops with UU at the extremities.
The conservation of these common nucleotides and their positions in the
different RNA-Reps secondary structures contrasts with the very low
sequence similarity between the 5(cid:2) UTRs of the other PMTV, BSBV, and
BVQ RNAs.

only TGB1 but not other virus proteins which suggests that the
movement form of BSMV is a RNP (Jackson et al., 2009).

viral replication, movement or encapsidation, these differences,
similar to PMTV, may reﬂect changes in RNA structure that affects
interactions with other factors (Figure 1).

BEET POMOVIRUS TERMINAL UTRs
Similar to PMTV and other viruses of the Virgaviridae (Good-
(cid:2)
win and Dreher, 1998; Dreher, 2009; Dieryck et al., 2010), the 3
extremities of BSBV and BVQ RNAs fold into tRNA-like structures
that are highly conserved with only seven nucleotide variations in
the terminal 46 nt. On the other hand, poor sequence similarity
is observed inter- and even intra-species for the 5
UTRs (Koenig
et al., 1998). Furthermore, unlike PMTV and other Virgaviridae,
the beet pomovirus RNAs do not always contain the canonical
GUA(U)n motif at their 5
ends. BSBV RNAs-2 and -3 begin with
GGU(A)2(U)4 and GGUA(U)9, and BVQ RNAs-1 and -2 with
AU(A)2(U)5 and GU(A)4(U)2, respectively. Since it is expected
that BSBV and BVQ 5
UTRs contain elements involved in either

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

soil-borne virus and BVQ induce local

BVQ LONG-DISTANCE MOVEMENT IN C. QUINOA MAY BE
RNA-CP DEPENDENT
Beet
lesions on
Chenopodium quinoa leaves inoculated with sap from infected
plants (Henry et al., 1986; Koenig et al., 1998) or RNA tran-
scripts generated from full-length cDNA clones (Crutzen et al.,
2009b; Crutzen and Bragard, unpublished data). No long-distance
movement of BSBV or BVQ has been reported in this host.

Nevertheless, recent advances in the study of BVQ by reverse
genetics suggest that BVQ RNAs can move long distance in
C. quinoa (Figures 2A,B). This contradiction concerning BVQ
long-distance movement could be explained by the possible

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 259 | 3

Torrance et al.

Pomoviral RNA movement

involvement of the BVQ CP-RT in long-distance movement, as
the isolate originally described was shown to carry a truncated CP-
RT encoding sequence (Koenig et al., 1998; Crutzen et al., 2009a).
This hypothesis is also supported by the lack of systemic symptoms
on C. quinoa leaves when the CP and CP-RT encoding RNA-2 is
omitted (Crutzen and Bragard, unpublished data).

THE ENIGMATIC ROLE OF THE NUCLEUS
In addition to localization in the PD, PMTV YFP-TGB1 when
expressed with RNA-Rep, in the presence or absence of RNA-CP,
was observed in the nucleoplasm, nucleolus (Figure 2C), and was
associated with microtubules (MT, Wright et al., 2010). Makarov
et al. (2009) reported that the TGB1 proteins of the hordei-, pomo-,
and peclu-viruses BSMV, Poa semilatent virus (PSLV), PMTV, and
PCV, contain an unstructured region at the N terminus called
the NTD domain that binds ss and dsRNA. There are two basic
amino acid clusters that are typical of RNA-binding motifs in
the NTD of PSLV (Kalinina et al., 2001) and mutation in these
domains of PSLV TGB1 abolished virus long distance but not
cell-to-cell movement of a chimeric BSMV carrying the mutated
TGB1 (Kalinina et al., 2001). PMTV TGB1 also contains puta-
tive nuclear and nucleolar localization signals in this domain and
deletion of 84 N-terminal amino acids comprising most of the
NTD also abolished long distance but not cell-to-cell movement
of all three RNA species as judged by Northern blotting. When
this deletion was introduced to the reporter clone PMTV. YFP-
TGB1, labeling of MT and the nucleolus was abolished but the
fusion protein still accumulated in the nucleus (Figure 2D). The
N-terminal deletion in TGB1 did not affect interactions with CP-
RT and TGB1 in the yeast two-hybrid assay indicating that the
N terminus is not involved in these interactions (Wright et al.,
2010). Furthermore, GFP-fusions to the N terminus of TGB1 in the
reporter clone do not affect cell-to-cell movement as ﬂuorescent
spreading lesions were observed (Wright et al., 2010) but long-
distance movement was prevented. Fusion of the 84 N-terminal
amino acids of TGB1 to GFP caused the GFP to accumulate in
the nucleolus but not on MT and alanine substitutions of basic
residues in this region in the TGB1 fusion protein also abolished
nucleolar accumulation of the mutant YFP-TGB1 (unpublished
results). Taken together these data indicate that the N terminus
of TGB1 either contains a nucleolar targeting signal or contains
a domain that recruits host factor(s) that assists transport into
the nucleolus (Wright et al., 2010, and Wright et al., unpublished
results).

In conclusion, the N terminus of TGB1 appears to be impor-
tant for long-distance movement of viral RNA by an unknown
mechanism and such movement is correlated with association of
TGB1 with the nucleolus and MT (Figure 2E). So far, we have been
unable to separate temporally the TGB1 nucleolar and MT associ-
ations to better understand their respective roles. It is not yet clear
whether both of these associations are important for RNA move-
ment or whether they have some other function. Other viruses that
have a nucleolar phase such as Groundnut rosette virus (GRV; Kim
et al., 2007b) have been shown to acquire a host factor, ﬁbrillarin
from the nucleolus and ﬁbrillarin is re-localized and incorporated
into a RNP that is competent for long-distance movement (Kim
et al., 2007a). However, we do not see a similar re-localization of

ﬁbrillarin from the nucleolus with PMTV infections (unpublished
results).

THE ENIGMATIC ROLE OF THE MICROTUBULES
The role of
the MT network during pomovirus infection
remains an intriguing question. Indeed, leaf treatment with MT-
depolymerizing drugs does not prevent PMTV cell-to-cell and
long-distance movement (Wright et al., 2010). Similar results
were also reported for the tobacco mosaic virus movement pro-
tein (TMV-MP) which interacts with MT (Gillespie et al., 2002).
Moreover, as the viral titers of both PMTV and TMV are not sig-
niﬁcantly altered upon MT disruption, the MT network seems
not to be essential for the virus infection. However, plant viruses
must subvert the host cell machinery to access cellular resources
needed for infection. Interfering with MT dynamics is one way
to suppress the signaling pathways involved in host response to
virus infection. Indeed, it has been shown recently that tobacco
mutants with reduced MT dynamics can tolerate TMV infection
better than wild type plants (Ouko et al., 2010). Moreover, better
tolerance of the mutant plants was attributed to decreased TMV
cell-to-cell movement accompanied by a decreased association of
TMV-MP with PD.

In other systems, autophagy and proteasome degradation
involves protein trafﬁcking along MT to the aggresome (Kraft et al.,
2010; Wong and Cuervo, 2010). Thus, disturbing the MT dynam-
ics may inhibit trafﬁcking of defense signals. This might help the
virus to suppress autophagy and prevent HR induction, because
autophagy contributes to hypersensitive cell death through EDS1
signaling (Hoﬁus et al., 2009).

In contrast with TMV-MP PMTV TGB1 does not stabilize the
MT network (Wright et al., 2010), which might make pomoviral
TGB1 more ﬂexible in terms of interference with MT dynamics.
Another important feature of PMTV movement protein TGB1
is its potential association with one terminus of the virus parti-
cles through its interaction with CP-RT (Torrance et al., 2009),
which in turn is implicated in transmission of the virus by the
soil-borne vector S. subterranea (Reavy et al., 1998). One can
speculate that by sitting on the very tip of the virus particles
TGB1 might be involved in transmission of the virus through
interaction with MT of the S. subterranea plasmodium, as was
reported for Rice gall dwarf virus (RGDV; Wei et al., 2009). MT
appear to facilitate RGDV transport from viroplasms to the cell
periphery and subsequent release of viruses from infected vec-
tor cells (Wei et al., 2009). Additionally, analysis of PMTV and
BVQ CP-RT sequences revealed the presence of two hydropho-
bic helices with a structure similar to some fusion proteins (F-
proteins) encoded by animal viruses, which mediate the fusion
of the viral outer membrane with the plasmalemma. We hypoth-
esize that during transmission of the virus from S. subterranea
plasmodium to the plant cell TGB1 translocates virus parti-
cles to the plasmodium plasma membrane through interaction
with MT; CP-RT, on the other hand, facilitates fusion of the
plant and plasmodium membranes and subsequent transfer of
the virions onto plant cell MT. The hypothesis might be ver-
iﬁed by testing whether TGB1 del 84 mutant, which lacks a
domain involved in MT association, could be transmitted by S.
subterranea.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Plant-Microbe Interaction

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 259 | 4

Torrance et al.

Pomoviral RNA movement

FIGURE 2 | (A,B) Systemic infection of Chenopodium quinoa by
BVQ RNA transcripts. (A) Upper non-inoculated leaves show
chlorosis and necrosis and (B) local lesions induced on inoculated leaves.
(C,D) Single confocal microscope sections showing nuclear and nucleolar
accumulation of YFP-TGB1 expressed from the PMTV reporter clone. [(C) left
panel) YFP-TGB1 and (D): YFP-del84-TGB1. [(C,D) right panels], co-expression
of the respective proteins with monomeric red ﬂuorescent protein-labeled
Arabidopsis ﬁbrillarin 2 (magenta) to distinguish the nucleolus. Scale

bar= 5 μm. (E) Model of PMTV RNA movement. (1) Viral RNP complexes are
transported intra-cellularly by TGB2 and TGB3 on the endoplasmic
reticulum-actin network to the PD. (2) TGB1 enters the nucleolus where it
either acquires a host factor or is modiﬁed in some way, or acts to modify the
host to facilitate long-distance movement of RNP or (3), tipped virions in the
vasculature. (4) Virions that do not contain CP-RT or that contain mutant
CP-RT that does not interact with TGB1 are not competent for long-distance
movement.

FUTURE WORK
Current research is focused on investigating whether BSBV and
BVQ can also move long-distance independently of CP and

whether long-distance movement can be recovered by comple-
mentation by inoculation of BVQ RNA-2 together with the orig-
inal BVQ isolate which does not infect C. quinoa systemically (R.

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 259 | 5

Torrance et al.

Pomoviral RNA movement

Koenig, personal communication, Crutzen et al., 2009a). We have
shown by BiFC that PMTV TGB1 interacts in vivo with the plant
nuclear transport factor importin α (unpublished results) and
knockdown of importin expression should provide some clues
on the role of the nucleolar phase of TGB1 in pomovirus move-
ment. The TGB1 protein seems to be the main determinant needed
for both viral cell-to-cell (forming RNP complexes) and systemic
movement (as a tip of polar virions). Thus, identiﬁcation of the
host proteins interacting with TGB1 will be of key importance to
understanding the mechanism of viral RNA trafﬁcking in plants.
Screening of plant cDNA libraries using TGB1 as the bait should

shed light on TGB1-interacting host factors and work is ongoing
to identify such host proteins.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work of L. Torrance, K. M. Wright, and G. H. Cowan is
funded by the Scottish Government’s Rural and Environment
Science and Analytical Services (RESAS) Division. The research
of N. I. Lukhovitskaya and E. I. Savenkov is funded by the
Swedish Research Council for Environment, Agricultural Sci-
ences and Spatial Planning (Formas, grants 2007-256; 2008-1047;
2009-1979).

REFERENCES
Adams, M., Antoniw, J., and Kreuze, J.
(2009). Virgaviridae: a new family
of rod-shaped plant viruses. Arch.
Virol. 154, 1967–1972.

Atabekov, J., Dobrov, E., Karpova, O.,
and Rodionova, N. (2007). Potato
virus X: structure, disassembly and
reconstitution. Mol. Plant Pathol. 8,
667–675.

Cowan, G. H., Lioliopoulou, F., Ziegler,
A., and Torrance, L. (2002). Sub-
cellular localisation, protein interac-
tions, and RNA binding of Potato
mop-top virus triple gene block pro-
teins. Virology 298, 106–115.

Cowan, G. H., Torrance, L., and Reavy,
B. (1997). Detection of potato mop-
top virus capsid readthrough protein
in virus particles. J. Gen. Virol. 78,
1779–1783.

Crutzen, F., Kreit, M., and Bragard, C.
(2009a). The beet virus Q coat pro-
tein readthrough domain is longer
than previously reported, with two
transmembrane domains. J. Gen.
Virol. 90, 754–758.

Crutzen, F., Mehrvar, M., Gilmer, D.,
and Bragard, C. (2009b). A full-
length infectious clone of beet soil-
borne virus indicates the dispens-
ability of the RNA-2 for virus sur-
vival in planta and symptom expres-
sion on Chenopodium quinoa leaves.
J. Gen. Virol. 90, 3051–3056.

Dieryck, B., Delfosse, P., Reddy, A.
S., and Bragard, C. (2010). Target-
(cid:2)
-untranslated
ing highly conserved 3
region of pecluviruses for sensi-
tive broad-spectrum detection and
quantitation by RT-PCR and assess-
ment of phylogenetic relationships.
J. Virol. Methods 169, 385–390.

Dreher, T. W. (2009). Role of tRNA-like
structures in controlling plant virus
replication. Virus Res. 139, 217–229.
Gillespie, T., Boevink, P., Haupt, S.,
Roberts, A. G., Toth, R., Valentine,
T. A., Chapman, S., and Oparka,
K. J. (2002). Functional analysis of
a DNA-shufﬂed movement protein
reveals that microtubules are dis-
pensable for the cell-to-cell move-
ment of Tobacco mosaic virus. Plant
Cell 14, 1207–1222.

Goodwin, J. B., and Dreher, T. W.
(1998). Transfer RNA mimicry in a
new group of positive-strand RNA
plant viruses, the Furoviruses: differ-
ential aminoacylation between the
RNA components of one genome.
Virology 246, 170–178.

Haupt, S., Cowan, G. H., Ziegler, A.,
Roberts, A. G., Oparka, K. J., and
Torrance, L. (2005). Two plant-viral
movement proteins trafﬁc in the
endocytic recycling pathway. Plant
Cell 17, 164–181.

Henry, C. M., Jones, R. A. C., and Coutts,
R. H. A. (1986). Occurrence of a soil-
borne virus of sugar beet in England.
Plant Pathol. 35, 585–591.

Hoﬁus, D., Schultz-Larsen, T., Joensen,
J., Tsitsigiannis, D. I., Petersen, N.
H. T., Mattsson, O., Jorgensen, L.
B., Jones, J. D. G., Mundy, J., and
Petersen, M.
(2009). Autophagic
components contribute to hypersen-
sitive cell death in Arabidopsis. Cell
137, 773–783.

Jackson, A. O., Lim, H. S., Bragg, J.,
Ganesan, U., and Lee, M. Y. (2009).
Hordeivirus replication, movement,
and pathogenesis. Annu. Rev. Phy-
topathol. 47, 385–422.

Kalinina, N. O., Rakitina, D. A., Yelina,
N. E., Zamyatnin, A. A., Stroganova,
T. A., Klinov, D. V., Prokhorov, V. V.,
Ustinova, S. V., Chernov, B. K., Schie-
mann, J., Solovyev, A. G., and Moro-
zov, S. Y. (2001). RNA-binding prop-
erties of the 63-kDa protein encoded
by the triple gene block of poa semi-
latent Hordeivirus. J. Gen. Virol. 82,
2569–2578.

Karpova, O. V., Zayakina, O. V.,
Arkhipenko, M. V., Sheval, E. V.,
Kiselyova, O.
I., Poljakov, V. Y.,
Yaminsky, I. V., Rodionova, N. P., and
Atabekov, J. G. (2006). Potato virus
X RNA-mediated assembly of single-
tailed ternary ‘coat protein–RNA–
movement protein’ complexes.
J.
Gen. Virol. 87, 2731–2740.

Kim, S. H., MacFarlane, S., Kalinina, N.
O., Rakitina, D. V., Ryabov, E. V.,
Gillespie, T., Haupt, S., Brown, J. W.
S., and Taliansky, M. (2007a). Inter-
action of a plant virus-encoded pro-
tein with the major nucleolar protein

ﬁbrillarin is required for systemic
virus infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 104, 11115–11120.

Kim, S. H., Ryabov, E. V., Kalinina, N.
O., Rakitina, D. V., Gillespie, T., Mac-
Farlane, S. A., Haupt, S., Brown, J.
W. S., and Talianksy, M. E. (2007b).
Cajal bodies and the nucleolus are
required for a plant virus systemic
infection. EMBO J. 26, 2169–2179.

Koenig, R., and Lesemann, D. E. (2005).
“Genus Pomovirus,” in Virus Taxon-
omy. Eighth Report of the Interna-
tional Committee on Taxonomy of
Viruses, eds C. M. Fauquet, M. A.
Mayo, J. Maniloff, U. Desselberger,
and L. A. Ball (San Diego, CA: Else-
vier/Academic Press), 1033–1038.

Koenig, R., Pleij, C. W., Beier, C., and
Commandeur, U. (1998). Genome
properties of beet virus Q, a
new furo-like virus from sugarbeet,
determined from unpuriﬁed virus. J.
Gen. Virol. 79, 2027–2036.

(2010). Selective

Kraft, C., Peter, M., and Hofmann,
K.
autophagy:
ubiquitin-mediated recognition and
beyond. Nat. Cell Biol. 12, 836–841.
Lough, T. J., and Lucas, W. J. (2006).
Integrative plant biology: role of
phloem long-distance macromole-
cular trafﬁcking. Annu. Rev. Plant
Biol. 57, 203–232.

Makarov, V. V., Rybakova, E., Eﬁmov,
A. V., Dobrov, E., Serebryakova, M.
V., Solovyev, A., Yaminsky, I. V.,
Taliansky, M., Morozov, S. Y., and
Kalinina, N. (2009). Domain orga-
nization of the N-terminal portion
of Hordeivirus movement protein
TGBp1. J. Gen. Virol. 90, 3022–3032.
McGeachy, K. D., and Barker, H.
(2000). Potato mop-top virus RNA
can move long distance in the
absence of coat protein: evidence
from resistant,
transgenic plants.
Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 13,
125–128.

Oparka, K. J., and Turgeon, R. (1999).
Sieve
and companion
cells – trafﬁc control centers of the
phloem. Plant Cell 11, 739–750.

elements

Ouko, M. O., Sambade, A., Brandner, K.,
Niehl, A., Pena, E., Ahad, A., Hein-
lein, M., and Nick, P. (2010). Tobacco

mutants with reduced microtubule
dynamics are less susceptible to
TMV. Plant J. 62, 829–839.
Peremyslov, V. V., Andreev,

I. A.,
Prokhnevsky, A. I., Duncan, G. H.,
Taliansky, M. E., and Dolja, V. V.
(2004). Complex molecular archi-
tecture of beet yellows virus parti-
cles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101,
5030–5035.

Reavy, B., Arif, M., Cowan, G. H.,
and Torrance, L. (1998). Associa-
tion of sequences in the coat pro-
tein/readthrough domain of potato
mop-top virus with transmission
by Spongospora subterranea. J. Gen.
Virol. 79, 2343–2347.

Sandgren, M., Savenkov, E.

J. P. T.

I., and
Valkonen,
(2001). The
readthrough region of potato mop-
top virus
(PMTV) coat protein
encoding RNA, the second largest
RNA of PMTV genome, under-
goes structural changes in natu-
rally infected and experimentally
inoculated plants. Arch. Virol. 146,
467–477.

Savenkov, E.

I., Germundsson, A.,
Zamyatnin, A. A. Jr., Sandgren, M.,
and Valkonen, J. P. T. (2003). Potato
mop-top virus: the coat protein-
encoding RNA and the gene for
cysteine-rich protein are dispens-
able for systemic virus movement in
Nicotiana benthamiana. J. Gen. Virol.
84, 1001–1005.

Savenkov, E.

I., Sandgren, M., and
Valkonen, J. P. T. (1999). Com-
plete sequence of RNA 1 and the
presence of tRNA-like structures in
all RNAs of potato mop-top virus,
genus Pomovirus. J. Gen. Virol. 80,
2779–2784.

Tilsner,

J., Cowan, G. H., Roberts,
A. G., Chapman, S. N., Ziegler,
A., Savenkov, E., and Torrance, L.
(2010). Plasmodesmal targeting and
intercellular movement of potato
mop-top Pomovirus is mediated by a
membrane anchored tyrosine-based
motif on the lumenal side of the
endoplasmic reticulum and the C-
terminal transmembrane domain in
the TGB3 movement protein. Virol-
ogy 402, 41–51.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Plant-Microbe Interaction

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 259 | 6

Torrance et al.

Pomoviral RNA movement

Torrance, L., Andreev, I. A., Gabrenaite-
Verhovskaya, R., Cowan, G., Mäki-
nen, K., and Taliansky, M. E. (2006).
An unusual structure at one end of
potato potyvirus particles. J. Mol.
Biol. 357, 1–8.

Torrance, L., Lukhovitskaya, N.

I.,
Schepetilnikov, M. V., Cowan, G.
H., Ziegler, A., and Savenkov, E.
I. (2009). Unusual
long-distance
movement strategies of potato mop-
top virus RNAs in Nicotiana ben-
thamiana. Mol. Plant Microbe Inter-
act. 22, 381–390.
J.,

L.,
Solovyev, A. G., Morozov, S. Y.,
Jackson, A. O., and Gilmer, D.
(2010). Varied movement strate-
gies
gene
block-encoding viruses. Mol. Plant
Microbe Interact. 23, 1231–1247.

employed by

Torrance,

triple

Verchot-Lubicz,

Wei, T., Uehara-Ichiki, T., Miyazaki, N.,
Hibino, H., Iwasaki, K., and Omura,

T. (2009). Association of rice gall
dwarf virus with microtubules is
necessary for viral release from cul-
tured insect vector cells. J. Virol. 83,
10830–10835.

Wong, E., and Cuervo, A. M. (2010).
clearance mech-
proteasome
and
Spring Harb.

Integration of
anisms:
autophagy. Cold
Perspect. Biol. 2, a006734.

the

Wright, K. M., Cowan, G. H., Lukhovit-
skaya, N. I., Tilsner, J., Roberts, A.
G., Savenkov, E. I., and Torrance,
L. (2010). The N-terminal domain
of PMTV TGB1 movement protein
is required for nucleolar localiza-
tion, microtubule association, and
long-distance movement. Mol. Plant
Microbe Interact. 23, 1486–1497.

Zamyatnin, A. A., Solovyev, A. G.,
Bozhkov, P. V., Valkonen, J. P. T.,
Morozov, S. Y., and Savenkov, E. I.
(2006). Assessment of the integral

membrane protein topology in liv-
ing cells. Plant J. 46, 145–154.

Zamyatnin, A. A., Solovyev, A. G.,
Savenkov, E. I., Germundsson, A.,
Sandgren, M., Valkonen, J. P. T.,
and Morozov, S. Y. (2004). Transient
coexpression of
individual genes
encoded by the triple gene block
of potato mop-top virus reveals
requirements for TGBp1 trafﬁck-
ing. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 17,
921–930.

Zuker, M. (2003). Mfold web server for
nucleic acid folding and hybridiza-
tion prediction. Nucleic Acids Res. 31,
3406–3415.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 01 November 2011; accepted:
02 December 2011; published online: 22
December 2011.
Citation: Torrance L, Wright KM,
Crutzen F, Cowan GH, Lukhovitskaya
NI, Bragard C and Savenkov EI (2011)
Unusual
features of pomoviral RNA
movement. Front. Microbio. 2:259. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2011.00259
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Plant-Microbe Interaction, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2011 Torrance, Wright ,
Lukhovitskaya,
Crutzen,
is
Bragard
distributed
an
under
the
Cre-
ative
Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits
non-commercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in other forums, provided
the original authors and source are
credited.

the
Commons

Savenkov. This

article
of

open-access

Cowan,

terms

and

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 259 | 7

