TECHNOLOGY REPORT
published: 21 June 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00225

Laboratory test methods to determine the degradation of
plastics in marine environmental conditions

Maurizio Tosin1, Miriam Weber 2, Michela Siotto1, Christian Lott 2 and Francesco Degli Innocenti 1*

1 Laboratory of Biodegradation, Ecology of Products and Environmental Communication, Novamont S.p.A., Novara, Italy
2 HYDRA Field Station/Centro Marino Elba, Campo nell’Elba, Livorno, Italy

Edited by:
Aurelio Briones, University of Idaho,
USA

*Correspondence:
Francesco Degli Innocenti, Laboratory
of Biodegradation, Ecology of
Products and Environmental
Communication, Novamont S.p.A., Via
Fauser 8, Novara 28100, Italy.
e-mail: fdi@novamont.com

In this technology report, three test methods were developed to characterize the degra-
dation of plastic in marine environment. The aim was to outline a test methodology to
measure the physical and biological degradation in different habitats where plastic waste
can deposit when littered in the sea. Previously, research has focused mainly on the con-
ditions encountered by plastic items when ﬂoating in the sea water (pelagic domain).
However, this is just one of the possible habitats that plastic waste can be exposed to.
Waves and tides tend to wash up plastic waste on the shoreline, which is also a relevant
habitat to be studied. Therefore, the degradation of plastic items buried under sand kept
wet with sea water has been followed by verifying the disintegration (visual disappearing)
as a simulation of the tidal zone. Most biodegradable plastics have higher densities than
water and also as a consequence of fouling, they tend to sink and lay on the sea ﬂoor.
Therefore, the fate of plastic items lying on the sediment has been followed by monitor-
ing the oxygen consumption (biodegradation). Also the effect of a prolonged exposure to
the sea water, to simulate the pelagic domain, has been tested by measuring the decay
of mechanical properties. The test material (Mater-Bi) was shown to degrade (total dis-
integration achieved in less than 9 months) when buried in wet sand (simulation test of
the tidal zone), to lose mechanical properties but still maintain integrity (tensile strength at
break=−66% in 2 years) when exposed to sea water in an aquarium (simulation of pelagic
domain), and substantially biodegrade (69% in 236 days; biodegradation relative to paper:
88%) when located at the sediment/sea water interface (simulation of benthic domain).
This study is not conclusive as the methodological approach must be completed by also
determining degradation occurring in the supralittoral zone, on the deep sea ﬂoor, and in
the anoxic sediment.

Keywords: biodegradable plastics, EN 13432, marine biodegradation, test methods, plastics, degradation, mater-Bi,
carrier bag

INTRODUCTION
The annual production of plastic materials has doubled in the last
15 years, being about 250 million tons in 2008 (PlasticsEurope,
2010). They are extensively commercialized at worldwide level
because they are inexpensive, easy to manufacture, lightweight, and
resistant to corrosion and microorganisms. These features make
plastics a very popular material and used in massive quantities in
several applications. On the other hand, the same features have
created the conditions for some environmental problems affect-
ing the marine pelagic and benthic habitats (Moore et al., 2001;
Derraik, 2002; Thompson et al., 2004; Moore, 2008; Barnes et al.,
2009; Gregory, 2009; Law et al., 2010; Carson et al., 2011). The
major source is uncontrolled disposal of waste. Plastic is reported
to be the main fraction of marine and beach litter (between 60 and
80% of the total amount of litter; Lucas, 1992; Derraik, 2002; Ryan
et al., 2009; Andrady, 2011; Cole et al., 2011). Currents move plas-
tic waste (Yamashita and Tanimura, 2007) to form aggregations
in areas of low water movements. Large aggregations of ﬂoat-
ing plastic debris (covering an area as large as central Europe)

were reported ﬁrst in the North Paciﬁc Ocean (Moore et al., 2001;
Moore, 2003) and similar scenarios are reported in other oceans,
such as the North Atlantic (Law et al., 2010). High densities of
plastic debris were found also in enclosed and semi-enclosed seas
such as Caribbean, in the open ocean coast-line of Northern Amer-
ica, Brazil or Hawaii, and in the Mediterranean Sea (Colton et al.,
1974; Barnes et al., 2009; Browne et al., 2010).

New plastics that are subject to biodegradation and thus applied
in speciﬁc applications where organic recycling (composting and
anaerobic digestion) is the preferable end-of-life have been devel-
oped in the last two decades (Tokiwa et al., 2009). In comparison
with other environments, the behavior of these biodegradable
plastics in the marine environment has been less studied because
the expected fate of bioplastics is to be treated in solid waste treat-
ment facilities or in soil (for agricultural applications). However,
recently there has been great interest regarding the characteri-
zation of marine biodegradation of bioplastics products. Plastic
articles which are used in the sea, such as ﬁshing gear, can get
lost or left willingly in the marine environment contributing to

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 225 | 1

Tosin et al.

Plastic degradation in marine environment

the marine pollution. Such ﬁshing products could therefore be
made with biodegradable plastics, once biodegradability in the
sea is well characterized. Furthermore, it is of interest to know
the marine biodegradability of biodegradable and compostable
plastics, in case of uncontrolled release.

The possible fate of products abandoned in the sea is illustrated
in Figure 1. Plastic products are directly littered or arrive with fresh
waters in the pelagic zone (a). From there, and depending on tides
and currents, may reach either the supralittoral (d), or remain in
the tidal zone (b), called eulitoral, or they sink to the sublittoral,
where light can still be detected (c), or eventually sink to the deep
sea (e). Once they reach the seaﬂoor the products either remain
on the surface or get buried within the sediments (f).

Surveys of the deep sea and the continental shelf have revealed
large deposits of plastics on the seaﬂoor (Galgani et al., 1995a,b,
1996; Goldberg, 1997). Many plastics have a density lower than 1
and therefore are buoyant and remain so until they become water-
logged or amass too much epibiota to ﬂoat. Under the weight of
fouling by a wide variety of microbes, algae, and animals, plastics
can sink to the seabed (Barnes et al., 2009).

In general, due to a density higher than 1, biodegradable plastics

tend to sink.

Standard test methods and speciﬁcations needed to charac-
terize the biodegradability and compostability of materials for
packaging are well developed (e.g., the European harmonized
standard EN 13432, 2000). Generally speaking, the degradation
of plastics is studied with test methods that simulate in labora-
tory the environmental conditions. In recent years, research in
the ﬁeld of biodegradation has focused on organic recycling (e.g.,
biodegradability in composting plants), as biodegradable plastic

FIGURE 1 | An overview of marine habitats where plastic waste has
been recorded. Plastic waste is littered in the sea or delivered with fresh
water by rivers and so ﬂoating freely in estuaries and the open ocean water
(a). Tides and storm waves bring to the shores great quantities of plastic
waste that remain in the eulittoral zone (b) or in the supralittoral zone (d).
Plastic products can otherwise sink to the bottom of the sublittoral zone (c)
or of the deep sea (e). At the sea ﬂoor the plastic products can be slowly
buried within sediments (f).

products are conceived to be recovered at their end-of-life through
organic recycling with the production of compost. For example,
the disintegration of plastic products during composting can be
determined by using the ISO 20200 (2004) test method. In prac-
tice, a composting process is simulated in a reactor in a laboratory:
the plastic product under analysis is put into the reactor and mixed
with some synthetic organic waste. After 3 months the level of dis-
integration is determined by sieving the obtained compost. If the
product has degraded its particles will pass through the sieve (mesh
size 2 mm) with compost and will not be distinguishable from it.
This test can measure the physical degradation of a product, i.e., its
disintegration; but it does not reveal if the fragments will continue
to biodegrade or if they will persist in the compost.

Disintegration into fragments is the ﬁrst phase of plastic degra-
dation. The ﬁnal outcome of a complete process is the transforma-
tion into carbon dioxide (CO2), which is the ﬁnal result of aerobic
biodegradation and thus concludes the ecological cycle.

This data can be obtained by measuring biodegradation under
composting conditions using the ISO 14855 (2005) test method.
The plastic sample is put inside bioreactors containing mature
compost and the evolution of CO2 – as proof of biodegradation – is
monitored. Even if complete biodegradation occurs, the expected
conversion into CO2 will not be 100% because microorganisms
grow and multiply assimilating some of the plastic. The values
obtained are generally between 60 and 100%. A material like cel-
lulose – whose biodegradation is certain – can help to correctly
interpret results if it is used as a reference.

The disintegration and biodegradation data are fundamental
in deﬁning the behavior of a biodegradable product in a certain
environment. This clearly applies also for the marine environment.
At the present, most available methods for testing the degrad-
ability of bioplastics in the marine environment are based on tests
carried out in the laboratory or directly in the ﬁeld, simulating the
pelagic conditions.

A frequently applied test approach is one based on the direct
exposure to seawater in the ﬁeld at different locations and at a
depth of about 1–2 m. The biopolymer samples are protected with
meshes and metal cages and dipped into the sea. Degradation is
assessed by measuring the decay of relevant physical properties
such as: changes in molecular weight mass and molecular mass
distribution, tensile properties, mass loss, morphological changes,
etc. (Rutkowska et al., 1998, 2002a,b; Imam et al., 1999; Tsuji and
Suzuyoshi, 2002a,b, 2003; O’Brine and Thompson, 2010; Guzman
et al., 2011; Sekiguchi et al., 2011; Volova et al., 2011). Rutkowska
et al. (1998, 2002a,b) tested some biopolymers in the waters of
Gdynia Harbor (Baltic Sea). Tsuji and Suzuyoshi (2002a) tested
samples in natural dynamic seawater at the Akabane Fishing Port
(Japan). Imam et al. (1999) tested samples in different locations
in a tropical area. Volova et al. (2011) exploited a ﬂoating plat-
form located in a tropical area in the South China Sea. O’Brine
and Thompson (2010) used a ﬂoating pontoon to keep the sam-
ples submerged at 0.6 m in Queens Anne Battery Marina, Coxside
Plymouth, UK.

Another testing approach is based on aquaria that are used
to reproduce pelagic conditions and to determine the changes
in physical properties of plastic samples protected within meshes
(Tsuji and Suzuyoshi, 2002b, 2003; Guzman et al., 2011).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiotechnology, Ecotoxicology and Bioremediation

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 225 | 2

Tosin et al.

Plastic degradation in marine environment

Biological degradation is usually measured with test methods
simulating the pelagic zone. For instance, aerobic biodegradation
is measured with the ASTM “Standard Test Method for Deter-
mining Aerobic Biodegradation of Plastic Materials in the Marine
Environment by a Deﬁned Microbial Consortium” (ASTM D6691,
2001). The plastic specimen is suspended in a synthetic sea salt
solution and carbon dioxide evolution (or mass loss) is determined
to assess biodegradation. Similarly Kasuya et al. (1998) studied
the biodegradation of biopolymers by measuring the biological
oxygen demand (BOD) in liquid conditions.

We are not aware of degradation test methods simulating the
conditions found at the supralittoral, the eulittoral, the sublit-
toral, the deep sea, where plastic is exposed to the sediment-water
interface, or buried in the sediment.

In this paper we propose a comprehensive test approach based
on the simulation of the habitats mentioned above (see descrip-
tion on Figure 1). We have identiﬁed the following six test methods
needed to characterize the degradation behavior of plastics in six
different marine habitats.

(A). Test method to measure the degradation of plastic samples in
the pelagic domain: plastic samples are exposed to free sea
water.

(B). Test method to measure the degradation of plastic sample in
eulittoral zone: plastic samples get partly buried in this zone
and are kept wet by tidal inundation and waves.

(C). Test method to measure the degradation of plastic samples on
sandy sublittoral zone: plastic ﬁlms settle on marine sandy
sediment where they are exposed to the sea water/sediment
interface.

(D). Test method to measure the degradation of plastic samples on
sandy supralittoral zone: the plastic products washed by waves
in the supralittoral zone, are exposed to a sandy soil with a
low moisture level.

(E). Test method to measure the degradation of plastic samples on
the bottom of the deep sea: the plastics products littered by
ships when in blue water could reach the bottom of the sea
in the non-photic zone. Pressure and conditions are extreme.
(F). Test method to measure the degradation of plastic samples when
buried by sediments: sea currents can carry the sediment and
slowly bury the plastic product settled on the sea ﬂoor. Con-
ditions in the sediment below the interface sediment/water
are anaerobic.

In this preliminary study test methods A and B have been devel-
oped to measure the physical degradation while test method C has
been developed to measure the biodegradation of plastic material
settled on the sandy sublittoral zone.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
SAMPLES
The following materials were tested (when indicated):

Filter paper (“Qualitative Analysis, Extrarapid type,” Tec-

novetro, Italy).

LDPE carrier bags (sampled in the market) with a 20 µm

thickness.

www.frontiersin.org

Mater-Bi carrier bags (available in the market) with a
22 µm thickness. Mater-Bi is made with a partially bio-based
copolyester (renewable monomers made starting from vegetable
oils) and corn starch. The material, produced by Novamont
(http://www.novamont.com/), is compostable, i.e., biodegradable
and disintegrable under composting conditions and meet the
compostability requirements of the EN 13432 (2000).

TEST METHODS
Three methods have been developed and are described herewith.

Test method A: degradation of plastic samples in the pelagic domain
A laboratory test method that simulates the environmental con-
ditions of the pelagic zone, with low nutrient concentrations, has
been developed with the purpose of measuring the physical degra-
dation of plastic objects when exposed to such conditions. In
parallel a preliminary testing activity has also been carried out
in order to measure the degradation of plastic samples in the
eutrophic pelagic domain (with higher nutrients).

The pelagic domain is simulated in an aquarium ﬁlled
with sea water. The aquarium used is made of glass
(65 cm× 60 cm× 50 cm; length, width, height) with total volume
of 195 L. The plastic specimens were sewn into an envelope made
with a plastic net to prevent eventually forming fragments from
falling apart. The net was a common non-biodegradable vinyl-
coated ﬁberglass mosquito net with a ﬁber diameter of about
280 µm and a 1.8 mm× 1.6 mm mesh. The envelopes contain-
ing the plastic samples were suspended into the aquarium with a
distance of approximately 2 cm between each sheet. For the ini-
tial ﬁlling of the aquaria and for each water exchange, seawater was
collected at the jetty at Seccheto on the Island of Elba (Italy) in plas-
tic drums and brought to the HYDRA Field Station, at Fetovaia.
The aquaria were set-up outside in the shade to assure daily light
rhythms but to avoid large temperature ﬂuctuations. The water
was circulated by a water pump. The water pump was checked
every other day. The salinity was measured with a refractome-
ter (Knob Refraktometer 1097, Knob GmbH, Germany), recorded
and adjusted every 2 weeks if necessary. The temperature was mea-
sured and recorded; the mesh bags were moved every other week,
so that each bag was exposed regularly in the middle and at the
edge of the aquarium. Two thirds of the water volume was changed
every 3 months. For sampling, the mesh envelopes with the plastic
specimens were taken out of the tank, adhering water was care-
fully blotted off, and the specimen within the envelope was put
into a labeled freezer bag that was sealed and then stored prior to
mechanical testing.

The tensile properties, tensile strength at break, and the elonga-
tion at break, were measured at different intervals, as reported in
the Section “Results” with a dynamometer (Instron 5500 Series,
USA). The tensile strength at break (F b) is the force required
to break a specimen of a plastic material when pulled (New-
ton). The elongation at break (εb) is the maximum elonga-
tion that the specimen can reach when pulled, before failure.
It is measured as ratio between original length of the specimen
and length at the moment of break. It expresses the capability
of a material to resist changes of shape without crack forma-
tion. The tensile testing was carried out in agreement with the

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 225 | 3

Tosin et al.

Plastic degradation in marine environment

standard test method described in ISO 527 Part 1 (1993) and in
Part 3 (1995). For each sample ﬁve replicates were individually
tested.

Test method B: degradation of plastic samples in eulittoral zones
This test method simulates the environmental conditions found in
tidal zones. The purpose is to determine the physical degradation
of plastic objects when exposed to these conditions. The tidal zone
is the part of the coast affected by the tides and movement of the
waves. It is the borderline between sea and land, usually a sandy
area that is kept constantly damp by the lapping of the waves. It is
where the tides and waves wash up the waste which ends up in the
sea after being dumped by ships or carried by rivers.

The eulittoral zone is simulated in a laboratory reactor by
keeping sandy sediment wet with seawater. The reactor is a
box made with polypropylene having the following dimensions:
30 cm× 20 cm× 10 cm (length, width, height). The box is pro-
vided with a lid assuring a tight closing to avoid an excessive vapor
release and excessive drying out of its contents. In the middle of
the two sides, a hole of 5 mm of diameter is present at 6.5 cm from
the bottom. The two holes provide gas exchange between the inner
atmosphere and the outside environment.

The reactor is ﬁlled with sandy sediment collected together with
some seawater from the littoral zone. Sediment, expected to have
an increased content of organic matter was sampled next to the
mouth of the canal close to the yacht club at the touristic harbor of
Marina di Campo, Elba Island (Italy). The sediment was collected
with a shovel at the beach directly from below the water line into
a bucket and was kept wet with seawater during delivery. Three
thousand grams of wet sediment (water content= 20.89%) was
evenly placed in the bottom of the box to form a bed. Film speci-
mens were cut from the original carrier bag and placed within slide
photo frameworks whose opening is 5.5 cm× 5.5 cm (Figure 2).
The frameworks were then buried in the sandy bed and left there
at room temperature until sampling. The reactor was then closed
and weighed. Periodically the reactor was weighed and, if needed,
the initial mass restored adding chlorine-free water. At intervals
the frameworks were carefully extracted from the sandy bed and
examined.

The test does not simulate the tides, i.e., the physical stress on

the tested plastics due to tidal inundation and waves.

Test method C: biodegradation of ﬁlm on the sandy sublittoral zone
This method is based on the determination of BOD and can be
considered as a modiﬁcation of the International standard test
method ISO 14851 (1999). In the original ISO 14851 the plastic
material is generally tested as powder in a liquid saline medium
inoculated with activated sludge from a sewage-treatment plant.
In this test method the testing medium is “two-phases” (marine
sediment and a column of synthetic sea water, Figure 4) and the
plastic material is preferably a ﬁlm to be laid down on top of the
sediment, at the interface between the solid phase and the liquid
phase. This is a simulation of an object that has sunk and ﬁnally
reached the sea ﬂoor [Figure 1(c)].

The test is carried out, at room temperature, with a Oxi-
Top®BOD Respirometer System (Global Water Instrumentation).
Marine sediment (15 g per reactor, wet weight), collected as
described before (see Test Method B: Degradation of Plastic Sam-
ples in Eulittoral Zones), was laid down on the bottom of the
reactor. A plastic ﬁlm specimen, cut from the previously described
carrier bags, was put on the sediment and 75 mL of synthetic sea
water (Table 1) was added.

The ﬁnal total volume was 82 mL. The reactors were closed and
the progressive consumption of oxygen was determined following
the directions of the OxiTop®System.

The percentage of biodegradation is obtained by dividing the
theoretical oxygen demand (ThOD) by the measured oxygen con-
sumption. The determination of the ThOD was deduced by the
elemental composition of Mater-Bi and paper, following annex A
of ISO14851.

The use of transparent glass reactors enables the correlation
between oxygen consumption and the physical status of samples
as by visual inspections. It was thus possible to monitor both the
physical deterioration (disintegration) and mineralization.

RESULTS
TEST METHOD A: DEGRADATION OF PLASTIC SAMPLES IN THE
PELAGIC DOMAIN
The specimens (both Mater-Bi carrier bags and PE carrier bags)
were inserted in the nets and submerged in the aquarium. The test
started on July 1st 2009 and ended on July 12th 2011. During the
test the salinity of the sea water in the aquarium ranged from 38
to 41 practical salinity units (PSU) and was adjusted every 2 weeks

FIGURE 2 | Test method B. Mater-Bi specimens before (A) and after 9 months of treatment (B).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiotechnology, Ecotoxicology and Bioremediation

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 225 | 4

Tosin et al.

Plastic degradation in marine environment

back to 38 PSU, corresponding to the seawater salinity in the bay of
Fetovaia, the sampling location (Island of Elba, Italy), by adding
spring water. The temperature ranged from 26˚C in summer to
11˚C in winter. The water temperature in the aquarium followed
the seasonal atmospheric temperature changes on the Island of
Elba and corresponded to the sea surface temperatures.

Specimens were withdrawn after 3, 8, 12, 19, and 24 months.
Specimens were tested for tensile properties and the results are
shown in Table 2.

The results indicate that Mater-Bi ﬁlms undergo a strong decay
of mechanical properties. The tensile strength at break (F b) and
the elongation at break (εb) decreased, respectively, of 66 and 96%
in 24 months.

Despite a strong decay of mechanical properties the carrier
bags were still recoverable and manageable. No fragmentation was
observed at anytime of the test period.

Table 1 | Synthetic sea water composition.

Salts

NaCl
MgCl2·6H2O
Na2SO4
CaCl
KCl
NaHCO3
H3BO3

After Italian Decree Law (2003).

Concentration (g/L)

22
9.7
3.7
1
0.65
0.20
0.023

On the other hand, the LDPE carrier bags did not show any

decay. Actually the mechanical properties increased.

Another trial was carried out using the same procedure
described in Section “Materials and Methods” but enriching the
seawater with glucose and mineral salts. The enrichment of the
seawater with nutrients was done every month. Glucose, ammo-
nium chloride, and sodium phosphate, monobasic were added to
a ﬁnal concentration of 1 mM directly to the tank.

This is a ﬁrst attempt to simulate a eutrophic pelagic domain,
with waters rich in mineral and organic nutrients, that is found
in anthropic areas or close to rivers’ outlets. The results shown
in Table 3 indicate that the addition of nutrients reduced the
degradation of Mater-Bi carrier bags.

TEST METHOD B: DEGRADATION OF PLASTIC SAMPLES IN EULITTORAL
ZONES
Pieces of Mater-Bi carrier bags and LDPE carrier bags were
inserted in the slide photo frameworks (Figure 2A) and tested
as described in the Section “Materials and Methods.” The Mater-
Bi ﬁlms after 9 months of testing were substantially disintegrated,
as shown in Figure 2B. Only few small fragments are still visible.
The LPDE carrier bags did not show any visible degradation.

TEST METHOD C: BIODEGRADATION OF FILM IN THE SANDY
SUBLITTORAL ZONE
The experimental set-up is shown in Table 4. The test was carried
out for 236 days.

Blank reactors (only sediment and sea water) showed an aver-
age total oxygen consumption of 120 mg/L with a low deviation
within the replicates. Paper and especially Mater-Bi showed a

Table 2 | Tensile properties of specimens exposed to an aquarium simulating the oligotrophic pelagic domain.

Specimen

LDPE carrier bags

Mater-Bi carrier bags

Exposure time
(months)

0
24
0
3
18
24

Thickness (µm)

F b (N)

εb (%)

∆F b (%)

∆εb (%)

20
20
22
22
20
18

7.3
10.4
4.7
4.1
2.9
1.6

421
466
211
208
42
9

42

−13
−38
−66

11

−1
−80
−96

Fb = tensile strength at break; εb,%= elongation at break; ∆Fb = [(Fb at time t/Fb at time 0)× 100%]; ∆εb = [(εb at time t/εb at time 0)× 100%].

Table 3 | Tensile properties of specimens exposed to an aquarium simulating the eutrophic pelagic domain.

Specimen

Exposure time (months)

Thickness (µm)

F b (N)

εb (%)

∆F b (%)

∆εb (%)

LDPE carrier bags

Mater-Bi carrier bags

0
24
0
8
18
24

20
20
22
22
22
22

7.3
8.8
4.7
4.1
3.5
3.6

421
515
211
148
196
192

20.55

−12.77
−25.53
−23.40

22.33

−29.86
−7.11
−9.00

Fb = tensile strength at break; εb,%= elongation at break; ∆Fb = [(Fb at time t/Fb at time 0)× 100%]; ∆εb = [(εb at time t/εb at time 0)× 100%].

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 225 | 5

Tosin et al.

Plastic degradation in marine environment

Table 4 | Experimental set-up of biodegradation test (Method C).

Reactor n

Specimen

Amount of specimen
in the reactor (mg)

R1
R2
R3
R7
R8
R9
R10
R11
R12

Blank
Blank
Blank
Mater-Bi
Mater-Bi
Mater-Bi
Cellulose
Cellulose
Cellulose

–
–
–
15.96
20.78
17.07
22.78
17.87
21.72

rather large deviation between the three replicates, ranging from
215 to 376 mg/L (Figure 3, Table 5).

It is important to note that the value of oxygen consump-
tion (biodegradation) of each replicate correlated very closely
with the visual appearance of the residual specimens as shown
in Figures 4A–C).

The average biodegradation curves are plotted in Figure 5.
At the end of the test (after 236 days), biodegradation of paper
was plateaued at 78.0% while Mater-Bi was at 68.9% and still grow-
ing (Figure 5). Therefore, the “relative biodegradation,” i.e., the
biodegradation of the test material relative to a positive benchmark
(paper, in this case) was 88.2%.

DISCUSSION
It is important to remark that the uncontrolled disposal of waste is
a serious social problem that must be solved by increasing environ-
mental and civic education and people’s environmental awareness.
Seas are not waste disposal plants. The biodegradability of prod-
ucts cannot be considered as an excuse to spread wastes that should
be recovered and recycled. Even if they are biodegradable, mate-
rials cannot be spread without any control because the human
population is huge, and the current levels of consumption – and
consequently of waste production – are so high that the environ-
mental burden would be unbearable. This is a general approach
that can be applied to every biodegradable organic substance and
not only to bioplastics. As an example sewage, that is composed
by biodegradable substances, must be treated in a waste-water
treatment plant before discharging in the sea or in a river.

That said, it is important to characterize the degradation behav-
ior of bioplastics because these innovative materials can be applied
in ﬁshing gear where the possible end-of-life is actually the sea.
Therefore, suitable test methodologies are required.

This preliminary study is the ﬁrst report of a project that aims
at simulating the most relevant habitats of the marine environ-
ment and gaining information on the behavior of the tested plastic
materials.

Test method A (degradation of plastic samples in the pelagic
domain) showed that the carrier bags made with a bioplastics suf-
fered a serious mechanical decay in the test period. The tensile
strength at break was reduced by 66% and elongation at break by
96% in 2 years testing, even if the samples were still intact. How-
ever the aquarium, as it was used in this study, does not reproduce

Synthetic sea water (mL)

Sediment (g)

75
75
75
75
75
75
75
75
75

15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15
15

FIGURE 3 | Oxygen consumption curves of all reactors. Reactor R1, R2,
and R3: blank; R4, R5, and R6: Mater-Bi; R7, R8, and R9: ﬁlter paper.

Table 5 | Total and net (the difference between the total oxygen and
the average oxygen consumed by the blanks) oxygen consumption
after 236 days.

Reactor

Total oxygen
consumed (mg/L)

Net oxygen
consumed (mg/L)

R1
R2
R3
R7
R8
R9
R10
R11
R12

Blank
Blank
Blank
Mater-Bi
Mater-Bi
Mater-Bi
Filter paper
Filter paper
Filter paper

120.90
107.50
131.70
242.40
376.00
215.10
306.30
277.30
357.40

–
–
–
122.37
255.97
95.07
186.27
157.27
237.37

many of the effects that function in open sea: waves, currents, solar
irradiation in the case of superﬁcial ﬂoating, etc. Therefore ﬁeld-
testing should complement the approach proposed in this study.
In a previous ﬁeld-study out in the open sea Mater-Bi carrier bags
were totally disintegrated after 24 weeks (O’Brine and Thompson,
2010).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiotechnology, Ecotoxicology and Bioremediation

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 225 | 6

Tosin et al.

Plastic degradation in marine environment

FIGURE 4 | Mater-Bi specimens at test termination (236 days): (A) Reactor R9, ﬁnal biodegradation= 50.0%; (B) Reactor R7, ﬁnal
biodegradation= 64.7%; (C) Reactor R8, ﬁnal biodegradation= 91.7%.

carrier bags was total, as no residual ﬁlm was visible within the
slide framework. Control samples with polyethylene were still fully
intact and visible. The data indicate that the bioplastic ﬁlm is
disintegrable but no information on ultimate biodegradability is
provided. This can be achieved by performing the test within a
closed reactor and measuring the oxygen consumption similarly
to the Test Method C.

Test Method C is a simulation of the habitat found in a ben-
thic zone where sunlight reaches the ocean ﬂoor (photic zone)
that, in marine science is called sublittoral zone. The degradation
of the single bioplastic replicates showed a rather large variation,
probably due to different contact surface areas of each plastic disk.
Thanks to the transparency of the glass reactors, the biodegrada-
tion course can be closely correlated with the disappearance of
the specimens, conﬁrming that the disintegration level is actually
linked to biodegradation level. The substantial biodegradation of
the carrier bags was quite surprising considering that other tests
carried out by us in the past with same equipment, method and
samples (OxiTop®BOD Respirometer System) but using sea water
as a matrix instead of the sea water/sediment interface, showed
very low biodegradation rate (4% in 50 days; Novamont Labora-
tory of Biodegradation, data not shown). These unpublished data
conﬁrm the result of Test Method A suggesting that biodegrada-
tion under ﬂoating conditions (pelagic zone) is more difﬁcult than
biodegradation in the bottom of the sea (benthic zone).

We suggest that this difference in biodegradation rates is due
to the different role of mycelial microorganisms (i.e., fungi and
actinomycetes) in the free seawater and in the sediments.

The biodegradable plastics can be considered similar to com-
plex plant tissues. These complex structures are best degraded by
mycelial microorganisms.

The important role of mycelial microorganisms in biodegrada-
tion of plastics has been identiﬁed in other environments such as in
compost (Tosin et al., 1996; Kleeberg et al., 1998; Degli Innocenti
et al., 2002) or soil (Cosgrove et al., 2007).

Pelagic and surface water environments are reported to be
low in nutrients, and the microbial eukaryotic component of the
planktonic food chain is predominately that of free-ﬂoating or
swimming single-celled organisms performing primary produc-
tion and/or phagotrophic grazing. Such environments are unlikely
to favor organisms that feed primarily by attachment to larger
physical substrates and osmotrophy, i.e., mycelial organisms that
secrete depolymerizing enzymes directly on the solid substrate

FIGURE 5 | Biodegradation curves of Mater-Bi and ﬁlter paper.

The study was also extended to test degradation of the carrier
bags in a eutrophic water column. Surprisingly the mechanical
degradation was strongly inhibited (Table 3). This ﬁnding indi-
cates that the addition of nutrients has affected the degradation
process. We can only speculate at this stage about the causes; in
particular, the following hypotheses can be made.

i Addition of nutrients has changed physiology of the microbial
population. In particular it repressed some enzymes involved
in degradation (e.g., through catabolic repression).

ii Addition of nutrients has changed the population genetics.
Repeated enrichment forced a selection of the microbial pop-
ulation which eventually was less suitable to biodegradation.

iii Addition of nutrients has changed water chemistry and this, in

turn, has caused abiotic plastic degradation.

More testing is needed in order to clarify which factor is involved
in this inhibition of degradation. We suggest to combine ﬁeld and
a extensive aquarium experiment, where the water chemistry is
continuously monitored.

Test Method B is an attempt to simulate the conditions expe-
rienced by a plastic item when buried in a wet sandy matrix. The
test has been conceived as a qualitative disintegration test simply
based on the visual assessment. We suggest to improve the test to
make it suitable to quantitative analysis by applying some image
analysis system, to determine the residual sample surface at differ-
ent times (Calmon et al., 1999). The degradation of the Mater-Bi

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 225 | 7

Tosin et al.

Plastic degradation in marine environment

and uptake dissolved nutrients by osmosis for nutrition (Richards
et al., 2012). Observations that fungi are the dominant active
eukaryotic microbes in the lower water column, below the photo-
zone, as particulate matter descends and enters the sediment are
consistent with this hypothesis (Takishita et al., 2006; Edgcomb
et al., 2011).

The hypothesis that the different biodegradation behavior of
plastic materials in stirred free sea water and on the sand sediment
is due to a higher activity of mycelial microorganisms has to be
challenged with further experiments.

In this preliminary study we did not cover all the habitats that
have been identiﬁed as important disposal endpoints. Missing
areas are the supralittoral zone [Figure 1 (d)], deep sea [Figure 1
(e)], and buried [Figure 1 (f)]. The supralittoral zone is much less
moist than the eulittoral zone. Plastic products can be brought by
storm up to this habitat. The plastic products that sink into the
deep sea experience special conditions, such as high pressure, dark-
ness, low ﬂow, and temperature. At the sea ﬂoor, plastic products
can also partly or totally be buried in by the sediments. We expect
that within the sediment the plastic is exposed to anoxic condi-
tions and steep chemical gradients. In the marine environment
sediment is the most abundant substrate (Divins, 2003). Sedi-
ments differ in their mineral types, grain size, and organic matter
content. We strongly suggest that the role of sediment character-
istics on biodegradation activity should be assessed similarly to
what done by Weber et al. (2006).

CONCLUSION
1) Plastic products in the marine environment tend to move and
settle in many different habitats. In order to get a complete
characterization of the degradation behavior of bioplastics we
strongly suggest that a test methodology based on six marine
habitats (supralittoral, eulittoral, sublittoral benthic, deep sea
benthic, pelagic, buried in the sediments) is needed.

2) We suggest that the degradation of plastic samples in the olig-
otrophic pelagic habitat was higher than in the eutrophic water
(supplemented with glucose and minerals) because the extra
carbon source affected either the physiologic status or the
microbial population itself, through selection or the chemistry
of the aquarium.

3) We suggest that the disintegration/biodegradation was highest
in the test where the tidal and subsurface areas were simulated
due to the speciﬁc microenvironment in the water-sediment-
interface. Conditions at the interface favor a microbial com-
munity capable of degrading the plastic.

4) We suggest that most active species are fungi and actinomycetes

(mycelial).

5) Furthermore,

studies

in the ﬁeld must be also per-
formed in order to conﬁrm that the developed simula-
tion tests can predict behavior under real environmental
conditions.

6) The results indicates that the tested material, a biodegradable
and compostable carrier bags, is susceptible to both physical
degradation and biological degradation with rates that differ
in different habitats.

7) Further studies will be needed to complete and fully check
the test methodology here suggested, based on the determina-
tion of both physical degradation and biological degradation
in three habitats. In particular the effect of sediments sampled
from different locations on degradation has to be tested and
range of test materials enlarged by testing other biopolymers
of different nature.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many thanks to Tony Breton for reading and commenting the
manuscript and to Catia Bastioli for continuous support and
encouragement. We wish also to thank Claudio Russo for tensile
testing of degraded samples.

REFERENCES
Andrady, A. L. (2011). Microplastics
in the marine environment. Mar.
Pollut. Bull. 62, 1596–1605.

ASTM D6691. (2001). Standard Test
Method for determining aerobic
biodegradation of plastic materials
in the marine environment by a
deﬁned microbial consortium.

Barnes, D. K. A., Galgani, F., Thompson,
R. C., and Barlaz, M. (2009). Accu-
mulation and fragmentation of plas-
tic debris in global environments.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol.
Sci. 364, 1985–1998.

Browne, M. A., Galloway, T. S., and
Thompson, R. C. (2010). Spatial pat-
terns of plastic debris along estuar-
ine shorelines. Environ. Sci. Technol.
44, 3404–3409.

Calmon, A., Guillaume, S., Bellon-
Maurel, V., Feuilloley, P., and Sil-
vestre, F.
(1999). Evaluation of
material biodegradability in real
conditions–development of a bur-
ial test and an analysis methodology

based on numerical vision. J. Polym.
Environ. 7, 157–166.

Carson, H. S., Colbert, S. L., Kaylor, M.
J., and McDermid, K. J. (2011). Small
plastic debris changes water move-
ment and heat
transfer through
beach sediments. Mar. Pollut. Bull.
62, 1708–1713.

Cole, M., Lindeque, P., Halsband, C., and
Galloway, T. S. (2011). Microplastics
as contaminants in the marine envi-
ronment: a review. Mar. Pollut. Bull.
62, 2588–2597.

Colton, J. B. Jr., Knapp, F. D., and Burns,
B. R. (1974). Plastic particles in
surface waters of the Northwestern
Atlantic. Science 185, 491–497.

Cosgrove, L., McGeechan, P. L., Rob-
son, G. D., and Handley, P. S.
(2007). Fungal communities associ-
ated with degradation of polyester
polyurethane in soil. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 73, 5817–5824.

Degli Innocenti, F., Goglino, G., Bellia,
G., Tosin, M., Monciardini, P., and
Cavaletti, L. (2002). “Isolation and

characterization of
thermophilic
microorganisms able to grow on
cellulose acetate,” in Microbiology
of Composting, eds H. Insam, N.
Riddech, and S. Klammer (Berlin:
Springer-Verlag), 273–286.

Derraik, J. G. B. (2002). The pollution
of the marine environment by plas-
tic debris: a review. Mar. Pollut. Bull.
44, 842–852.

Divins, D. L. (2003). Total Sediment
Thickness of the World’s Oceans &
Marginal Seas. Boulder, CO: NOAA
National Geophysical Data Center.

Edgcomb, V. P., Beaudoin, D., Gast, R.,
Biddle, J. F., and Teske, A. (2011).
Marine subsurface eukaryotes: the
fungal majority. Environ. Microbiol.
13, 172–183.

EN 13432. (2000). Requirements for
packaging recoverable through com-
posting and biodegradation – test
scheme and evaluation criteria for
the ﬁnal acceptance of packaging.

Galgani, F., Burgeot, T., Bocquene, G.,
Vincent, F., Leaute, J. P., Labastie,

J., Forest, A., and Guichet, R.
(1995a). Distribution and abun-
dance of debris on the continental
shelf of the Bay of Biscay and in Seine
Bay. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 30, 58–62.

Galgani, F., Jaunet, S., Campillo,A., Gue-
negen, X., and His, E. (1995b). Dis-
tribution and abundance of debris
on the continental shelf of
the
North-Western Mediterranean sea.
Mar. Pollut. Bull. 30, 713–717.

Galgani, F., Souplet, A., and Cadiou,
Y. (1996). Accumulation of debris
on the deep sea ﬂoor off
the
French Mediterranean coast. Mar.
Ecol. Prog. Ser. 142, 225–234.

Goldberg, E. D. (1997). Plasticizing the
seaﬂoor: an overview. Environ. Tech-
nol. 18, 195–201.

Gregory, M. R. (2009). Environmen-
tal
implications of plastic debris
in marine settings entanglement,
ingestion, smothering, hangers-on,
hitch-hiking and alien invasions.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol.
Sci. 364, 2013–2025.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiotechnology, Ecotoxicology and Bioremediation

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 225 | 8

Tosin et al.

Plastic degradation in marine environment

Guzman, A., Janik, H. Z., Mastalerz,
M., and Kosakowska, A. (2011). Pilot
study of the inﬂuence of thermo-
plastic starch based polymer pack-
aging material on the growth of
diatom population in sea water envi-
ronment. Pol. J. Chem. Tech. 13,
57–61.

Imam, S. H., Gordon, S. H., Shogren, R.
L., Tosteson, T. R., Govind, N. S., and
Greene, R. V. (1999). Degradation
of
starch–poly(b-hydroxybutyrate-
co-b-hydroxyvalerate) bioplastic in
tropical coastal waters. Appl. Envi-
ron. Microbiol. 65, 431–437.

ISO 14851. (1999). Determination of
the Ultimate Aerobic Biodegradabil-
ity of Plastic Materials in an Aque-
ous Medium. Method by Measur-
ing the Oxygen Demand in a Closed
Respirometer.

ISO 14855. (2005). Determination of the
Ultimate Aerobic Biodegradability of
Plastic Materials Under Controlled
Composting Conditions-Method by
Analysis of Evolved Carbon Dioxide-
Part 1: General Method.
(2004).

Plastics-
the Degree of
Determination of
Disintegration of Plastic Materi-
als Under Simulated Composting
Conditions
in a Laboratory-Scale
Test.

20200.

ISO

ISO 527. (1993). Plastics – Determina-
tion of Tensile Properties – Part 1:
General Principles.

ISO 527. (1995). Plastics – Determina-
tion of Tensile Properties – Part 3: Test
Conditions for Films and Sheet.

Italian Decree Law. (2003). Deﬁnizione
delle procedure per il riconosci-
mento di
idoneità dei prodotti
disperdenti ed assorbenti da imp-
la boniﬁca
iegare in mare per
dalla
idro-
Gazzetta
carburi
Ufﬁciale
at:
http://www.gazzettaufﬁciale.biz/atti/
2003/20030035/03A01462.htm

petroliferi.
35.

contaminazione da

Available

Kasuya, K., Takagi, K., Ishiwatari, S.,
Yoshida, Y., and Doi, Y. (1998).
Biodegradabilities
various
aliphatic polyester in natural waters.
Polym. Degrad. Stab. 59, 327–332.

of

Kleeberg, I., Hetz, C., Kroppenstedt,
R. M., Müller, R. J., and Deck-
wer, W. D.
(1998). Biodegrada-
tion of aliphatic-aromatic copoly-
esters by Thermomonospora fusca

and other thermophilic compost
isolates. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64,
1731–1735.

Law, K. L., Morét-Ferguson, S., Maxi-
menko, N. A., Proskurowski, G., Pea-
cock, E. E., Hafner, J., and Reddy, C.
M. (2010). Plastic accumulation in
the North Atlantic Subtropical Gyre.
Science 3, 1185–1188.

Lucas, Z. (1992). Monitoring persis-
tent litter in the marine environment
on Sable Island, Nova Scotia. Mar.
Pollut. Bull. 24, 192–199.

Moore, C.

(2003). Trashed: across
the paciﬁc ocean, plastics, plastics,
everywhere. Nat. Hist.112, 9.

Moore, C. J. (2008). Synthetic poly-
mers in the marine environment: a
rapidly increasing, long-term threat.
Environ. Res. 108, 131–139.

Moore, C. J., Moore, S. L., Leecaster,
M. K., and Weisberg, S. B. (2001).
A comparison of plastic and plank-
ton in the North Paciﬁc Cen-
tral Gyre. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 42,
1297–1300.

O’Brine, T., and Thompson, R. C.
(2010). Degradation of plastic car-
rier bags in the marine environment.
Mar. Pollut. Bull. 60, 2279–2283.

PlasticsEurope.

of

(2010).
European

Production, Demand

An
Plas-
Analysis
and
tics
Available
Recovery
at:
http://www.plasticseurope.
org/Document/plastics—the-facts-
2010.aspx?Page=DOCUMENT&
FolID=2

2009.

for

Richards, T. A.,

Jones, M. D. M.,
Leonard, G., and Bass, D. (2012).
Marine fungi: their ecology and mol-
ecular diversity. Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci. 4,
495–522.

Rutkowska, M., Heimowska, A., Kra-
sowska, K., and Janik, H. (2002a).
Biodegradability of polyethylene
starch blends in sea water. Pol. J.
Environ. Stud. 11, 267–274.

Rutkowska, M.,

Krasowska,

K.,
Heimowska, A., Steinka, 1., Janik,
H., and Haponiuk, J., and Karls-
son, S.
(2002b). Biodegradation
of modiﬁed poly(ε-caprolactone)
in different environments. Pol. J.
Environ. Stud. 11, 413–420.

Rutkowska, M., Jastrzebska, M., and
Janik, H. (1998). Biodegradation of
polycaprolactone in sea water. React.
Funct. Polym. 38, 27–30.

Ryan, P. G., Moore, C. J., Van Franeker,
J. A., and Moloney, C. L. (2009).
Monitoring the abundance of plastic
debris in the marine environment.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol.
Sci. 364, 1999–2012.

Sekiguchi, T., Saika, A., Nomura, K.,
Watanabe, T., Watanabe, T., Fuji-
moto,Y., Enoki, M., Sato, T., Kato, C.,
and Kanehiro, H. (2011). Biodegra-
dation of aliphatic polyesters soaked
in deep seawaters and isolation
of poly(ε-caprolactone)-degrading
bacteria. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 96,
1397–1403.

Takishita, K., Tsuchiya, M., Reimer,
J. D., and Maruyama, T. (2006).
Molecular evidence demonstrating
the basidiomycetous fungus Cryp-
tococcus curvatus is the dominant
microbial eukaryote in sediment at
the Kuroshima Knoll methane seep.
Extremophiles 10, 165–169.

Thompson, R. C., Olsen, Y., Mitchell,
R. P., Davis, A., Rowland, S. J.,
John, A. W. G., McGonigle, D.,
and Russell, A. E. (2004). Lost at
sea: where is all the plastic? Science
304, 838.

Tokiwa, Y., Calabia, B. P., Ugwu, C. U.,
and Aiba, S. (2009). Biodegradabil-
ity of plastics. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 10,
3722–3742.

Tosin, M., Degli Innocenti, F., and Bas-
tioli, C. (1996). Effect of the com-
posting substrate on biodegradation
of solid materials under controlled
composting conditions. J. Environ.
Polym. Degrad. 4, 55–63.

degradation
polyesters

Tsuji, H., and Suzuyoshi, K. (2002a).
of
Environmental
2.
biodegradable
Poly(ε-caprolactone),
poly[(R)-
and
3-hydroxybutyrate],
in natural
poly(L-lactide) ﬁlms
dynamic seawater. Polym. Degrad.
Stab. 75, 357–365.

degradation
polyesters

Tsuji, H., and Suzuyoshi, K. (2002b).
of
Environmental
1.
biodegradable
Poly(ε-caprolactone),
poly[(R)-
3-hydroxybutyrate],and
poly(L-
lactide) ﬁlms in controlled static
seawater. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 75,
347–355.

Tsuji, H., and Suzuyoshi, K. (2003).
Environmental
of
biodegradable polyesters 4. The
effects
surface

degradation

pores

and

of

hydrophilicity on the biodegrada-
tion of poly(ε-caprolactone) and
poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate]
ﬁlms
ter.
587–593.

controlled
J. Appl. Polym.

seawa-
90,

Sci.

in

Volova, T. G., Boyandin, A. N., Vasil’ev,
A. D., Karpov, V. A., Kozhevnikov,
I. V., Prudnikova, S. V., Rud-
nev, V. P., Xuån, B. B., Viet, D.
V., and Gitel’Zon,
(2011).
Biodegradation of polyhydroxyalka-
noates (PHAs) in the South China
Sea and identiﬁcation of PHA-
degrading bacteria. Microbiology 80,
252–260.

I.

I.

Weber, M., Lott, C., and Fabricius,
K. E. (2006). Sedimentation stress
in a scleractinian coral exposed
to terrestrial and marine
sedi-
ments with contrasting physical,
organic and geochemical proper-
ties. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 336,
18–32.

Yamashita, R.,

and Tanimura, A.
in the
(2007). Floating plastic
Kuroshio current
area, western
North Paciﬁc Ocean. Mar. Pollut.
Bull. 54, 464–488.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 18 May 2012; accepted: 01 June
2012; published online: 21 June 2012.
Citation: Tosin M, Weber M, Siotto M,
Lott C and Degli Innocenti F (2012)
Laboratory test methods to determine the
degradation of plastics in marine envi-
ronmental conditions. Front. Microbio.
3:225. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00225
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Microbiotechnology, Ecotoxicology and
Bioremediation, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Tosin, Weber, Siotto,
Lott and Degli Innocenti. This is an
open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 225 | 9

