REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 11 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00142

Mining genomes of marine cyanobacteria for elements of
zinc homeostasis

James P. Barnett 1, Andrew Millard 2, Amira Z. Ksibe 1, David J. Scanlan2, Ralf Schmid 3 and
Claudia Andrea Blindauer 1*

1 Department of Chemistry, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
2 School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK
3 Department of Biochemistry, Henry Wellcome Building, Leicester, UK

Edited by:
Martha Gledhill, University of
Southampton, UK
Reviewed by:
Mak Saito, Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, USA
Nigel John Robinson, Durham
University, UK
Jennifer Cavet, University of
Manchester, UK
*Correspondence:
Claudia Andrea Blindauer ,
Department of Chemistry, University
of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK.
e-mail: c.blindauer@warwick.ac.uk

Zinc is a recognized essential element for the majority of organisms, and is indispensable
for the correct function of hundreds of enzymes and thousands of regulatory proteins. In
aquatic photoautotrophs including cyanobacteria, zinc is thought to be required for carbonic
anhydrase and alkaline phosphatase, although there is evidence that at least some carbonic
anhydrases can be cambialistic, i.e., are able to acquire in vivo and function with different
metal cofactors such as Co2+ and Cd2+. Given the global importance of marine phytoplank-
ton, zinc availability in the oceans is likely to have an impact on both carbon and phosphorus
cycles. Zinc concentrations in seawater vary over several orders of magnitude, and in the
open oceans adopt a nutrient-like proﬁle. Most studies on zinc handling by cyanobacteria
have focused on freshwater strains and zinc toxicity; much less information is available on
marine strains and zinc limitation. Several systems for zinc homeostasis have been char-
acterized in the freshwater species Synechococcus sp. PCC 7942 and Synechocystis sp.
PCC 6803, but little is known about zinc requirements or zinc handling by marine species.
Comparative metallo-genomics has begun to explore not only the putative zinc proteome,
but also speciﬁc protein families predicted to have an involvement in zinc homeostasis,
including sensors for excess and limitation (SmtB and its homologs as well as Zur), uptake
systems (ZnuABC), putative intracellular zinc chaperones (COG0523) and metallothioneins
(BmtA), and efﬂux pumps (ZiaA and its homologs).

Keywords: zinc limitation, Zur, COG0523, SmtA, BmtA

INTRODUCTION
Zinc might be considered as one of the most inconspicuous trace
elements. To some extent, this is due to its “boring” (Levi, 1984)
chemistry – in its only biologically relevant oxidation state, Zn(II),
it is colorless and does not display any redox chemistry of its own.
Because Zn2+
is not redox-active, many authors tend to consider
it as less important than iron or copper in terms of both essential-
ity and toxicity, even though between 5 and 9% of the predicted
proteomes of most organisms correspond to zinc-requiring pro-
teins – in most cases more than either the predicted iron or copper
sub-proteomes (Andreini et al., 2009).

This is even true for prokaryotes which once were thought to
“avoid the hidden cost of zinc homeostasis” (Luisi, 1992). Several
recent bioinformatic approaches aimed at predicting metallopro-
teomes (Andreini et al., 2006, 2008; Dupont et al., 2010) found that
although overall zinc utilization in bacteria is undoubtedly lower
than in eukaryotes, Zn-binding domains are yet highly abundant
in predicted bacterial proteomes. For the case of currently existing
prokaryotes, there is clear evidence for widespread zinc utilization,
in particular in hydrolytic enzymes (Decaria et al., 2010). A major
reason for lower zinc utilization by bacteria is likely the much
lower abundance of zinc ﬁnger domains in their proteomes. Fur-
thermore, at least in heterotrophs, the cellular quotas for zinc and
iron tend to be similar (Outten and O’Halloran, 2001), although

it should be emphasized that metal quotas do not necessarily bear
a direct relationship to metal requirements.

Virtually all organisms have elaborate mechanisms to control
zinc levels and distribution (Hantke, 2005; Eide, 2006; Fukada and
Kambe, 2011). Total cellular concentrations typically are in the
high micromolar range; however, various lines of evidence have
indicated that “free” cytosolic zinc concentrations are extremely
low. Values given in the literature vary between nanomolar and
femtomolar – with the true regulated value probably somewhere
in the picomolar range (Krezel and Maret, 2006). The apparent
need for the narrow range of tolerable zinc concentrations had
initially puzzled some researchers, as there seems to be a wide-
spread belief that zinc is not particularly toxic to cells. It could
be argued that this is only true for cells that have efﬁcient mech-
anisms to deal with zinc; otherwise free zinc concentrations as
low as nanomolar can be toxic (Bozym et al., 2010). Deleteri-
ous effects of Zn2+
may, at least to some extent, be due to its
high position in the Irving–Williams series (Irving and Williams,
1953), meaning that it outcompetes less competitive metal ions
such as Fe2+
for their protein binding sites, as demon-
strated recently for the Mn-binding protein MncA (Tottey et al.,
2008). This latter study illustrated why it is important to limit the
amount of exchangeable zinc in the cytosol of cells, by the demon-
stration that the major periplasmic Mn-binding protein MncA

and Mn2+

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 1

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 (a freshwater cyanobacterium) can
only incorporate the essential cofactor Mn2+
to a signiﬁcant extent
if this is present in 100000-fold molar excess over Zn2+
. Since
MncA folds and is loaded with Mn2+
in the cytosol, this ﬁnding
implies the need for a very low free cytosolic zinc concentration in
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Little information is available on zinc
toxicity to marine cyanobacteria. A study on Synechococcus strains
in the strait of Gibraltar noted that even micromolar concentra-
tions of zinc had only a moderate effect on growth (Debelius et al.,
2011), but zinc sensitivity may differ considerably depending on
the natural habitat of a given cyanobacterium.

There are indications for an impact of zinc on major global bio-
geochemical cycles. A “zinc hypothesis” was put forward in 1994 in
a study that demonstrated zinc and carbon co-limitation in marine
phytoplankton (Morel et al., 1994). A link between zinc and car-
bon ﬁxation is also reﬂected in the arctic ice-core record (Hong
et al., 1996): during periods of glaciation, zinc levels were at least 10
times higher, whilst CO2 levels were signiﬁcantly lower than in the
intervening periods. Changes in zinc levels due to increased depo-
sition of dust into the oceans are thought to have had an effect
on marine microbial community structure, and the decrease in
CO2 levels could be attributed to increased CaCO3 production
by coccolithophores and a resulting decrease in atmospheric CO2
(Schulz et al., 2004). The amount of data on geochemical zinc
ﬂuxes is limited, and it is not clear whether dust deposition today
does (Thuroczy et al., 2010) or does not (Bruland et al., 1994) sig-
niﬁcantly contribute. In terms of a direct biochemical link between
zinc and organic CO2 ﬁxation, there are of course the carbonic
anhydrases, which operate in all marine phytoplankton, including
cyanobacteria (Cannon et al., 2010), although substitution with
either Co or Cd has been demonstrated for eukaryotic phytoplank-
ton (Xu et al., 2008). There are also strong indications for links
between Zn and phosphorus cycles (Jakuba et al., 2008), thought
to be due to the requirement of Zn for alkaline phosphatase.

An absolute requirement for zinc has been clearly demonstrated
for marine eukaryotic phytoplankton (Sunda and Huntsman,
1995, 2005), but the situation is less clear for marine cyanobac-
teria, as discussed below. With this review, we aim to make a
case for intensifying studies into the relevance of zinc for marine
cyanobacteria.

MARINE CYANOBACTERIA
Cyanobacteria are a group of phototrophic prokaryotes that all
have the ability to perform oxygenic photosynthesis. In the marine
environment a large diversity of both unicellular (e.g., Syne-
chococcus, Prochlorococcus, Cyanobium, Acaryochloris, and Cro-
cosphaera) and ﬁlamentous (e.g., Trichodesmium, Lyngbya, Oscilla-
toria, Nodularia, and Microcoleus) genera exist, occupying habitats
ranging from intertidal microbial mats through to oligotrophic
open-ocean waters (see Whitton and Potts, 2000).

The numerically dominant cyanobacteria in open-ocean waters
are the unicellular genera Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus which
contribute signiﬁcantly to marine CO2 ﬁxation (Li, 1994; Jardil-
lier et al., 2010). Synechococcus are the more widely distributed,
being found in waters covering a broad temperature range, from
ca. 2–3˚C to >30˚C (Shapiro and Haugen, 1988; Waterbury et al.,
1996; Fuller et al., 2006; Zwirglmaier et al., 2008), and including

open-ocean, coastal and estuarine environments (Partensky et al.,
1999; Scanlan, 2003). Prochlorococcus appears to be more con-
strained in its distribution occupying waters roughly between
45˚N and 40˚S but within these latitudes it is extremely abundant,
routinely reaching concentrations of 105 cells per ml or higher
(Partensky et al., 1999; Partensky and Garczarek, 2010). Prochloro-
coccus can be distinguished from Synechococcus by its lack of a phy-
cobilisome light-harvesting antenna complex. Instead, it possesses
thylakoid membrane proteins binding unique divinyl derivatives
of chlorophyll a and b (Goericke and Repeta, 1992; Partensky
and Garczarek, 2003). In stratiﬁed tropical and subtropical waters
Prochlorococcus cells undergo vertical partitioning between dis-
tinct high light- and low light-adapted ecotypes (Moore et al.,
1998; West and Scanlan, 1999). Both Synechococcus and Prochloro-
coccus have relatively small genomes ranging in size between 1.64
and 2.7 Mb in Prochlorococcus and from 2.2 to 2.86 Mb in Syne-
chococcus (Kettler et al., 2007; Dufresne et al., 2008; Scanlan et al.,
2009). In the case of Prochlorococcus, signiﬁcant genome reduction
has occurred during evolution of the genus, likely an adaptation
to the oligotrophic gyre systems they inhabit, providing signiﬁcant
economies in energy and nutrients (Dufresne et al., 2005).

As well as contributing to marine carbon cycling, some
cyanobacteria are also capable of nitrogen ﬁxation (Zehr, 2011).
Trichodesmium, a ﬁlamentous non-heterocystous genus, is ubiq-
uitous in tropical and subtropical environments (Capone et al.,
1997) and until recently was thought to be the dominant marine
nitrogen-ﬁxer. However, it is now clear that the unicellular UCYN-
A and UCYN-B lineages, the latter encompassing the genera
Crocosphaera and Cyanothece, also contribute signiﬁcantly to this
process (Zehr, 2011). Surprisingly, despite its global distribution in
the Atlantic and Paciﬁc Oceans Crocosphaera appears to have lim-
ited genetic diversity with high identity and synteny of the cultured
genome sequence to environmental metagenomic datasets for this
genus (Zehr et al., 2007). Interestingly, metabolic insights from the
genome of the UCYN-A lineage reveals a cyanobacterium lacking
photosystem II, RuBisCO, and a tricarboxylic acid cycle (Tripp
et al., 2010) suggesting it requires a symbiotic partner.

The high diversity of marine cyanobacteria is epitomized by
Acaryochloris marina, a cyanobacterium that uniquely utilizes
chlorophyll d as its main photosynthetic pigment (Kuhl et al.,
2005) trapping the far-red light that penetrates beneath the didem-
nid ascidians (sea squirts) upon which these organisms are found
(Ohkubo et al., 2006). Curiously, the A. marina genome is con-
siderably larger than other sequenced unicellular strains (Swingley
et al., 2008) comprising a circular chromosome of 6.5 Mb and nine
distinct plasmids giving a total DNA content of 8.3 Mb. Over 10%
of the protein families contain duplicated copies in A. marina and
this information, together with its utilization of far-red light that
is not absorbed by other aerobic photoautotrophs, suggests that
Acaryochloris species ﬁll a non-competitive niche where they are
apparently free to specialize their metabolic library, and potentially
explains their expansive genome size (Swingley et al., 2008).

BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL CO-EVOLUTION, AND CYANOBACTERIAL
METAL REQUIREMENTS
It has been hypothesized that metal ion bioavailability presented
an evolutionary selection pressure on the “choice” of metals

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 2

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

within metalloenzymes (Williams and Da Silva, 2003). Con-
versely, biological evolution and the emergence of life has changed
the chemical composition, or more precisely, the speciation of
the atmosphere, the lithosphere, and of course the hydrosphere.
Arguably, cyanobacteria might be deemed responsible for the
greatest change of all by inventing oxygenic photosynthesis (Ray-
mond and Blankenship, 2004). Consequently, they were amongst
the ﬁrst organisms that encountered, and had to cope with,
the changes in the chemical composition of their environment
that oxygenation brought about (Cavet et al., 2003; Saito et al.,
2003). For metal ion speciation, both fundamental considerations
(Williams and Da Silva, 2001) as well as detailed studies (Saito et al.,
2003) agree that the presence of oxygen meant a drastic reduction
in iron, cobalt, nickel, and manganese availability, and a signiﬁ-
cant increase in the concentrations of zinc, copper, and cadmium
(Williams and Da Silva, 2001; Williams, 2011). It is reasonable to
accept that these changes in chemistry and bioavailability directed
biological evolution, including that of metal-binding biomole-
cules (Williams and Da Silva, 2000). Indeed, even though it has
been suggested that microbial metalloproteomes are still largely
uncharacterized (Cvetkovic et al., 2010), bioinformatic genome
analyzes of known metal-binding protein domains (Dupont et al.,
2010) as well as elemental analysis experiments on marine phy-
toplankton (Bertilsson et al., 2003; Heldal et al., 2003; Ho et al.,
2003; Quigg et al., 2003, 2011; Morel, 2008) give a picture that is
consistent with this idea. Thus, the “co-evolution of biology and
chemistry” is imprinted on both the metallome and the metal-
loproteome. The interested reader is directed to a recent debate
regarding the evolution of zinc-binding domains (Mulkidjanian
and Galperin, 2009; Dupont and Caetano-Anolles, 2010).

In the case of cyanobacteria, metal ion requirements and sensi-
tivities, as far as they have been experimentally determined, agree
with the notion that they evolved in an environment with metal
ion concentrations typical of a sulﬁdic or a ferrous ocean (Saito
et al., 2003): both marine Synechococcus (Sunda and Huntsman,
1995) and Prochlorococcus (Saito et al., 2002) strains have been
shown to be cobalt-limited, whereas the requirements for zinc are
so low (Saito et al., 2003) that only mild reductions in growth
rates were observed at the lowest possible free zinc concentrations
(Saito et al., 2002).

Our previous genome-mining approaches have identiﬁed
strong candidate genes for potentially zinc-requiring carboxyso-
mal carbonic anhydrases, ABC-type zinc uptake systems, as well
as for proteins involved in the intracellular handling of zinc
(Blindauer, 2008b). Several other enzymes in cyanobacteria are
also predicted to require zinc for function, including for example
DNA ligase and alkaline phosphatase (Palenik et al., 2003), the
latter leading to the suggestion that cyanobacteria may be Zn–
P co-limited. Indeed, in certain cyanobacterial strains, alkaline
phosphatase activity is elicited by phosphorus limitation (Moore
et al., 2005), and direct crosstalk between P and Zn, mediated by
the regulatory protein PtrA, has been found in Synechococcus sp.
WH8102 (Ostrowski et al., 2010). PtrA responds to phosphorus
depletion and its expression up-regulates not only the expression
of phosphatases, but also that of proteins predicted to be involved
in zinc acquisition and distribution – including ZnuABC and a
member of the COG0523 family (see below). However, it has to

be noted that the true metal requirements of each of these pro-
teins has yet to be experimentally veriﬁed, and there is reason to be
cautious, with some evidence for the in vivo replacement of zinc
with cobalt (Sunda and Huntsman, 1995) and cadmium (Lee and
Morel, 1995) in marine phytoplankton. Very recently though, uti-
lization of an alternative calcium-requiring phosphatase (PhoX)
has been shown for uncultured Prochlorococcus (Kathuria and
Martiny, 2011), suggesting a further mechanism for reducing zinc
requirements.

In conclusion, although cyanobacteria are at the root of what
life and marine trace metal chemistry are like today, their metal
requirements require further study; none of the predicted major
destinations for zinc are experimentally conﬁrmed, and informa-
tion about if, and how, zinc requirements can be alleviated by
either Co or Cd substitution, is limited.

(cid:2)

ZINC SPECIATION IN SEA WATER
In order to understand how cyanobacteria might acquire zinc from
the marine environment, we must ﬁrst understand its chemical
nature in seawater. The concentration of zinc in oceanic waters
follows typical nutrient-like depth proﬁles (Bruland, 1980; But-
ler, 1998), with the lowest concentrations found in the euphotic
zone with dissolved zinc rapidly removed to lower depths as
a constituent of colloidal particles (Bruland, 1989; Wells et al.,
1998). Total dissolved zinc concentrations in surface waters of
the North Atlantic Ocean range from just 0.1 to 0.3 nM (Ell-
wood and van den Berg, 2000), similar to values obtained from
measurements taken in the North Paciﬁc Ocean (Bruland, 1980).
The vast majority of this zinc (∼98%) is found complexed to
uncharacterized organic ligands (Bruland, 1989; Donat and Bru-
land, 1990; Ellwood and van den Berg, 2000) with conditional
stability constants, log K
ZnL, of between 10.0 and 10.5 (Wells
et al., 1998; Ellwood and van den Berg, 2000). This results in
a concentration of free Zn2+
of 1–20 pM. The distribution of
these metal complexing ligands suggests a surface source (Bruland,
1980) that may include phytoplankton including cyanobacteria.
This contribution could be through the direct secretion of zinc-
binding ligands into the ocean. There is already some evidence that
cyanobacteria actively secrete ligands that complex other biolog-
ically important trace metals including copper, iron, and cobalt.
The marine Synechococcus sp. strains WH8101 and WH7805 have
both been found to produce siderophores (Wilhelm and Trick,
1994) for scavenging iron from nutrient-depleted environments,
whilst Cu-complexing ligands are produced to mitigate the toxic
effects of copper (Wiramanaden et al., 2008), with cyanobacteria
particularly sensitive to this metal (Mann et al., 2002). Signiﬁcant
quantities of strong cobalt-binding ligands were produced by a
Synechococcus-dominated microbial community in the Costa Rica
upwelling dome (Saito et al., 2005).

Alternatively the Zn complexing ligands could be released from
cyanobacterial cells indirectly, perhaps as a consequence of cell
lysis by marine phages (Wells et al., 1998). Despite the fact that
the vast majority of zinc in ocean waters is present in the form of
organic metal complexes, there is evidence that free Zn2+
is the
major form of this nutrient taken up by phytoplankton (Ander-
son et al., 1978; Sunda and Huntsman, 1992; Sunda et al., 2005). In
the Paciﬁc Ocean the concentration of free Zn2+
in surface waters

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 3

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

ranges from only 1 to 14 pM (Bruland, 1980; Donat and Bruland,
1990), and in the Atlantic Ocean ranges from 6.8 to 20 pM (Brand
et al., 1983). The concentration of free Zn2+
in surface waters is
thought to be sufﬁciently low to limit the growth of some marine
phytoplankton (Brand et al., 1983; Sunda and Huntsman, 1992)
although one study found that phytoplankton growth was not
limited by low Zn2+
concentrations even after iron limitation was
alleviated (Coale et al., 1996). Conversely, productivity in the sub-
tropical Atlantic was further boosted by addition of Zn or Co to
water that had also been enriched with Fe and P (Dixon, 2008),
providing evidence for Zn/Fe/P co-limitation. Similarly, the iron-
depleted waters of the Southern Ocean and the sub-arctic Paciﬁc
are also extremely zinc-depleted (Sunda and Huntsman, 2000)
which appears to induce high levels of Cd uptake and high Cd:P
ratios in phytoplankton. It is thus clear that interactions between
the cycles of different metal ions exist, and that co-limitation needs
to be studied (Saito et al., 2008). How important such crosstalk is
in cyanobacteria is not yet well understood, and further work is
required to determine if mechanisms exist for the active uptake of
zinc, and if so, in what form zinc is acquired by cyanobacteria, and
to determine the impact that cyanobacteria have on trace metal
speciation in ocean waters (Leao et al., 2007).

SYSTEMS FOR ZINC HOMEOSTASIS
Zinc homeostasis in bacteria is largely achieved through a balance
of active uptake and efﬂux by speciﬁc membrane transporters
(Hantke, 2005), plus proteins mediating intracellular zinc han-
dling (Figure 1). In the freshwater cyanobacterium Synechocystis
sp. PCC 6803, a zinc-speciﬁc high afﬁnity ABC transporter termed
ZnuABC has been identiﬁed for the active uptake of zinc from
the periplasm (Cavet et al., 2003). Putative ZnuABC systems
have also been identiﬁed in most strains of marine cyanobacte-
ria (Blindauer, 2008b; Scanlan et al., 2009). The putative znuABC
gene cluster of many of the marine strains also contains a putative
zur gene (Blindauer, 2008b). Zur proteins (for zinc uptake reg-
ulator) are low-zinc sensors; their zinc-loaded forms repress the
expression of znuABC under zinc-replete conditions (Patzer and
Hantke, 2000).

To date no speciﬁc mechanisms for the active uptake of zinc
across the outer cell membrane of cyanobacteria has been iden-
tiﬁed. It is generally considered that metal ions are small enough
to diffuse freely through porins in the outer-membrane of Gram-
negative bacteria; however, as described above, the concentration
of free Zn2+
in surface layers of the world’s oceans is extremely
low, with the vast majority of zinc complexed to as yet uncharac-
terized ligands of unknown structure and origin (Bruland, 1989).
Whether at least some of these ligands are actively secreted to aid in
zinc acquisition remains an open question; there is also the possi-
bility that at least in coastal environments, ligands are synthesized
in response to zinc excess and hence to avoid toxicity (Lohan et al.,
2005; Leao et al., 2007).

In order to deal with excess zinc, Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 has
a zinc-speciﬁc efﬂux pump, ZiaA (Thelwell et al., 1998), similar
to other P1-type ATPase metal ion transporters, that transports
Zn2+
from the cytoplasm to the periplasmic space (Figure 1).
Expression of this efﬂux system is induced by zinc and is regulated
by ZiaR (Thelwell et al., 1998), a zinc-speciﬁc repressor protein.

With the exception of Lyngbya sp. and Nodularia sp., most marine
strains of cyanobacteria appear to lack zinc-speciﬁc efﬂux pumps
(Blindauer, 2008b; Scanlan et al., 2009) reﬂecting the nutrient
poor environments they occupy, with free Zn2+
concentrations
being in the picomolar range in ocean waters (Hunter and Boyd,
1999). Instead, at least some marine cyanobacteria seem to rely on
a mechanism of zinc sequestration by bacterial metallothioneins
(BmtAs; Blindauer, 2008b) to deal with any eventual excess. Met-
allothioneins are small cytosolic proteins rich in cysteine residues
that bind and sequester metal ions and thereby prevent any delete-
rious interactions (Blindauer and Leszczyszyn, 2010). The metal-
lothionein SmtA of the freshwater cyanobacterium Synechococcus
sp. PCC 7942 is induced by several metal ions but most promi-
nently by zinc (Huckle et al., 1993) and its expression is controlled
by the zinc sensor SmtB (Osman and Cavet, 2010) that is highly
similar to ZiaR. Several marine strains of cyanobacteria appear
to lack an SmtB/ZiaR type regulator (Blindauer, 2008b) despite
the presence of one or more genes for a BmtA (Table 1). Fur-
thermore, many also appear to lack any established mechanism
for dealing with zinc excess, with all Prochlorococcus and some
Synechococcus strains apparently lacking both a ZiaA efﬂux pump
and a metallothionein encoding gene (Blindauer, 2008b). Pre-
sumably these bacteria never encounter toxic levels of zinc in

FIGURE 1 | Known and proposed elements of zinc homeostasis in
cyanobacteria. A requirement for zinc is sensed by the transcriptional
regulator Zur, leading to the upregulation of the components of the
ZnuABC uptake system. Some members of the putative
metallochaperone family COG0523 are also regulated by Zur, and have,
in other bacteria, been shown to be expressed in response to zinc
deﬁciency. In most freshwater cyanobacteria, excessive levels of zinc
are sensed by SmtB and its homologs (ZiaR, AztR, BxmR), and these
sensors regulate either the expression of efﬂux pumps (ZiaA) or
metallothioneins (SmtA and homologs).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 4

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

Table 1 | Presence of selected genes predicted to be involved in zinc homeostasis in marine cyanobacterial genomes.

In gene cluster?

yes

yes

yes

BmtA
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

SmtB
(cid:2)
?
?
?
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Species/strain

Acaryochloris marina MBIC11017
Crocosphaera watsonii WH 8501
Cyanobium sp. PCC 7001 [D]b
Lyngbya sp. PCC 8106
Microcoleus chthonoplastes sp. PCC 7420 [D]
Nodularia spumigena sp. CCY9414
Oscillatoria sp. PCC 6506
Synechococcus sp. CC9311
Synechococcus sp. CC9605
Synechococcus sp. WH 7803
Synechococcus sp. WH8102
Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002
Synechococcus sp. WH 8109 [D]
Synechococcus sp. WH5701
Synechococcus sp. CC9902
Synechococcus sp. BL107 [D]
Synechococcus sp. PCC 7335 [D]
Synechococcus sp. RCC307 [D]
Synechococcus sp. RS9916 [D]
Synechococcus sp. RS9917 [D]
Synechococcus sp. WH7805 [D]
Trichodesmium erythraeum IMS101
Prochlorococcus marinus sp. AS9601
P. marinus sp. MIT 9211
P. marinus sp. MIT 9215
P. marinus sp. MIT 9301
P. marinus sp. MIT 9303
P. marinus sp. MIT 9312
P. marinus sp. MIT 9313
P. marinus sp. MIT 9515
P. marinus sp. MIT9202 [D]
P. marinus NATL1A
P. marinus NATL2A
P. marinus marinus CCMP1375c
P. marinus pastoris CCMP1986c

Zur
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

Zinc-related COG0523?a
(cid:2)(cid:2)
?
(cid:2)
(cid:2)(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
?
?
?
?
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
?
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

Empty cells indicate absence of a recognizable zinc-related homolog; “?” indicate presence of homologs with unclear metal speciﬁcity.
aAccording to analysis of syntenic genome regions or presence of upstream Zur box.
b[D] Draft genome.
cCCMP1375 also known as SS120; CCMP1986 also known as MED4.

the environment, although it also remains possible that they may
employ novel mechanisms for zinc homeostasis that have yet to be
discovered.

SENSING A REQUIREMENT FOR ZINC: Zur TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS
In bacteria, the expression of proteins that deal with metal ion
homeostasis is predominantly regulated at the transcriptional level
(Finney and O’Halloran, 2003; Giedroc and Arunkumar, 2007;
Waldron et al., 2009), and is mediated by sensor proteins for zinc
excess (e.g., SmtB and its relatives; Giedroc and Arunkumar, 2007;
Osman and Cavet, 2010) and zinc depletion (Zur and others).
Seven major groups of bacterial metalloregulatory proteins have
so far been deﬁned: the Fur-family (for “ferric uptake regulator”)

is one of them (COG0735; Bagg and Neilands, 1987), and also
comprises paralogous sensors for zinc (Zur), nickel (Nur), man-
ganese (Mur; Lee and Helmann, 2007), and hydrogen peroxide
(PerR; Jacquamet et al., 2009).

Metal sensing in bacteria occurs overwhelmingly in the cytosol
(Waldron and Robinson, 2009). Ultimately, the sensor proteins are
the proteins that need to be the “most speciﬁc” – they should ide-
ally either not bind any other metal ion, or if that is not possible,
they should not respond to other metal ions in the same way as
to their cognate metal. The key concepts of access and allostery, as
well as the importance of relative afﬁnities of different metallopro-
teins for different metal ions, have been highlighted by Waldron
et al., 2009.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 5

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

The dissociation constants of Zn2+

–Zur complexes are in the
femtomolar range; similar data are also available for zinc excess
sensors (Outten and O’Halloran, 2001; Giedroc and Arunkumar,
2007) – these data also support the idea that the free Zn2+
concen-
tration in the cytosol is extremely low. Several crystal structures
of representatives of the COG0735 family have been determined
(Pohl et al., 2003; Lucarelli et al., 2007; Jacquamet et al., 2009;
Sheikh and Taylor, 2009; Shin et al., 2011). All members stud-
ied adopt a “winged-helix” fold (Figures 2A,C) and all assemblies
are homo-dimeric, as are many other proteins that speciﬁcally
recognize DNA sequences.

All “urs” are thought to bind their cognate DNA in the pres-
ence of the entity to be sensed. Although no structures in the
presence of DNA are available, it is thought that DNA-binding
is mediated by the ﬁrst ca. 80 residues, whilst dimerization, also
a prerequisite of DNA-binding, is mediated by the C-terminal
half, in particular by the formation of a six-stranded β-sheet
formed by both monomers. The overall shape of the dimeric
assembly can be described as an “arch” (Figure 2C), and the two
DNA-binding domains are thought to “grip” the DNA using their
DNA-recognition helices. It is likely that the interaction between
protein and DNA requires a particular conformation that is stabi-
lized by the presence of the sensed metal. The sensing appears to
be mediated by two inter-domain hinges that are likely to be sta-
bilized by metal-binding. In contrast to metal sensors of the SmtB
family in which complete metal sites form between monomers,
each metal site in Fur-family proteins is formed from residues
from one monomer only. If the respective metal is absent, a differ-
ent conformation may become more favorable, and DNA-binding
no longer occurs, leading to the de-repression of gene transcrip-
tion. Despite this general mechanistic idea, there is considerable
ambiguity about the molecular detail of metal-binding, and how
the binding of the “correct” metal mediates DNA-recognition.
Despite the availability of X-ray structure for no less than seven
Fur-family proteins, the identity of the residues involved in bind-
ing the metal ion to be sensed is unclear, in particular in those
“urs” that contain three metal sites per monomer.

A structural zinc site formed by four conserved Cys residues is
present in the majority of Fur-family members, independent of the
sensed metal. One or two further sites participate in sensing. An
inspection of various X-ray structures of Fur-family proteins sug-
gested that sample preparation for such studies seems to be quite
challenging; in particular, appropriate population with the correct
complement of metal ions appears to be less than straightforward,
and in several cases, workers appear to have resorted to populating
all sites with Zn2+
. Whilst this is certainly appropriate for Zurs, in
other cases this may lead to ambiguous conclusions, as the coordi-
nation preferences of Zn2+
or
Ni2+
. It has been demonstrated experimentally for SmtB/ArsR
sensors that coordination geometry (Cavet et al., 2002) is an
important discriminator in metal sensor proteins (via allostery).
For Pseudomonas aeruginosa Fur, it has been shown in vitro that
Zn2+
-loaded Fur interacted with a Fur-binding DNA sequence in
a different manner to that observed with Fe2+
(Ochsner et al.,
1995). It should also be noted that despite full conservation of
the respective residues, the crystallographically observed metal-
binding sites in the Fur proteins from Pseudomonas aeruginosa

are rather different to those of Fe2+

on the one hand and Vibrio cholerae and Helicobacter pylori on
the other (all structures contain only Zn2+
ions) are not identical
(see Figure 2B), and that the domain orientations in the dimeric
assemblies also differ signiﬁcantly – likely as a consequence of the
different coordination modes. It is conceivable that the binding
mode for Fe2+
differs from both experimentally observed sites,
with likely consequences for the structure that is competent to
bind to Fur boxes.

Even in the case of the Zur sensors, metal population seems to
be problematic, and as a consequence, there is some controversy
over stoichiometry as well as the role of the various sites. For the
Zurs from Streptomyces coelicolor (Shin et al., 2011) and Bacillus
subtilis (Ma et al., 2011), there is agreement that site 2 (Figure 2A)
is the major sensory site. Variations of site 2 are present in Fur,
Nur, and PerR (Figure 2B), and in each case, this site has been
identiﬁed as the sensory site. Site 3 was only partially occupied in
the M. tuberculosis structure (Lucarelli et al., 2007), and the dimer
displayed an open conformation, probably with reduced DNA-
binding ability. In contrast, site 3 (site D) was fully occupied in
the structure of S. coelicolor Zur, and the dimer showed a closed
conformation, thought to be DNA-binding competent. This led
to suggestions that site 3 ﬁne-tunes the response to zinc (Shin
et al., 2011). This assessment has been contested based on studies
of mutants of B. subtilis Zur (Ma et al., 2011), which suggested
that site 3 is not populated under physiological conditions at all,
but that the two site 2s in the dimer have different afﬁnities and
show negative cooperativity. In either case, it was suggested that
different metal afﬁnities of the various sites allow the broadening
of the operating range of the Zur proteins.

We believe that the preceding discussion demonstrates the chal-
lenges encountered in the study of metal-binding and -sensing
proteins, but also highlights how important continued studies of
metalloproteins are. Unfortunately, so far, no structure for any“ur”
from a cyanobacterium has been elucidated, but in the following,
we will explore what can be achieved using theoretical approaches.
BLAST searches in the genomes of marine cyanobacteria
retrieved members of the COG0735 family as summarized in
Table 1; Figure 3 and Figures S1 and S2 in Supplementary Mate-
rial. They cluster into four distinct groups. Although it should
be recognized that sequence similarity and metal speciﬁcity of
sensors (or indeed other metalloproteins) need not be congru-
ent (Campbell et al., 2007), comparisons with other “urs” of
known speciﬁcity, ﬁrst and foremost Synechocystis Zur, suggest
that the branch highlighted in light purple corresponds to Zurs.
Furthermore, an analysis of the genome environments of the Zurs
from the majority of Prochlorococcus strains supports this idea
(Figure 4).

Intriguingly, sequence comparisons (Figure 2B) show that an
equivalent of site 2 cannot be identiﬁed in the cyanobacterial Zur
homologs, and neither are all residues of site 3 the same as in
structurally characterized Zur proteins. We have constructed a
homology model of the representative from Prochlorococcus sp.
SS120 (CCMP1375) to test whether likely alternative binding sites
might be predicted. The model obtained (Figure 2C) suggests that
the cyanobacterial Zurs may contain a variation of site 3, compris-
ing D80, H82, C98, and H118. Thus, the predicted zinc-sensing
site is in a location corresponding to site 3, but has a ligand set that

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 6

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

FIGURE 2 | Structural features of Zur proteins. (A) Crystal structure of
Zur from Streptomyces coelicolor (Shin et al., 2011; pdb 3MWM). Only
one monomer is shown. The three zinc-binding sites are highlighted in red
(site 2 – major sensory site), yellow (site 3), and gray (site 1 – structural
site). (B) Sequential alignment of structurally characterized Fur-family
proteins from various bacteria together with selected sequences from
cyanobacteria. The color-coding for the Zur proteins from S. coelicolor and
M. tuberculosis corresponds to that shown in (A). The consensus sensory
site 2 is clearly not present in cyanobacterial sequences, but a variation of
site 3, highlighted in yellow, can be discerned. Corresponding sites in
Fur/Nur/PerR proteins are highlighted in dark and light green, and gray for

the structural zinc site. (C) Homology model for Pro1502, a predicted Zur
protein from Prochlorococcus marinus sp. CCPM1375. Inspection of initial
metal-free models and conservation of potential ligands [see (B)]
suggested that cyanobacterial Zurs contain only one sensory binding site
that differs signiﬁcantly from the sites in other Fur-family proteins including
the two Zur proteins from S. coelicolor and M. tuberculosis, but the
combination of donor atoms is the same as for site 2 (= N2OS). Further
variations within the cyanobacterial Zur proteins are possible, as indicated
for the sequences from Gloeobacter violaceus (a genus forming the
earliest branch of the cyanobacterial phylogenetic tree) and Crocosphaera
watsonii, which could form N3S sites.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 7

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

FIGURE 3 | Phylogenetic relationship among Fur-like proteins from
marine cyanobacteria. Sequences are labeled with species and protein
accession number; a rectangular tree including bootstrap statistics can be
found in Figure S1 in Supplementary Material, and the actual sequences are
documented in Figure S2 in Supplementary Material. Additional proteins for
the experimentally veriﬁed Fur from Escherichia coli and Synechocystis sp.
PCC 6803 are also included (green boxes), along with the Zur proteins from
Streptomyces coelicolor, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Synechocystis sp.
PCC 6803 (purple boxes). Amino acid sequences (see Figure S2 in
Supplementary Material) were aligned using CLUSTALW (Larkin et al., 2007),

and manually edited prior to import into MEGA5 (Tamura et al., 2011).
Phylogeny was inferred using the minimal evolution method. Bootstrap values
are the result of 1000 replications. Evolutionary distance was estimated using
the JTT model of substitution. There are four clear branches. Inclusion of
Synechocystis Zur and Fur allows the suggestion that the branches containing
these sequences correspond to zinc-responsive (light purple bubble) and
iron-responsive (light green bubble) regulators. The Zur and Fur sequences
from other bacteria do not cluster with any of the four branches, indicating
that similarity between cyanobacterial sequences and those from other
bacteria do not allow to infer metal speciﬁcity.

is similar to that of site 2, which may suggest that the zinc-binding
afﬁnity of this site is also closer to that of site 2. The four residues

identiﬁed are almost fully conserved in putative Zur proteins from
all cyanobacteria (Figure S2 in Supplementary Material). A notable

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 8

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

FIGURE 4 | Selected variations in genome neighborhoods of elements
of zinc homeostasis in marine cyanobacteria, with a focus on putative
Zur (left) and COG0523 (right) proteins. ZnuA is the periplasmic binding
protein, ZnuB the permease, and ZnuC the ATPase component of the
ZnuABC uptake transporter (also see Figure 1). In other strains and
species (e.g., other Synechococcus strains, Lyngbya sp. PCC 8106,
Microcoleus chthonoplastes), the gene for Zur is not co-localized with

recognizable elements of zinc homeostasis. Note that there appear to be
two ZnuABC-type systems in Prochlorococcus marinus sp. MIT 9303. The
Acaryochloris marina genome and plasmids harbor at least nine COG0523
family members; AM1_3070 (corresponding to UniProt entry
B0CDJ7_ACAM1) and AM1_3031 (corresponding to UniProt entry
B0CCJ8_ACAM1) are directly or indirectly associated with zinc
homeostasis.

exception is the homolog from Trichodesmium erythraeum, in
which H82 is replaced by a Tyr residue.

From this analysis, we would predict that the molecular mecha-
nism for sensing in cyanobacterial Zurs differs to some extent from
that of other bacterial Zurs with three metal sites, but the general
idea of zinc stabilizing domain orientation still holds. Notably,
the recognition motifs (Zur boxes) for cyanobacterial Zurs differ
somewhat from those of other bacteria (Haas et al., 2009), which
may require an adapted mode of operation of the protein.

Using the Zur box motif developed by Haas et al.
(2009) we have interrogated the genomes of Synechococcus sp.
CC9311, Prochlorococcus sp. CCMP1375, and Prochlorococcus sp.
CCMP1986. We have also examined the entries for cyanobacterial
Zur regulons in the RegPrecise database (Novichkov et al., 2010).
The motifs developed by Haas and by RegPrecise differ (Figure 5),
but common features can still be discerned, and it is likely that the
consensus Zur box in cyanobacteria corresponds to an (imper-
fect) inverted repeat, analogous to Zur and Fur boxes from other
bacteria (Gabriel et al., 2008).

In the Prochlorococcus strains examined, a putative Zur box
was found in the intergenic region between a putative znuA and
znuC. All three components of the ABC transporter are arranged
into one gene cluster that also comprises the respective putative
zur gene (Figure 4). All other strains inspected (Trichodesmium

erythraeum, Synechococcus sp. WH8102, Synechococcus sp. PCC
7002) also contain one or more Zur boxes in their znuABC gene
cluster.

In the genome of Prochlorococcus sp. CCMP1986, Zur boxes
were also identiﬁed upstream of several genes encoding ribosomal
proteins (S7, S12, and S14p/S29e). This is of potential interest,
because in other bacteria several ribosomal proteins, e.g., S14,
L31, L33, and L36, occur in two versions, one requiring a zinc
ion to stabilize a zinc-ribbon fold, and one version not requiring
zinc (Makarova et al., 2001). The latter versions have been shown
to be regulated by Zur in several bacterial species (Panina et al.,
2003; Owen et al., 2007; Gabriel and Helmann, 2009). It has been
suggested that the ribosome is, under zinc-replete conditions, a
substantial store for cellular zinc, and that the “alternative” ver-
sions are expressed in response to zinc deprivation (Owen et al.,
2007), operating as a backup for growth in Zn-poor environments,
thus helping to reduce the overall requirement for zinc and the cel-
lular zinc quota. The transcriptional response of E. coli to extreme
zinc limitation (Graham et al., 2009) highlights that zinc limita-
tion not only affects the transcription of genes encoding proteins
involved in zinc homeostasis, and that are zinc-requiring, but
also, importantly, zinc-independent proteins. Similarly, in other
bacterial species it has been demonstrated that a variety of zinc-
independent proteins including an alternative version of the global

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 9

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

even more remarkable repertoire for dealing with ﬂuctuations in
zinc concentrations than previously thought (Palenik et al., 2006).
Two further notable RegPrecise entries were found for the genomes
of Trichodesmium erythraeum, indicating Zur boxes upstream of a
putative metallochaperone of the COG0523 family (Tery_4617),
and Synechococcus sp. WH8102, which contains two Zur boxes
upstream of a gene encoding a potential bacterial metallothionein
(SYNW0359) – both groups of proteins are discussed below.

Very recently, Napolitano et al. (2012) studied the response of
Anabaena sp. PCC7120 to zinc starvation. Aided by gel shift assays
and a deletion mutant, the product of the all2473 gene, previously
designated FurB and thought to be involved in the response to
oxidative stress (López-Gomollón et al., 2009), was identiﬁed as
a true Zur. Several gene clusters that contain putative Zur boxes
were shown to be regulated by changes in zinc levels in this organ-
ism. The expression of four categories of proteins was regulated
by Zur: (i) zinc-free paralogs of zinc proteins, (ii) putative met-
allochaperones of the COG0523 family, (iii) ABC transporters
including a predicted ZnuABC system, and (iv) outer-membrane
proteins, particularly TonB-dependent receptors. A 7-1-7 palin-
dromic DNA sequence to which Zur bound with high speciﬁcity
was also determined, and agrees well with the Zur box consensus
motifs shown in Figure 5. The protein sequence of the all2473
product clusters with those predicted by us to be Zurs (Figure 3),
and the four residues predicted to be involved in zinc-sensing are
also conserved in the all2473 protein.

MEMBERS OF THE COG0523 FAMILY AND ZINC
In our earlier work (Blindauer, 2008b), we noted that the genome
neighborhood of putative zur and znuABC genes in numerous
genomes from cyanobacteria harbored genes that were anno-
tated as “Putative GTPase, G3E family”, “Cobalamin synthesis
protein/P47K”, or “CobW”. The latter protein is a cobalt chap-
erone that is part of the machinery for Vitamin B12 synthesis,
and at the time, this raised the question whether our putative
zinc-related genes might actually be involved in the regulation
and transport of cobalt. In the meantime however, Haas et al.
(2009) have conducted a thorough analysis of the COG0523 fam-
ily (Leipe et al., 2002) to which CobW belongs. All members of
COG0523 have a P-loop GTPase domain, and are thus also related
to nickel-chaperones of the G3E family with the same domain that
are involved in the maturation and assembly of urease (UreG),
and hydrogenase (HypB), as well as to the iron-chaperone Nha3
required for maturation of nitrile hydratase. G3E family proteins,
and by inference, COG0523 proteins, function as either insertases –
proteins that perform energy-requiring metal insertion into target
proteins – or as cytosolic storage and transport devices for metals
(=metallochaperones), or both.

The COG0523 members are composed of two domains, a
well-conserved N-terminal GTPase domain, and a more vari-
able C-terminal domain. They have been categorized as segmen-
tally variable genes (Haas et al., 2009), and this points toward
a role in adaptation to environmental stresses and/or variability,
and indicates development of binding speciﬁcity for other pro-
teins or small molecules. Haas et al. note that “the COG0523
family is a striking example of systematic homology-based mis-
annotation” – a speciﬁc function (in this case a role in cobalamin

FIGURE 5 | Sequence logos for Zur boxes in cyanobacteria. (A)
Consensus sequence developed by Haas et al. (2009), using 14
sequences found upstream of COG0523 genes in Prochlorococcus
marinus sp. CCMP1986, P. marinus sp. CCMP1375, Nostoc sp. PCC
7120, Cyanothece sp. PCC 7424, Cyanothece sp. PCC 8802,
Cyanothece sp. PCC 8801, Cyanothece sp. ATCC 51142, and
Cyanothece sp. PCC 7425. (B) Consensus sequence deposited in the
RegPrecise database (Novichkov et al., 2010) using 75 sequences from
the genomes of Synechocystis PCC 6803, Synechococcus sp. PCC
7002, Synechococcus sp. PCC 7942, Synechococcus JA-3.3Ab,
Thermosynechococcus elongatus BP-1, Synechococcus sp. WH8102,
Prochlorococcus sp. MIT 9313, Trichodesmium erythraeum IMS101,
Cyanothece sp. PCC 7425, Cyanothece sp. PCC 8801, Cyanothece sp.
ATCC 51142, Microcystis aeruginosa NIES-483, Nostoc sp. PCC 7120,
and Gloeobacter violaceus PCC 7421. There are clear similarities
between the two logos as indicated by the suggested alignment of
parts A and B.

transcription factor DksA in Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Blaby-Haas
et al., 2011), are under the control of Zur, and genome analyses of
Zur regulons suggest that this is a widespread phenomenon (Haas
et al., 2009). However, neither of the two versions of S14 present
in the genome of Prochlorococcus sp. MED4 displays any salient
signatures for zinc-binding, and neither S7 nor S12 are known to
bind zinc or occur in duplicate, so the signiﬁcance of their vicinity
to Zur boxes is in need of further investigation.

Another set of potential Zur boxes were found in a cluster
that comprises FutC, ferritin, and a Rieske iron–sulfur protein.
According to the manually curated database of bacterial regulons
RegPrecise, the cognate sequences of Furs and Zurs differ signiﬁ-
cantly (Novichkov et al., 2010). Hence, the detection of potential
Zur boxes within a cluster related to iron homeostasis suggests
that there is some crosstalk between the homeostasis of these two
metal ions; this has been observed in other bacteria, e.g., in S. coeli-
color, where the gene cluster responsible for the production of the
siderophore coelibactin is regulated by Zur (Kalliﬁdas et al., 2010).
The only Zur box that we were able to identify in the genome
of Synechococcus sp. CC9311 was upstream of a predicted ZIP
transporter protein (Sync_2443). ZIP (for “zinc–iron permeases”)
proteins are involved in zinc uptake in a variety of organisms
including plants, animals, fungi, and bacteria. However, ZIP
proteins have as yet not been reported for cyanobacteria, and
no recognizable homologs of Sync_2443 were found in any other
cyanobacterium; the closest match in a BLAST search was a zinc
transporter from the γ-proteobacterium Francisella novicida. If
Sync_2443 really is a zinc transporter, this coastal strain has an

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 10

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

biosynthesis) being assigned even though the level of sequence
similarity does not support this conclusion. We would add that
such mis-annotation is certainly rife in the case of gene annota-
tion for metal-binding proteins. The fact that many Zur proteins
are annotated as Fur is another example of this problem, and issues
surrounding the annotation of ABC-type transporters and metal-
transporting ATPases have been discussed elsewhere (Blindauer,
2008b).

Importantly, the theoretical and experimental studies of Haas
et al. as well as the work of other groups (Gabriel et al., 2008)
strongly suggested that a subset of COG0523 proteins is involved
in zinc homeostasis. The most prominent member of zinc-related
COG0523 is probably Bacillus subtilis YciC (Gabriel et al., 2008); it
has been established that its expression is under the control of Zur,
leading to upregulation when zinc is scarce. It is suggested that the
expression of zinc-related COG0523 proteins may provide advan-
tages under conditions of poor zinc nutrition – obviously, these are
conditions always present for open-ocean cyanobacteria. Unfortu-
nately, no suitable studies at the protein level seem to be available
for any COG0523 member, so although a link to zinc deprivation
is solidly established at the transcriptional level, it is not known
whether and which metal ion these proteins bind either in vitro or
in vivo. Whilst the requirement of metallochaperones for copper,
nickel, and cobalt can be easily understood, as the target proteins
for whose assembly they are required are few and well identiﬁed, a
similar scenario for zinc has been deemed unlikely, as it is thought
that even in bacteria, there are too many destinations for zinc, so
the tenet that there is one chaperone per metalloprotein is incon-
ceivable. Hence, two hypotheses have been put forward regarding
the role of the zinc-related COG0523 members (Haas et al., 2009):
(i) they are up-regulated to function in the recruitment and supply
of a metal ion that is not zinc to metalloproteins – the latter may
be either normally zinc-requiring or a different paralog – (ii) these
COG0523 proteins may be involved in the (re-)allocation of zinc
when this becomes necessary.

Sequence analysis of

cyanobacterial COG0523 proteins
(Figure 7; Figures S3 and S4 in Supplementary Material) illus-
trates characteristic features, for example a well-conserved GCxCC
motif which has been suggested as potential metal-binding site
previously (Haas et al., 2009); however, its location in a β strand
makes this less likely (see below and Figure 8). Another intrigu-
ing feature is the insertion of stretches with repetitive HHX, and
HXH motifs of up to 70 amino acid residues in total. These
His-rich stretches have been suggested to be hallmarks for met-
allochaperone activity of G3E GTPases. In the COG0523 subset
we have analyzed 115 out of 150 proteins (77%) display such
stretches. The phylogenetic tree for cyanobacterial COG0523 pro-
teins (Figure 6) is roughly split into three major branches, each
of which is divided into two sub-branches. Phylogenetic analysis,
together with analyses of genome contexts (Figure 4), suggests
that phylogeny and metal speciﬁcity are not congruent – in agree-
ment with the ﬁndings of Haas et al. who deﬁned 15 phylogenetic
sub-groups for COG0523 members, with links to zinc homeostasis
found in several sub-groups, and various sub-groups containing
representatives with links to several different metal ions. A strong
link to znuABC- and zur-containing gene clusters is present in one
branch (1a) of the phylogenetic tree (Figure 6) for sequences from

Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus sp. WH8102. Analysis of the
genome environment for these sequences reveals co-localization
of COG0523 with a WD-40 repeat gene (Figure 4). This associa-
tion is also strongly conserved for other members in this branch,
although the functional signiﬁcance of the WD-40 repeat protein
is unclear. Interestingly, COG0523 sequences of branch 1a con-
tain long inserts (ca. 150 aa), distinct from those described above,
as they are not particularly rich in His residues (Figure 7). Sec-
ondary structure prediction for these inserts suggests the presence
of four to six β-strands and one or two short α-helices. It is con-
ceivable that this insert forms an additional domain in its own
right, though no similarity to any known domains was found in
an InterPro-scan search.

There is currently only one X-ray structure available for a
COG0523 protein – the YjiA protein from E. coli (Khil et al., 2004).
According to the analysis by Haas et al. (2009) YjiA belongs to their
subgroup 9, for which no clear association with any particular
metal ion was reported. The crystal structure (pdb 1NJI) also does
not contain any metal ions, but considering that the structure is a
product of a structural genomics effort, this may not be surprising.
Analysis of potential metal sites in the structure using the CHED
server (Levy et al., 2009) revealed the presence of two surface-
exposed sites with potential for metal-binding; these are both in
the GTPase domain and are composed of H23, E27, and H29, and
D52, D79, and D82.

We were interested to see whether it would be possible to pin-
point distinguishing elements that would indicate metal-binding
capacity, with the help of homology models for COG0523 proteins.
We therefore chose B0CCJ8_ACAM1 from Acaryochloris marina
that is present in branch 1 as a target for comparative model-
ing. The respective AM1_3031 gene is next to a WD-40 repeat
gene and also in the neighborhood of a zur gene (Figure 4). In
addition, we modeled B0CDJ7_ACAM1, since the gene for this
protein (AM1_3070) is co-localized with a putative znuABC sys-
tem (Figure 4). The sequence for this protein is located in branch
3b of the phylogenetic tree and is highlighted in Figure 6. Several
other closely related sequences from the same organism (includ-
ing some plasmid-encoded sequences) are present in all three
branches, but none of these occurs in a zinc-related genomic
context. The two models are shown in Figure 8. Beside a His-
rich loop between the two domains that also contains two Asp
and a Cys residue, there are no further recognizable metal sites
in B0CDJ7_ACAM1. In contrast, B0CCJ8_ACAM1 has a much
shorter loop comprising only two His and several Asp and Glu
residues that might bind a metal. Other branch 1b members also
contain this short loop, but so do some representatives from the
other sub-branches. The model also displays two further potential
metal sites composed of D132, H135, and H139, and E210, D212,
and E300, as identiﬁed using the CHED server, but only D132
and H135 are conserved within the branch, questioning the sig-
niﬁcance of these sites. The quest for the true metal-binding sites
and the mode of action of the zinc-related COG0523 proteins
remains open.

INTRACELLULAR HANDLING: METALLOTHIONEINS (BmtAs)
Metallothioneins, small proteins with a high content of cysteine
with the capability to bind multiple metal ions in metal–sulfur

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 11

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

FIGURE 6 | Phylogenetic tree for COG0523 family members. The
phylogenetic tree for cyanobacterial COG0523 family members was
generated in MEGA5 using the maximum likelihood method with the JJT
substitution model. Bootstrap values are the result of 1000 replications.
Sequences are labeled with UniProt accession numbers; the actual
sequences are documented Figure S3 in Supplementary Material, and a

rectangular tree including bootstrap statistics can be found Figure S4 in
Supplementary Material. The sequence of E. coli YjiA, the only COG0523
member for which an experimentally determined structure is available, was
also included in the tree. Entries with a genomic context linked to zinc
homeostasis are highlighted in purple (also see Table 1). Sub-branches are
labeled and discussed in the main text.

clusters, were initially reported as cadmium-binding proteins in
the livers and kidneys of mammals (Kägi, 1991). In the ﬁve

decades since their discovery (Margoshes and Vallee, 1957), genes
encoding metallothioneins have been identiﬁed in virtually all

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 12

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

FIGURE 7 | Examples of the six sub-groups of COG0523 family
members. All four homologs from Prochlorococcus marinus
CCMP1375 are shown, as well as two sequences from Acaryochloris
marina, structural models of which are shown in Figure 8. A further A.
marina representative from branch 2b and the potentially Zur-regulated
representative from Trichodesmium erythraeum (locus tag Tery_4617,
see text) have also been added. The sequences are labeled with their

location in the phylogenetic tree (see Figure 6). The ﬁrst three rows
correspond to the GTPase domain. This is followed by a highly variable
section. Group 1a is characterized by ca. 150 aa long inserts with no His
residues. Inserts of medium length are found for some representatives
of group 3. Very short linkers between the N-terminal GTPase domain
and the C-terminal domain (which is relatively well-conserved again) are
found in all three major groups.

phyla, and numerous studies regarding their biophysical prop-
erties (Blindauer and Leszczyszyn, 2010) and biological func-
tions (Davis and Cousins, 2000; Cobbett and Goldsbrough, 2002;
Klaassen et al., 2009) have been carried out. It has become clear
that their main function is not restricted to cadmium detoxiﬁ-
cation nor to responses to other chemical and physical stresses.
At least for vertebrates, it is now accepted that they also play a
more general and essential role in zinc homeostasis (Maret, 2009;
Colvin et al., 2010), and that they constitute an important link
between cellular redox state and zinc signaling networks (Maret,
2011).

The presence of metallothionein-like proteins in bacteria (for
recent reviews see (Blindauer, 2009, 2011) was ﬁrst indicated
in 1979, namely in the marine cyanobacterium Synechococcus

RRIMP N1 (Olafson et al., 1979). So-called “pseudo-thioneins”
were also discovered in cadmium-adapted Pseudomonas putida
(Higham et al., 1984). The ﬁrst gene for a bacterial metalloth-
ionein, smtA, was isolated from Synechococcus sp. PCC 7942
(Robinson et al., 1990), and was shown to be regulated by
the zinc-sensing transcriptional repressor SmtB. Phenotypically,
smtA knock-out mutants are hypersensitive to Zn2+
, and to
a lesser extent to Cd2+
, with no effect on tolerance to other
metal ions (Turner et al., 1993), even though smtA transcription
is stimulated not only by Zn2+
(which is by far the strongest
inducer) and Cd2+
, and
Ni2+
(Huckle et al., 1993). Moreover, SmtA expressed in E. coli
was shown to bind not only zinc and cadmium, but also cop-
per and mercury (Shi et al., 1992). Considering that SmtB is

, but also Hg2+

, Cu2+

, Co2+

, Cr3+

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 13

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

FIGURE 8 | Structural models for zinc-related COG0523 proteins from
Acaryochloris marina. (A) B0CCJ8_ACAM1 (AM1_3031). (B)
B0CDJ7_ACAM1 (AM1_3070). The N-terminal GTPase domains are shown on
the right hand side, the C-terminal extension that distinguishes COG0523
members from other metal-related G3E GTPases is shown on the left hand

side. The cysteines forming CCXC motifs in the GTPase domain are also
shown; their location in a β-strand makes their involvement in metal-binding
unlikely in these structures, as their sulfurs are too far apart. C69 and H34 in
B0CCJ8_ACAM1 are within >4 Å of each other, but no other potential
metal-binding residues are nearby.

clearly a Zn2+
-responsive metal sensor (Turner et al., 1996), the
documented responses to other metal ions may be mediated
indirectly, by displacement of Zn from proteins by these metal
ions.

As soon as the protein sequence of what was later to be called
SmtA was available, it was clear that apart from the high cysteine
content, there was very little sequence similarity between previ-
ously characterized metallothioneins and their bacterial counter-
parts (Olafson et al., 1988). However, it should be made clear
that this statement is essentially true for all MTs from different
phyla (Blindauer and Leszczyszyn, 2010). For example, in the ani-
mal kingdom, the sequences from MTs from nematodes, snails,
earthworms, and vertebrates are so divergent that it is not pos-
sible to demonstrate a clear evolutionary relationship. To some
extent, this is due to their small size, their low level of complex-
ity, and the absence of a deﬁned protein fold. The latter feature is
also reﬂected in the fact that the folding of MTs is dominated by
the formation of the metal–sulfur clusters, and unless the “cor-
rect” complement of metal ions is bound, MTs do not adopt
well-deﬁned conformations.

In that sense, bacterial metallothioneins of the BmtA type
are an exception – they contain a clearly identiﬁable zinc ﬁnger
fold (Blindauer et al., 2001, 2002; Blindauer and Sadler, 2005;
Figure 9A), and it has been demonstrated experimentally that the
constituents of this fold (residues 7–38) form an ordered, folded
structure, even if only one Zn2+
ion is bound to SmtA (Leszczyszyn
et al., 2007a). Another“special feature”that is becoming less excep-
tional as more and more MTs from other phyla are being studied,
is the presence of aromatic residues, including histidines, the latter
often with a direct involvement in metal-binding (Blindauer et al.,
2007; Leszczyszyn et al., 2007b; Blindauer, 2008a; Peroza et al.,
2009; Zeitoun-Ghandour et al., 2010).

The high abundance of cysteine residues are the cause of the
high thermodynamic stability of MT complexes with soft1 metal
+
and Cd2+
ions such as Cu
, and these tend to bind more strongly
to MTs than Zn2+
, which is classiﬁed as a borderline metal ion. It
should however be noted that thermodynamic stability is not nec-
essarily a criterion to determine which metal ions are handled by a
particular MT (or indeed a particular protein) in vivo. If the metal-
lated protein has not been obtained in its natively metallated form
from the natural source, it is important to take into account infor-
mation on which metal ion(s) induce(s) MT gene transcription
most strongly, whether the protein confers tolerance against a par-
ticular metal ion, and also on how well-folded the protein is in the
presence of different metal ions. Boﬁll et al. (2009) have compiled
large amounts of biophysical data on recombinantly expressed
MTs from a variety of species, and have suggested that there are
clear Cu-MTs and Zn/Cd-MTs, as well as MTs between these two
extremes with less well-deﬁned metal preferences.

SmtA is thought to be a prototypical Zn-MT. To some extent,
this is indeed also reﬂected in the in vitro properties of the
protein: the zinc ﬁnger site and fold require a four-coordinate
+
metal ion – which excludes Cu
as it prefers trigonal or linear
coordination modes with thiolate ligands. In addition, the two
His-containing metal sites augment the relative afﬁnity for Zn2+
compared to Cd2+
, although this is certainly not their sole pur-
pose (Blindauer et al., 2007). Nevertheless, SmtA folds equally
well in the presence of four Zn (Blindauer et al., 2001) or four
Cd (Blindauer et al., 2008) ions, or any mixture thereof, a fea-
ture that greatly facilitated the determination of its 3D structure.

1The terms “soft” and “borderline” refer to Pearson’s HSAB principle: Pearson
(1990).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 14

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

FIGURE 9 | Structural features of bacterial metallothioneins. (A)
NMR solution structure of Zn4SmtA. Residues important for the zinc
ﬁnger fold and metal ligands are highlighted. (B) Selected primary
sequences of BmtAs from marine cyanobacteria. The level of
conservation is different for different metal sites. Site A, the zinc ﬁnger
site, is fully conserved, as it is required for structural stability.

Conservation is also high for residues Y31 and A37; these mediate a
CH-π interaction between β hairpin and α-helix. The least conserved site
is site C, which is also the “business end” of BmtAs, i.e., the site that (in
SmtA) releases zinc most readily (Leszczyszyn et al., 2007a). It is
envisaged that the high variability of this site may allow to ﬁne-tune the
metal-binding and -release properties of different SmtAs.

Although no in-depth study of SmtA (or any other BmtA) loaded
with copper ions has so far been carried out, recombinant expres-
sion of SmtA in the presence of added copper yielded samples
with only ca. 1.5 copper ions bound, whereas contents of Cd2+
,
Hg2+
varied between ca. 4 and 6 when the respec-
tive metal ion was added to the culture medium (Shi et al.,
1992).

, and Zn2+

An analysis of the genomes of all marine cyanobacteria reveals
that 14 out of 33 sequenced genomes contain one or more genes for
a BmtA (Table 1; Figures 9B). The BmtA sequences were retrieved
using a protein vs. DNA TBLASTN search with the Synechococcus
sp. PCC 7942 sequence as query and the six-frame translations of
the genomic nucleotide databases. This is necessary to ensure that
all BmtAs are captured, as due to their small size, BmtA ORFs are
easy to overlook. This is illustrated by the fact that bmtA genes
are not annotated in the genomes of Microcoleus, Cyanobium, and
Crocosphaera watsonii, all of which are in their “Draft” stage, but

they have also been overlooked in the ﬁnished genome and plasmid
sequences of Acaryochloris marina.

In a select few genomes (Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002, Oscil-
latoria sp. PCC 6506, and the genome as well as pREB2 and
pREB6 plasmids of Acaryochloris marina) BmtAs occur in a clus-
ter together with SmtB. On the latter two plasmids, a COG0523
homolog is also nearby. In the Synechococcus sp. WH5701 genome,
both BmtAs are annotated, and WH5701_11219 (the latter num-
ber refers to the ﬁrst base of the start codon) is located near a
CsbD-like protein, thought to be involved in the general stress
response, a Cd/Co/HG/Pg/Zn-transporting ATPase, and the per-
mease and ATPase components of an ABC transporter, but since
no periplasmic component is present in the vicinity, the speciﬁcity
for this transporter cannot be predicted.

Several of the benthic strains also have SmtB homologs, for
example Microcoleus chthonoplastes and Lyngbya (in a cluster with
ZiaA), and Nodularia spumigena (intriguingly in a gene cluster

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 15

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

with an ABC transporter), but even though several open-ocean
and coastal marine Synechococcus (WH8102, WH8109, WH7803,
CC9311, CC9605) have genes for BmtA, there are no identiﬁable
SmtB or other known zinc excess sensors present. Therefore, it
remains unclear how the expression of these metallothionein genes
is regulated, although the discovery of two Zur boxes upstream of
BmtA in Synechococcus sp. WH8102 gives rise to the suggestion
that this strain might use its metallothionein in response to zinc
limitation rather than excess.

We note that although the prototype smtA clearly responds
most strongly to zinc, and the SmtA protein can be considered a
“zinc-metallothionein,” this may not necessarily hold true for all
homologs from marine strains. Since the concentrations of Cd2+
can be signiﬁcant in various natural seawaters, the marine BmtAs
may also help with dealing with this metal ion – potentially both
for preventing toxicity as well as in preparation for utilization as
a cofactor. Cd also has a nutrient-like proﬁle in stratiﬁed marine
waters, and there are several precedents where marine phytoplank-
ton have been found to utilize Cd instead of Zn (Lane et al., 2005).
If this was also common in marine cyanobacteria, BmtAs may
be part of this utilization network. Furthermore, it can also be
envisaged that some BmtAs may play a role in defense against
oxidative stress, as shown for metallothioneins from other species
(Zeitoun-Ghandour et al., 2011).

Finally, it should be highlighted that cyanobacteria are not
the only marine microorganisms with metallothioneins. Several
γ-proteobacteria of the genus Nitrosococcus also harbor bmtA
genes in their genomes, and additional bmtA sequences can also
be retrieved from marine metagenomes (Blindauer, 2008b), sug-
gesting that many more marine bacterial species utilize these
proteins.

CONCLUSION
At the time of writing this report (December 2011), there were 64
cyanobacterial genomes available, 35 of them from marine species.
Genome annotation must, ultimately, be based on experimental
evidence, and we have seen that there is a persistent shortfall of
reliable information regarding function of predicted proteins. This
is a general problem, witnessed by the large number of hypothetical
proteins even in ﬁnished genomes, but even in the case of well-
deﬁned protein families, annotations regarding metal speciﬁcity
have to be approached with caution. Our discussions emphasize
that sequence similarity alone does not hold the key to determine
metal speciﬁcity, but we believe that, amongst other approaches,
the generation of more sound data at the protein level is central to
reﬁne our ideas about how metal homeostasis works.

With this caveat in mind, we are highlighting in the following
some salient points from our analyses. The ubiquitous presence
of bona-ﬁde Zur and ZnuABC systems – both thought to be
involved in responding to a lack of cellular zinc – in all strains we
have studied suggests that these cyanobacteria are at the very least
capable of utilizing zinc. The identiﬁcation of putative Zur boxes
in several genomes we and others have inspected also suggests
that zinc levels are an integral part of the metabolic network of
marine cyanobacteria. Nevertheless, an absolute requirement for
zinc has not been demonstrated experimentally for any cyanobac-
terium – in the few instances where this has been studied, only

small reductions in growth rates were observed. This may indicate
that marine cyanobacteria have either very low zinc requirements,
or extremely efﬁcient uptake mechanisms, or both, enabling them
to thrive at extremely low free zinc concentrations. It would hence
be interesting to study whether cyanobacteria that are growing at
such extremely low zinc concentrations actually contain any zinc,
and if so, what the ratio of bio-accumulation is.

Genes for zinc excess sensors appear to be absent from the
genomes of open-ocean strains (Blindauer, 2008b), but other
strains including Microcoleus chthonoplastes, Synechococcus sp.
PCC 7002, and Oscillatoria sp. PCC 6506 have clear SmtB
homologs. Although the coastal strain Synechococcus sp. CC9311
does not appear to have SmtB, it not only has four BmtA homologs,
but also a putative CzrA efﬂux pump that is thought to be able to
transport zinc (and cobalt). Together with at least one ZnuABC
system and a putative ZIP transporter for uptake, as well as at least
one zinc-related COG0523 protein, this strain is expected to cope
well with both zinc excess and scarcity.

The suggestion that metallothioneins in marine Synechococcus
(e.g., WH8102) may be under the control of Zur is exciting. Whilst
this ﬁnding may at ﬁrst seem counterintuitive, it suggests that, also
in (some) bacteria, metallothioneins are not just devices to combat
metal toxicity, but may play a more central role in essential zinc
homeostasis. This hypothesis has been raised before (Robinson
et al., 2001; Blindauer, 2009), and this newly identiﬁed association
between Zur and BmtA provides support.

METHODS
Sequences of Fur-family proteins were retrieved from cyanobacte-
rial genomes using BLAST (Altschul et al., 1997). Brieﬂy, GenBank
ﬁles were retrieved for each genome and all protein sequences were
extracted using BioPerl (Stajich et al., 2002) and a custom BLAST
database was created for each genome. Fur-like proteins were
identiﬁed using the three Fur-like proteins previously identiﬁed
in Synechococcus sp. CC9311 as queries (accessions YP_730377.1,
−5.
YP_732019.1, and YP_730926.1) with an e value cutoff <10
Any duplications were removed and amino acid sequences were
aligned using clustalw (Larkin et al., 2007). The Fur amino acid
sequence from Escherichia coli and Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803,
along with Zur from Streptomyces coelicolor, Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis, and Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 were extracted from the
Protein Data Bank2. Phylogenetic analysis was carried out in mega
version 5 (Tamura et al., 2011).

Sequences for COG0523 family proteins were collected by
searching the fully sequenced and annotated cyanobacterial pro-
teomes plus all sequences from Oscillatoria sp. PCC 6506, Lyngbya
sp. PCC 8106, Microcoleus chthonoplastes sp. PCC 7420, Nodu-
laria spumigena sp. CCY9414, Crocosphaera watsonii WH 8501,
and Trichodesmium erythraeum IMS101 from UniProt with the
Pfam PF07683 Hidden Markov Model using hmmer4 with stan-
dard cutoffs. The collated sequences were ﬁltered for fragments
and aligned in jalview and muscle v.3.8 (Edgar, 2004), and were
manually adjusted where necessary.

2http://www.rcsb.org/

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 16

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

Gene Ortholog Neighborhood analyses were performed using
the respective resource on the Integrated Microbial Genome Server
(Markowitz et al., 2010).

Comparative modeling was carried out using Modeller ver-
sion 9.7 (Eswar et al., 2008). A dimeric assembly of Streptomyces
coelicolor Zur was generated from the two B chains in the orig-
inal pdb ﬁle (3MWM; Shin et al., 2011) using PISA3 (Krissinel
and Henrick, 2007). This dimeric structure was used as a tem-
plate for modeling the putative Zur from Prochlorococcus marinus
CCMP1375 (locus tag Pro1502). Template and model sequences
were aligned manually. Sidechains and improper dihedrals were
optimized with scwrl 3.0 (Wang et al., 2008). Inspection of ini-
tial models and sequence alignments suggested that Cys98 may
be a zinc ligand; this residue is highly conserved in all putative
Zur sequences from cyanobacteria (See Figure S2 in Supplemen-
tary Material). Hydrogens, Zn ions, and metal–ligand bonds were
added in MOE v. 2004.03. Energy minimization of the ﬁnal
model was performed in MOE using a customized Amber94
force-ﬁeld. Final structures were validated using the whatif
server4. Structural images (Figures 2, 8, and 9) were generated
with molmol v.2K.2 (Koradi et al., 1996). A similar strategy was

applied for modeling two putatively zinc-binding representatives
of the COG0523 family based on the E. coli protein as a tem-
plate (pdb-entry 1NIJ). The target template sequence alignment
made use of the hhpred (Soding et al., 2005) fold recognition
server.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank the Leverhulme Trust (F/00 215/AY) and the Nat-
ural Environment Research Council (grants NE/F004249/1 and
NE/G017948/1) for their support of this work, and the Al-Baath
University (Homs, Syria) for a scholarship to Amira Z. Ksibe.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiological_Chemistry/10.3389/
fmicb.2012.00142/abstract

Figure S1 | Phylogenetic tree for Fur/Zur-like proteins extracted from
genomes of marine cyanobacteria.

Figure S2 | Sequence alignment of Fur/Zur-like proteins.

Figure S3 | Phylogenetic tree for COG0523 family members.

3http://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/prot_int/cgi-bin/piserver
4http://swift.cmbi.ru.nl/servers/html/index.html

Figure S4 | Sequence alignment of members of the COG0523 protein
family from the genomes of cyanobacteria.

REFERENCES
Altschul, S. F., Madden, T. L., Schaf-
fer, A. A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z.,
Miller, W., and Lipman, D. J. (1997).
Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a
new generation of protein database
search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.
25, 3389–3402.

Anderson, M. A., Morel, F. M. M., and
Guillard, R. R. L. (1978). Growth
limitation of a coastal diatom by
low zinc ion activity. Nature 276,
70–71.

Andreini, C., Banci, L., Bertini, I., and
Rosato, A. (2006). Zinc through the
three domains of life. J. Proteome Res.
5, 3173–3178.

Andreini, C., Bertini, I., Cavallaro, G.,
Holliday, G. L., and Thornton, J.
M. (2008). Metal ions in biologi-
cal catalysis: from enzyme databases
to general principles. J. Biol. Inorg.
Chem. 13, 1205–1218.

Andreini, C., Bertini, I., and Rosato, A.
(2009). Metalloproteomes: a bioin-
formatic approach. Acc. Chem. Res.
42, 1471–1479.

Bagg, A., and Neilands, J. B. (1987).
Ferric uptake regulation protein acts
as a repressor, employing iron(II)
as a cofactor to bind the opera-
tor of an iron transport operon
in Escherichia coli. Biochemistry 26,
5471–5477.

Bertilsson, S., Berglund, O., Karl, D.
M., and Chisholm, S. W. (2003).
Elemental composition of marine

Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus:
implications for the ecological sto-
ichiometry of
sea. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 48, 1721–1731.

the

Blaby-Haas, C. E., Furman, R., Rodi-
onov, D. A., Artsimovitch,
I.,
and De Crecy-Lagard, V. (2011).
Role of a Zn-independent DksA
in Zn homeostasis
and strin-
gent response. Mol. Microbiol. 79,
700–715.

Blindauer, C. A. (2008a). Metalloth-
ioneins with unusual residues: his-
tidines as modulators of zinc afﬁnity
and reactivity. J. Inorg. Biochem. 102,
507–521.

Blindauer, C. A. (2008b). Zinc handling
in cyanobacteria – an update. Chem.
Biodivers. 5, 1990–2013.

Blindauer, C. A. (2009). “Bacterial met-
allothioneins,” in Metallothioneins
and Related Chelators, eds A. Sigel, H.
Sigel, and R. Sigel (Cambridge: The
Royal Society of Chemistry), 51–81.
Blindauer, C. A. (2011). Bacterial metal-
lothioneins: past, present, and ques-
tions for the future. J. Biol. Inorg.
Chem. 16, 1011–1024.

Blindauer, C. A., Harrison, M. D.,
Parkinson, J. A., Robinson, A. K.,
Cavet, J. S., Robinson, N. J., and
Sadler, P. J. (2001). A metalloth-
ionein containing a zinc ﬁnger
within a four-metal cluster pro-
tects a bacterium from zinc toxic-
ity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98,
9593–9598.

Blindauer, C. A., Harrison, M. D.,
Parkinson, J. A., Robinson, N. J.,
and Sadler, P. J. (2008). Isostructural
replacement of zinc by cadmium in
bacterial metallothionein. Met. Ions
Biol. Med. 10, 167–173.

Blindauer, C. A., Harrison, M. D.,
Robinson, A. K., Parkinson, J. A.,
Bowness, P. W., Sadler, P. J., and
Robinson, N. J. (2002). Multiple bac-
teria encode metallothioneins and
SmtA-like zinc ﬁngers. Mol. Micro-
biol. 45, 1421–1432.

Blindauer, C. A., and Leszczyszyn, O.
I. (2010). Metallothioneins: unpar-
alleled diversity in structures and
functions for metal ion homeosta-
sis and more. Nat. Prod. Rep. 27,
720–741.

Blindauer, C. A., Razi, M. T., Campopi-
ano, D. J., and Sadler, P. J. (2007).
Histidine ligands in bacterial metal-
lothionein enhance cluster stability.
J. Biol. Inorg. Chem. 12, 393–405.

Blindauer, C. A., and Sadler, P. J. (2005).
How to hide zinc in a small protein.
Acc. Chem. Res. 38, 62–69.

Boﬁll, R., Capdevila, M., and Atrian, S.
(2009). Independent metal-binding
features of recombinant metalloth-
ioneins convergently draw a step
gradation between Zn- and Cu-
thioneins. Metallomics 1, 229–234.

Bozym, R. A., Chimienti, F., Giblin, L.
J., Gross, G. W., Korichneva, I., Li, Y.
A., Libert, S., Maret, W., Parviz, M.,
Frederickson, C. J., and Thompson,

R. B. (2010). Free zinc ions outside
a narrow concentration range are
toxic to a variety of cells in vitro. Exp.
Biol. Med. 235, 741–750.

Brand, L. E., Sunda, W. G., and Guil-
lard, R. R. L. (1983). Limitation of
marine phytoplankton reproductive
rates by zinc, manganese, and iron.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 28, 1182–1198.

Bruland, K. W. (1980). Oceanographic
distribution of
zinc,
nickel, and copper in the North
Paciﬁc. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 47,
176–198.

cadmium,

Bruland, K. W. (1989). Complexation
of zinc by natural organic ligands
in the central North Paciﬁc. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 34, 269–285.

Bruland, K. W., Orians, K. J., and Cowen,
J. P. (1994). Reactive trace met-
als in the stratiﬁed central North
Paciﬁc. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta
58, 3171–3182.

Butler, A. (1998). Acquisition and uti-
lization of
ions
by marine organisms. Science 281,
207–210.

transition metal

Campbell, D. R., Chapman, K. E., Wal-
dron, K. J., Tottey, S., Kendall, S.,
Cavallaro, G., Andreini, C., Hinds,
J., Stoker, N. G., Robinson, N. J.,
and Cavet, J. S. (2007). Mycobac-
terial cells have dual nickel-cobalt
sensors – sequence relationships
and metal sites of metal-responsive
repressors are not congruent. J. Biol.
Chem. 282, 32298–32310.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 17

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

Cannon, G. C., Heinhorst, S., and
Kerfeld, C. A. (2010). Carboxyso-
mal carbonic anhydrases: structure
and role in microbial CO2 ﬁxa-
tion. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1804,
382–392.

Capone, D. G., Zehr, J. P., Paerl, H.
W., Bergman, B., and Carpenter, E.
J. (1997). Trichodesmium, a globally
signiﬁcant marine cyanobacterium.
Science 276, 1221–1229.

Cavet, J. S., Borrelly, G. P. M., and Robin-
son, N. J. (2003). Zn, Cu and Co
in cyanobacteria: selective control of
metal availability. FEMS Microbiol.
Rev. 27, 165–181.

Cavet, J. S., Meng, W. M., Pennella,
M. A., Applehoff, R. J., Giedroc,
D. P., and Robinson, N. J. (2002).
A nickel-cobalt-sensing ArsR-SmtB
family repressor – contributions of
cytosol and effector binding sites to
metal selectivity. J. Biol. Chem. 277,
38441–38448.

Coale, K. H., Johnson, K. S., Fitzwa-
ter, S. E., Gordon, R. M., Tanner, S.,
Chavez, F. P., Ferioli, L., Sakamoto,
C., Rogers, P., Millero, F., Stein-
berg, P., Nightingale, P., Cooper, D.,
Cochlan, W. P., Landry, M. R., Con-
stantinou, J., Rollwagen, G., Trasv-
ina,A., and Kudela, R. (1996). A mas-
sive phytoplankton bloom induced
by an ecosystem-scale iron fertil-
ization experiment
in the equa-
torial Paciﬁc Ocean. Nature 383,
495–501.

Cobbett, C., and Goldsbrough, P.
(2002). Phytochelatins and metal-
lothioneins: roles in heavy metal
detoxiﬁcation
homeostasis.
Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 53, 159–182.

and

Colvin, R. A., Holmes, W. R., Fontaine,
C. P., and Maret, W. (2010). Cytoso-
lic zinc buffering and mufﬂing: their
role in intracellular zinc homeosta-
sis. Metallomics 2, 306–317.

Cvetkovic,A., Menon,A. L., Thorgersen,
M. P., Scott, J. W., Poole, F. L., Jenney,
F. E., Lancaster, W. A., Praissman,
J. L., Shanmukh, S., Vaccaro, B. J.,
Trauger, S. A., Kalisiak, E., Apon,
J. V., Siuzdak, G., Yannone, S. M.,
Tainer, J. A., and Adams, M. W. W.
(2010). Microbial metalloproteomes
are largely uncharacterized. Nature
466, 779–782.

Davis, S. R., and Cousins, R. J. (2000).
Metallothionein expression in ani-
mals: a physiological perspective on
function. J. Nutr. 130, 1085–1088.

Debelius, B., Forja, J. M., and Lubian, L.
M. (2011). Toxicity of copper, nickel
and zinc to synechococcus popula-
tions from the strait of gibraltar. J.
Mar. Syst. 88, 113–119.

Decaria, L., Bertini, I., and Williams,
R. J. P. (2010). Zinc proteomes,

phylogenetics and evolution. Metal-
lomics 2, 706–709.

Dixon, J. L. (2008). Macro and micro
nutrient limitation of microbial pro-
ductivity in oligotrophic subtropical
Atlantic waters. Environ. Chem. 5,
135–142.

Donat, J. R., and Bruland, K. W. (1990).
A comparison of 2 voltammetric
techniques for determining zinc spe-
ciation in northeast Paciﬁc-Ocean
waters. Mar. Chem. 28, 301–323.

Dufresne, A., Garczarek, L., and Parten-
sky, F. (2005). Accelerated evolution
associated with genome reduction
in a free-living prokaryote. Genome
Biol. 6, R14.

Dufresne, A., Ostrowski, M., Scanlan, D.
J., Garczarek, L., Mazard, S., Palenik,
B. P., Paulsen, I. T., De Marsac, N.
T., Wincker, P., Dossat, C., Ferriera,
S., Johnson, J., Post, A. F., Hess, W.
R., and Partensky, F. (2008). Unravel-
ing the genomic mosaic of a ubiqui-
tous genus of marine cyanobacteria.
Genome Biol. 9, 16.

Dupont, C. L., Butcher, A., Valas, R. E.,
Bourne, P. E., and Caetano-Anolles,
G. (2010). History of biological
metal utilization inferred through
phylogenomic analysis of protein
structures. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 107, 10567–10572.

Dupont, C. L., and Caetano-Anolles, G.
(2010). Mulkidjanian and Galperin:
Zn may have constrained evolution
during the Proterozoic but not the
Archean Reply. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 107, E138.

Edgar, R. C. (2004). MUSCLE: multiple
sequence alignment with high accu-
racy and high throughput. Nucleic
Acids Res. 32, 1792–1797.

Eide, D. J. (2006). Zinc transporters
trafﬁcking of
and the
zinc. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1763,
711–722.

cellular

Ellwood, M. J., and van den Berg, C.
M. G. (2000). Zinc speciation in the
Northeastern Atlantic Ocean. Mar.
Chem. 68, 295–306.

Eswar, N., Eramian, D., Webb, B., Shen,
M.-Y., and Sali, A. (2008). “Pro-
tein structure modeling with MOD-
ELLER,” in Methods in Molecular
Biology, eds B. Kobe, M. Guss, and T.
Huber (Totowa, NJ: Humana Press
Inc), 145–159.

Finney, L. A., and O’Halloran, T. V.
(2003). Transition metal speciation
in the cell: insights from the chem-
istry of metal ion receptors. Science
300, 931–936.

Fukada, T., and Kambe, T. (2011).
Molecular and genetic features of
zinc
in physiology
and pathogenesis. Metallomics 3,
662–674.

transporters

Fuller, N. J., Tarran, G. A., Yallop, M.,
Orcutt, K. M., and Scanlan, D. J.
(2006). Molecular analysis of pic-
ocyanobacterial community struc-
ture along an Arabian Sea tran-
sect reveals distinct spatial separa-
tion of lineages. Limnol. Oceanogr.
51, 2515–2526.

Gabriel, S. E., and Helmann, J. D. (2009).
Contributions of Zur-controlled
ribosomal proteins to growth under
zinc starvation conditions. J. Bacte-
riol. 191, 6116–6122.

Gabriel, S. E., Miyagi, F., Gaballa, A.,
and Helmann, J. D. (2008). Regula-
tion of the Bacillus subtilis yciC gene
and insights into the DNA-binding
speciﬁcity of the zinc-sensing met-
alloregulator zur. J. Bacteriol. 190,
3482–3488.

Giedroc, D. P.,

and Arunkumar,
I. (2007). Metal sensor pro-
A.
teins:
nature’s metalloregulated
allosteric switches. Dalton Trans.
3107–3120.

Goericke, R., and Repeta, D. J. (1992).
The pigments of Prochlorococcus
marinus – the presence of divinyl
chlorophyll-a
and chlorophyll-b
in a marine prokaryote. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 37, 425–433.

Graham, A. I., Hunt, S., Stokes, S.
L., Bramall, N., Bunch, J., Cox, A.
G., Mcleod, C. W., and Poole, R.
K. (2009). Severe zinc depletion
of Escherichia coli roles for high
afﬁnity zinc binding by ZinT, zinc
and zinc-independent
transport
proteins.
J. Biol. Chem.
284,
18377–18389.

Haas, C. E., Rodionov, D. A., Kropat, J.,
Malasarn, D., Merchant, S. S., and
De Crecy-Lagard, V. (2009). A sub-
set of the diverse COG0523 fam-
ily of putative metal chaperones is
linked to zinc homeostasis in all
kingdoms of life. BMC Genomics 10,
470. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-10-470
Hantke, K. (2005). Bacterial zinc uptake
and regulators. Curr. Opin. Micro-
biol. 8, 196–202.

Heldal, M., Scanlan, D. J., Norland,
S., Thingstad, F., and Mann, N.
H. (2003). Elemental composition
of single cells of various strains
of marine Prochlorococcus
and
Synechococcus using X-ray micro-
analysis. Limnol. Oceanogr.
48,
1732–1743.

Higham, D. P., Sadler, P.

J., and
Scawen, M. D. (1984). Cadmium-
resistant Pseudomonas putida syn-
thesizes novel cadmium proteins.
Science 225, 1043–1046.

Ho, T. Y., Quigg, A., Finkel, Z. V., Mil-
ligan, A. J., Wyman, K., Falkowski,
P. G., and Morel, F. M. M. (2003).
The elemental composition of some

marine phytoplankton. J. Phycol. 39,
1145–1159.

Hong, S. M., Candelone, J. P., Turetta, C.,
and Boutron, C. F. (1996). Changes
in natural
lead, copper, zinc and
cadmium concentrations in central
Greenland ice from 8250 to 149,100
years ago: their association with cli-
matic changes and resultant varia-
tions of dominant source contribu-
tions. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 143,
233–244.

Huckle, J. W., Morby, A. P., Turner, J.
S., and Robinson, N. J. (1993). Iso-
lation of a prokaryotic metalloth-
ionein locus and analysis of tran-
scriptional control by trace metal
ions. Mol. Microbiol. 7, 177–187.

Irving, H., and Williams, R.

Hunter, K. A., and Boyd, P. (1999). Bio-
geochemistry of trace metals in the
ocean. Mar. Freshw. Res. 50, 739–753.
J. P.
(1953). The stability of transition-
metal complexes.
J. Chem. Soc.
3192–3210.

Jacquamet, L., Traore, D. A. K., Ferrer,
J. L., Proux, O., Testemale, D., Haze-
mann, J. L., Nazarenko, E., El Gha-
zouani, A., Caux-Thang, C., Duarte,
V., and Latour, J. M. (2009). Struc-
tural characterization of the active
form of PerR:
insights into the
metal-induced activation of PerR
and Fur proteins for DNA binding.
Mol. Microbiol. 73, 20–31.

Jakuba, R. W., Moffett, J. W., and
Dyhrman, S. T. (2008). Evidence for
the linked biogeochemical cycling
of zinc, cobalt, and phosphorus in
the western North Atlantic Ocean.
Global Biogeochem. Cycle 22, 13.

Jardillier, L., Zubkov, M. V., Pearman, J.,
and Scanlan, D. J. (2010). Signiﬁcant
CO2 ﬁxation by small prymnesio-
phytes in the subtropical and trop-
ical northeast Atlantic Ocean. ISME
J. 4, 1180–1192.

Kägi, J. H. R. (1991). Overview of met-
allothionein. Meth. Enzymol. 205,
613–626.

Kalliﬁdas, D., Pascoe, B., Owen, G. A.,
Strain-Damerell, C. M., Hong, H. J.,
and Paget, M. S. B. (2010). The Zinc-
responsive regulator Zur controls
expression of the coelibactin gene
cluster in Streptomyces coelicolor. J.
Bacteriol. 192, 608–611.

Kathuria, S., and Martiny, A. C. (2011).
Prevalence of a calcium-based alka-
line phosphatase associated with the
marine cyanobacterium Prochloro-
coccus and other ocean bacteria. Env-
iron. Microbiol. 13, 74–83.

Kettler, G. C., Martiny, A. C., Huang, K.,
Zucker, J., Coleman, M. L., Rodrigue,
S., Chen, F., Lapidus, A., Ferriera, S.,
Johnson, J., Steglich, C., Church, G.
M., Richardson, P., and Chisholm,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 18

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

S. W. (2007). Patterns and implica-
tions of gene gain and loss in the
evolution of Prochlorococcus. PLoS
Genet. 3, e231. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pgen.0030231

Khil, P. P., Obmolova, G., Teplyakov,
A., Howard, A. J., Gilliland, G. L.,
and Camerini-Otero, R. D. (2004).
Crystal structure of the Escherichia
coli YjiA protein suggests a GTP-
dependent regulatory function. Pro-
teins 54, 371–374.

Klaassen, C. D., Liu, J., and Diwan,
B. A.
(2009). Metallothionein
protection of cadmium toxicity.
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol.
238,
215–220.

Koradi, R., Billeter, M., and Wuthrich,
K. (1996). MOLMOL: a program for
display and analysis of macromole-
cular structures. J. Mol. Graph. 14,
51–55.

Krezel, A., and Maret, W. (2006). Zinc-
buffering capacity of a eukaryotic
cell at physiological pZn. J. Biol.
Inorg. Chem. 11, 1049–1062.

Krissinel, E., and Henrick, K. (2007).
Inference of macromolecular assem-
blies from crystalline state. J. Mol.
Biol. 372, 774–797.

Kuhl, M., Chen, M., Ralph, P.

J.,
Schreiber, U., and Larkum, A. W.
D. (2005). A niche for cyanobacte-
ria containing chlorophyll d. Nature
433, 820.

Lane, T. W., Saito, M. A., George, G.
N., Pickering, I. J., Prince, R. C.,
and Morel, F. M. M. (2005). A
cadmium enzyme from a marine
diatom. Nature 435, 42.

Larkin, M. A., Blackshields, G., Brown,
N. P., Chenna, R., Mcgettigan, P. A.,
Mcwilliam, H., Valentin, F., Wallace,
I. M., Wilm, A., Lopez, R., Thomp-
son, J. D., Gibson, T. J., and Hig-
gins, D. G. (2007). Clustal W and
Clustal X version 2.0. Bioinformatics
23, 2947–2948.

Leao, P. N., Vasconcelos, M., and Vas-
concelos, V. M. (2007). Role of
marine cyanobacteria in trace metal
bioavailability in seawater. Microb.
Ecol. 53, 104–109.

Lee, J. G., and Morel, F. M. M. (1995).
Replacement of zinc by cadmium
in marine phytoplankton. Mar. Ecol.
Prog. Ser. 127, 305–309.

Lee, J. W., and Helmann, J. D. (2007).
Functional specialization within the
Fur family of metalloregulators. Bio-
metals 20, 485–499.

Leipe, D. D., Wolf, Y. I., Koonin, E.
V., and Aravind, L. (2002). Clas-
siﬁcation and evolution of P-loop
GTPases and related ATPases. J. Mol.
Biol. 317, 41–72.

Leszczyszyn, O. I., Evans, C. D., Keiper,
S. E., Warren, G. Z. L., and Blindauer,

C. A. (2007a). Differential reactiv-
ity of individual zinc ions in clus-
ters from bacterial metallothioneins.
Inorganica Chim. Acta 360, 3–13.

Leszczyszyn, O. I., Schmid, R., and
Blindauer, C. A. (2007b). Toward
a property/function relationship for
metallothioneins: histidine coordi-
nation and unusual cluster composi-
tion in a zinc-metal lothionein from
plants. Proteins 68, 922–935.

Levi, P. (1984). The Periodic Table.

New York: Schocken Books.

Levy, R., Edelman, M., and Sobolev,
V. (2009). Prediction of 3D metal
binding
from translated
gene sequences based on remote-
homology templates. Proteins 76,
365–374.

sites

Li, W. K. W. (1994). Primary produc-
tion of prochlorophytes, cyanobac-
teria, and eukaryotic ultraphyto-
plankton – measurements
from
ﬂow cytometric sorting. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 39, 169–175.

Lohan, M. C., Crawford, D. W., Purdie,
D. A., and Statham, P. J. (2005). Iron
and zinc enrichments in the north-
eastern subarctic Paciﬁc: ligand pro-
duction and zinc availability in
response to phytoplankton growth.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 50, 1427–1437.

López-Gomollón, S., Sevilla, E., Bes,
M. T., Peleato, M. L., and Fillat,
M. F. (2009). New insights into the
role of Fur proteins: FurB (All2473)
from Anabaena protects DNA and
increases cell survival under oxida-
tive stress. Biochem. J. 418, 201–207
Lucarelli, D., Russo, S., Garman, E.,
Milano, A., Meyer-Klaucke, W., and
Pohl, E. (2007). Crystal structure
and function of
the zinc uptake
regulator FurB from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.
J. Biol. Chem. 282,
9914–9922.

Luisi, B. (1992). DNA transcription –
zinc standard for economy. Nature
356, 379–380.

Ma, Z., Gabriel, S. E., and Helmann, J. D.
(2011). Sequential binding and sens-
ing of Zn(II) by Bacillus subtilis Zur.
Nucleic Acids Res. 39, 9130–9138.

Makarova, K. S., Ponomarev, V. A.,
and Koonin, E. V. (2001). Two C
or not two C: recurrent disruption
of Zn-ribbons, gene duplication,
lineage-speciﬁc gene loss, and hor-
izontal gene
in evolu-
tion of bacterial ribosomal proteins.
Genome Biol. 2, R33.

transfer

Mann, E. L., Ahlgren, N., Moffett, J.
W., and Chisholm, S. W. (2002).
Copper toxicity and cyanobacteria
ecology in the Sargasso Sea. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 47, 976–988.

Maret, W. (2009). Molecular aspects
of human cellular zinc homeostasis:

redox control of zinc potentials and
zinc signals. Biometals 22, 149–157.
Maret, W. (2011). Redox biochemistry
of mammalian metallothioneins. J.
Biol. Inorg. Chem. 16, 1079–1086.

Margoshes, M., and Vallee, B. L. (1957).
A cadmium protein from equine
kidney cortex. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 79,
4813–4814.

Markowitz, V. M., Chen, I. M. A.,
Palaniappan, K., Chu, K., Szeto, E.,
Grechkin,Y., Ratner,A.,Anderson, I.,
Lykidis, A., Mavromatis, K., Ivanova,
N. N., and Kyrpides, N. C. (2010).
The integrated microbial genomes
system: an expanding comparative
analysis resource. Nucleic Acids Res.
38, D382–D390.

Moore, L. R., Ostrowski, M., Scanlan, D.
J., Feren, K., and Sweetsir, T. (2005).
Ecotypic variation in phospho-
rus acquisition mechanisms within
marine picocyanobacteria. Aquat.
Microb. Ecol. 39, 257–269.

(1998). Physiology

Moore, L. R., Rocap, G., and Chisholm,
S. W.
and
molecular phylogeny of coexist-
ing Prochlorococcus ecotypes. Nature
393, 464–467.

Morel, F. M. M.

(2008). The co-
evolution of phytoplankton and
trace element cycles in the oceans.
Geobiology 6, 318–324.

Morel, F. M. M., Reinfelder, J. R.,
Roberts, S. B., Chamberlain, C. P.,
Lee,
J. G., and Yee, D. (1994).
Zinc and carbon co-limitation of
marine phytoplankton. Nature 369,
740–742.

Mulkidjanian, A. Y., and Galperin, M.
Y. (2009). On the origin of life in
the zinc world. 2. Validation of the
hypothesis on the photosynthesizing
zinc sulﬁde ediﬁces as cradles of life
on Earth. Biol. Direct 4, 37.

Napolitano, M., Rubio, M. A.,
Santamaría-Gómez,
J., Olmedo-
Verd, E., Robinson, N. J., and Luque,
I. (2012). Characterization of the
response
in
cyanobacterium Anabaena
the
sp.
PCC 7120.
Bacteriol.
doi:10.1128/JB.00090–12.

zinc-deﬁciency

to

J.

Novichkov, P. S., Laikova, O. N.,
Novichkova, E. S., Gelfand, M. S.,
Arkin, A. P., Dubchak, I., and Rodi-
onov, D. A. (2010). RegPrecise: a
database of curated genomic infer-
ences of transcriptional regulatory
interactions in prokaryotes. Nucleic
Acids Res. 38, D111–D118.

Ochsner, U. A., Vasil, A. I., and Vasil, M.
L. (1995). Role of the ferric uptake
regulator of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
in the regulation of siderophores and
exotoxin A expression: puriﬁcation
and activity on iron-regulated pro-
moters. J. Bacteriol. 177, 7194–7201.

Ohkubo, S., Miyashita, H., Murakami,
A., Takeyama, H., Tsuchiya, T.,
and Mimuro, M. (2006). Molecular
detection of epiphytic Acaryochloris
spp. on marine macroalgae. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 72, 7912–7915.

Olafson, R. W., Abel, K., and Sim, R.
G. (1979). Prokaryotic metalloth-
ionein – preliminary characteriza-
tion of a blue green alga heavy metal-
binding protein. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 89, 36–43.

Olafson, R. W., Mccubbin, W. D.,
and Kay, C. M. (1988). Primary-
and secondary-structural analysis
of a unique prokaryotic metalloth-
ionein from a Synechococcus
sp.
cyanobacterium. Biochem. J. 251,
691–699.

Osman, D., and Cavet, J. S. (2010). Bac-
terial metal-sensing proteins exem-
pliﬁed by ArsR-SmtB family repres-
sors. Nat. Prod. Rep. 27, 668–680.

Ostrowski, M., Mazard, S., Tetu, S. G.,
Phillippy, K., Johnson, A., Palenik,
B., Paulsen, I. T., and Scanlan, D. J.
(2010). PtrA is required for coordi-
nate regulation of gene expression
during phosphate stress in a marine
Synechococcus. ISME J. 4, 908–921.

Outten, C. E., and O’Halloran, T. V.
(2001). Femtomolar sensitivity of
metalloregulatory proteins control-
ling zinc homeostasis. Science 292,
2488–2492.

Owen, G. A., Pascoe, B., Kalliﬁdas, D.,
and Paget, M. S. B. (2007). Zinc-
responsive regulation of alternative
ribosomal protein genes in Strepto-
myces coelicolor involves Zur and σR.
J. Bacteriol. 189, 4078–4086.

Palenik, B., Brahamsha, B., Larimer, F.
W., Land, M., Hauser, L., Chain, P.,
Lamerdin, J., Regala, W., Allen, E. E.,
Mccarren, J., Paulsen, I., Dufresne,
A., Partensky, F., Webb, E. A., and
Waterbury, J. (2003). The genome
of a motile marine Synechococcus.
Nature 424, 1037–1042.

Palenik, B., Ren, Q. H., Dupont, C. L.,
Myers, G. S., Heidelberg, J. F., Bad-
ger, J. H., Madupu, R., Nelson, W.
C., Brinkac, L. M., Dodson, R. J.,
Durkin, A. S., Daugherty, S. C., Sul-
livan, S. A., Khouri, H., Mohamoud,
Y., Halpin, R., and Paulsen, I. T.
(2006). Genome sequence of Syne-
chococcus CC9311:
into
adaptation to a coastal environment.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103,
13555–13559.

insights

Panina, E. M., Mironov, A. A., and
Gelfand, M. S. (2003). Comparative
genomics of bacterial zinc regulons:
enhanced ion transport, pathogene-
sis, and rearrangement of ribosomal
proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
100, 9912–9917.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 19

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

Partensky, C., and Garczarek, L. (2003).
“The photosynthetic apparatus of
chlorophyll b- and d- containing
oxychlorobacteria,” in Photosynthe-
sis in Algae, Vol. 14, eds A. W. D.
Larkum, S. E. Douglas, and J. A.
Raven (Dordrecht: Kluwer Acade-
mic Publishers), 29–62.

Partensky, F., and Garczarek, L. (2010).
Prochlorococcus: advantages and lim-
its of minimalism. Ann. Rev. Mar.
Sci. 2, 305–331.

Partensky, F., Hess, W. R., and Vaulot,
D. (1999). Prochlorococcus, a marine
photosynthetic prokaryote of global
signiﬁcance. Microbiol. Mol. Biol.
Rev. 63, 106–127.

Patzer, S. I., and Hantke, K. (2000). The
zinc-responsive regulator Zur and
its control of the znu gene cluster
encoding the ZnuABC zinc uptake
system in Escherichia coli. J. Biol.
Chem. 275, 24321–24332.

Pearson, R. G. (1990). Hard and soft
acids and bases – the evolution of a
chemical concept. Coord. Chem. Rev.
100, 403–425.

Peroza, E. A., Schmucki, R., Guntert, P.,
Freisinger, E., and Zerbe, O. (2009).
The βE-domain of wheat E-c-1
metallothionein: a metal-binding
domain with a distinctive structure.
J. Mol. Biol. 387, 207–218.

Pohl, E., Haller, J. C., Mijovilovich, A.,
Meyer-Klaucke, W., Garman, E., and
Vasil, M. L. (2003). Architecture of a
protein central to iron homeostasis:
crystal structure and spectroscopic
analysis of the ferric uptake regula-
tor. Mol. Microbiol. 47, 903–915.

Quigg, A., Finkel, Z. V., Irwin, A. J.,
Rosenthal, Y., Ho, T. Y., Reinfelder, J.
R., Schoﬁeld, O., Morel, F. M. M., and
Falkowski, P. G. (2003). The evolu-
tionary inheritance of elemental sto-
ichiometry in marine phytoplank-
ton. Nature 425, 291–294.

Quigg, A., Irwin, A. J., and Finkel, Z.
V. (2011). Evolutionary inheritance
of elemental stoichiometry in phyto-
plankton. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol.
Sci. 278, 526–534.

Raymond, J., and Blankenship, R. E.
(2004). Biosynthetic pathways, gene
replacement and the antiquity of life.
Geobiology 2, 199–203.

Robinson, N. J., Gupta, A., Fordham-
Skelton, A. P., Croy, R. R. D.,
Whitton, B. A., and Huckle,
J.
W. (1990). Prokaryotic metalloth-
ionein gene characterization and
expression: chromosome crawling
by ligation-mediated PCR. Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 242, 241–247.
Robinson, N. J., Whitehall, S. K., and
Cavet, J. S. (2001). Microbial metal-
lothioneins. Adv. Microb. Physiol. 44,
183–213.

Saito, M. A., Goepfert, T. J., and Ritt,
J. T. (2008). Some thoughts on
the concept of colimitation: three
deﬁnitions and the importance of
bioavailability. Limnol. Oceanogr. 53,
276–290.

Saito, M. A., Moffett, J. W., Chisholm,
S. W., and Waterbury, J. B. (2002).
Cobalt
limitation and uptake in
Prochlorococcus. Limnol. Oceanogr.
47, 1629–1636.

Saito, M. A., Rocap, G., and Moffett,
J. W. (2005). Production of cobalt
binding ligands in a Synechococcus
feature at the Costa Rica upwelling
dome.
50,
279–290.

Limnol. Oceanogr.

Saito, M. A., Sigman, D. M., and Morel,
F. M. M. (2003). The bioinorganic
chemistry of the ancient ocean: the
co-evolution of cyanobacterial metal
requirements and biogeochemical
cycles at the Archean-Proterozoic
boundary? Inorganica Chim. Acta
356, 308–318.

Scanlan, D.

J. (2003). Physiological
diversity and niche adaptation in
marine Synechococcus. Adv. Microb.
Physiol. 47, 1–64.

Scanlan, D. J., Ostrowski, M., Mazard,
S., Dufresne, A., Garczarek, L., Hess,
W. R., Post, A. F., Hagemann, M.,
Paulsen, I., and Partensky, F. (2009).
Ecological genomics of marine pic-
ocyanobacteria. Microbiol. Mol. Biol.
Rev. 73, 249–299.

Schulz, K. G., Zondervan,

I., Ger-
ringa, L.
J. A., Timmermans,
K. R., Veldhuis, M.
J. W., and
Riebesell, U.
(2004). Effect of
trace metal availability on coccol-
ithophorid calciﬁcation. Nature 430,
673–676.

Shapiro, L. P., and Haugen, E. M. (1988).
Seasonal distribution and tempera-
ture tolerance of Synechococcus in
Boothbay Harbor, Maine. Estuar.
Coast. Shelf Sci. 26, 517–525.

Sheikh, M. A., and Taylor, G. L.
(2009). Crystal structure of the Vib-
rio cholerae ferric uptake regula-
tor (Fur) reveals insights into metal
co-ordination. Mol. Microbiol. 72,
1208–1220.

Shi, J., Lindsay, W. P., Huckle, J. W.,
Morby, A. P., and Robinson, N. J.
(1992). Cyanobacterial metalloth-
ionein gene expressed in Escherichia
coli. Metal-binding properties of the
expressed protein. FEBS Lett. 303,
159–163.

Shin, J. H., Jung, H. J., An, Y. J., Cho,
Y. B., Cha, S. S., and Roe, J. H.
(2011). Graded expression of zinc-
responsive genes through two reg-
ulatory zinc-binding sites in Zur.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108,
5045–5050.

Soding, J., Biegert, A., and Lupas, A.
N. (2005). The HHpred interac-
tive server for protein homology
detection and structure prediction.
Nucleic Acids Res. 33, W244–W248.
Stajich, J. E., Block, D., Boulez, K., Bren-
ner, S. E., Chervitz, S. A., Dagdigian,
C., Fuellen, G., Gilbert, J. G., Korf, I.,
Lapp, H., Lehvaslaiho, H., Matsalla,
C., Mungall, C. J., Osborne, B. I.,
Pocock, M. R., Schattner, P., Senger,
M., Stein, L. D., Stupka, E., Wilkin-
son, M. D., and Birney, E. (2002).
The Bioperl toolkit: perl modules
for the life sciences. Genome Res. 12,
1611–1618.

Sunda, W. G., and Huntsman, S.
A. (1992). Feedback Interactions
between zinc and phytoplankton
in seawater. Limnol. Oceanogr. 37,
25–40.

Sunda, W. G., and Huntsman, S. A.
(1995). Cobalt and zinc interre-
placement in marine phytoplank-
ton: biological and geochemical
implications. Limnol. Oceanogr. 40,
1404–1417.

Sunda, W. G., and Huntsman, S. A.
(2000). Effect of Zn, Mn, and Fe on
Cd accumulation in phytoplankton:
implications for oceanic Cd cycling.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 45, 1501–1516.

Sunda, W. G., and Huntsman, S. A.
(2005). Effect of CO2 supply and
demand on zinc uptake and growth
limitation in a coastal diatom. Lim-
nol. Oceanogr. 50, 1181–1192.

Sunda, W. G., Price, N. M., and
Morel, F. M. M. (2005). “Trace
metal ion buffers and their use in
culture studies,” in Algal Cultur-
ing Techniques, ed. R. A. Andersen
(Burlington, MA: Academic Press),
35–63.

Swingley, W. D., Chen, M., Cheung,
P. C., Conrad, A. L., Dejesa, L. C.,
Hao, J., Honchak, B. M., Karbach,
L. E., Kurdoglu, A., Lahiri, S.,
Mastrian, S. D., Miyashita, H.,
Page, L., Ramakrishna, P., Satoh, S.,
Sattley, W. M., Shimada, Y., Taylor,
H. L., Tomo, T., Tsuchiya, T., Wang,
Z. T., Raymond, J., Mimuro, M.,
Blankenship, R. E., and Touchman,
J. W.
(2008). Niche adaptation
and genome
expansion in the
chlorophyll d-producing cyanobac-
terium Acarylochloris marina.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
2005–2010.

Tamura, K., Peterson, D., Peterson,
N., Stecher, G., Nei, M.,
and
Kumar, S. (2011). MEGA5: molec-
ular evolutionary genetics analysis
using maximum likelihood, evolu-
tionary distance, and maximum par-
simony methods. Mol. Biol. Evol. 28,
2731–2739.

Thelwell, C., Robinson, N.

J., and
Turner-Cavet, J. S. (1998). An SmtB-
like repressor from Synechocystis
PCC 6803 regulates a zinc exporter.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95,
10728–10733.

Thuroczy, C. E., Boye, M., and Losno,
R. (2010). Dissolution of cobalt
and zinc from natural and anthro-
pogenic dusts in seawater. Biogeo-
sciences 7, 1927–1936.

Tottey, S., Waldron, K. J., Firbank, S.
J., Reale, B., Bessant, C., Sato, K.,
Cheek, T. R., Gray, J., Banﬁeld, M.
J., Dennison, C., and Robinson, N. J.
(2008). Protein-folding location can
regulate manganese binding versus
copper- or zinc-binding. Nature 455,
1138–1142.

Tripp, H. J., Bench, S. R., Turk, K.
A., Foster, R. A., Desany, B. A.,
Niazi, F., Affourtit, J. P., and Zehr,
J. P. (2010). Metabolic streamlin-
ing in an open-ocean nitrogen-
ﬁxing cyanobacterium. Nature 464,
90–94.

Turner, J. S., Glands, P. D., Samson, A.
C. R., and Robinson, N. J. (1996).
Zn2+
-sensing by the cyanobacterial
metallothionein repressor SmtB: dif-
ferent motifs mediate metal-induced
protein-DNA dissociation. Nucleic
Acids Res. 24, 3714–3721.

Turner, J. S., Morby, A. P., Whitton, B.
A., Gupta, A., and Robinson, N. J.
(1993). Construction of Zn2+
/Cd2+
hypersensitive
cyanobacterial
mutants lacking a functional metal-
lothionein locus. J. Biol. Chem. 268,
4494–4498.

Waldron, K. J., and Robinson, N. J.
(2009). How do bacterial cells ensure
that metalloproteins get the cor-
rect metal? Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 7,
25–35.

Waldron, K. J., Rutherford, J. C., Ford,
D., and Robinson, N. J. (2009).
Metalloproteins and metal sensing.
Nature 460, 823–830.

Wang, Q., Canutescu, A. A., and Dun-
brack, R. L. (2008). SCWRL and
MolIDE: computer programs for
side-chain conformation prediction
and homology modeling. Nat. Pro-
toc. 3, 1832–1847.

Waterbury, R. D., Byrne, R. H., Kelly,
J., Leader, B., Mcelligott, S., and
Russell, R. (1996). Development of
an Underwater In-Situ Spectropho-
tometric Sensor for Seawater pH.
Bellingham: Spie – Int Soc Optical
Engineering.

Wells, M. L., Kozelka, P. B., and Bruland,
K. W. (1998). The complexation of
‘dissolved’ Cu, Zn, Cd and Pb by sol-
uble and colloidal organic matter in
Narragansett Bay, RI. Mar. Chem. 62,
203–217.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 20

Barnett et al.

Zinc homeostasis in cyanobacteria

West, N. J., and Scanlan, D. J. (1999).
Niche-partitioning of Prochlorococ-
cus populations in a stratiﬁed water
column in the eastern North Atlantic
Ocean. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65,
2585–2591.

Whitton, B. A., and Potts, M. (2000).
The Ecology of Cyanobacteria: Their
Diversity in Time and Space. Dor-
drecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Wilhelm, S. W., and Trick, C. G. (1994).
Iron-limited growth of cyanobacte-
ria – multiple siderophore produc-
tion is a common response. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 39, 1979–1984.

Williams, R.

J. P.

(2011). Chemi-
cal advances in evolution by and
changes in use of space during time.
J. Theor. Biol. 268, 146–159.

Williams, R. J. P., and Da Silva, J. J. R.
F. (2000). The distribution of ele-
ments in cells. Coord. Chem. Rev.
200, 247–348.

Williams, R. J. P., and Da Silva, J. J.
R. F. (2001). The Biological Chem-
istry of the Elements: The Inorganic

Chemistry of Life. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Williams, R. J. P., and Da Silva, J. J.
R. F. (2003). Evolution was chemi-
cally constrained. J. Theor. Biol. 220,
323–343.

Wiramanaden, C. I. E., Cullen, J. T.,
Ross, A. R. S., and Orians, K.
J. (2008). Cyanobacterial copper-
binding ligands isolated from arti-
ﬁcial seawater cultures. Mar. Chem.
110, 28–41.

Xu, Y., Feng, L., Jeffrey, P. D., Shi, Y. G.,
and Morel, F. M. M. (2008). Struc-
ture and metal exchange in the cad-
mium carbonic anhydrase of marine
diatoms. Nature 452, U56–U53.

Zehr, J. P. (2011). Nitrogen ﬁxation by
marine cyanobacteria. Trends Micro-
biol. 19, 162–173.

Zehr, J. P., Bench, S. R., Mondragon,
E. A., McCarren, J., and Delong,
E. F. (2007). Low genomic diver-
sity in tropical oceanic N2–ﬁxing
cyanobacteria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 104, 17807–17812.

Zeitoun-Ghandour, S., Charnock, J.,
Hodson, M. E., Leszczyszyn, O. I.,
Blindauer, C. A., and Stürzenbaum,
S. R. (2010). The two Caenorhabditis
elegans metallothioneins (CeMT-1
and CeMT-2) discriminate between
essential zinc and toxic cadmium.
FEBS J. 277, 2531–2542.

Zeitoun-Ghandour, S., Leszczyszyn, O.
I., Blindauer, C. A., Geier, F. M.,
Bundy, J. G., and Stürzenbaum, S. R.
(2011). C. elegans metallothioneins:
response to and defence against ROS
toxicity. Mol. Biosyst. 7, 2397–2406.
Zwirglmaier, K., Jardillier, L., Ostrowski,
M., Mazard, S., Garczarek, L., Vaulot,
D., Not, F., Massana, R., Ulloa,
O., and Scanlan, D.
(2008).
Global phylogeography of marine
Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus
reveals a distinct partitioning of lin-
eages among oceanic biomes. Envi-
ron. Microbiol. 10, 147–161.

J.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was

conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 21 December 2011; accepted: 25
March 2012; published online: 11 April
2012.
Citation: Barnett JP, Millard A, Ksibe
AZ, Scanlan DJ, Schmid R and Blindauer
CA (2012) Mining genomes of marine
cyanobacteria for elements of zinc home-
ostasis. Front. Microbio. 3:142. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00142
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Microbiological Chemistry, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Barnett , Millard,
Ksibe, Scanlan, Schmid and Blindauer.
This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non Commercial License,
which permits non-commercial use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in other
forums, provided the original authors and
source are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 142 | 21

