REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 20 June 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00201

Viral CNS infections: role of glial pattern recognition
receptors in neuroinﬂammation
Samantha R. Furr and Ian Marriott*

Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, USA

Edited by:
Amy Rasley, Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory, USA
Reviewed by:
Monica Borucki, Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory, USA
June Round, University of Utah, USA
*Correspondence:
Ian Marriott, Department of Biology,
University of North Carolina at
Charlotte, 9201 University City
Boulevard, Charlotte, NC 28223, USA.
e-mail: imarriot@uncc.edu

Viruses are the major causative agents of central nervous system (CNS) infection world-
wide. RNA and DNA viruses trigger broad activation of glial cells including microglia and
astrocytes, eliciting the release of an array of mediators that can promote innate and
adaptive immune responses. Such responses can limit viral replication and dissemina-
tion leading to infection resolution. However, a deﬁning feature of viral CNS infection is the
rapid onset of severe neuroinﬂammation and overzealous glial responses are associated
with signiﬁcant neurological damage or even death. The mechanisms by which microglia
and astrocytes perceive neurotropic RNA and DNA viruses are only now becoming appar-
ent with the discovery of a variety of cell surface and cytosolic molecules that serve as
sensors for viral components. In this review we discuss the role played by members of
the Toll-like family of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) in the inﬂammatory responses
of glial cells to the principle causative agents of viral encephalitis. Importantly, we also
describe the evidence for the involvement of a number of newly described intracellular
PRRs, including retinoic acid-inducible gene I and DNA-dependent activator of IFN regula-
tory factors, that are thought to function as intracellular sensors of RNA and DNA viruses,
respectively. Finally, we explore the possibility that cross-talk exists between these dis-
parate viral sensors and their signaling pathways, and describe how glial cytosolic and
cell surface/endosomal PRRs could act in a cooperative manner to promote the fulminant
inﬂammation associated with acute neurotropic viral infection.

Keywords: microglia, astrocytes, viral encephalitis, neuroinﬂammation, pattern recognition receptors, RLR,TLR

Microbial and viral infections of the brain and spinal cord result
in inﬂammation that underlies wide ranging symptoms including
fever, headache, confusion, and in extreme cases, stroke, seizure,
or even death. The resulting disease is classiﬁed based on the area
of the central nervous system (CNS) affected and can include
the membranes that surround the brain (meningitis), spinal
cord (myelitis), or inﬂammation within the brain parenchyma
(encephalitis). Of these, encephalitis tends to be associated with
more signiﬁcant alterations in the level of consciousness, cognitive
defects, seizures, and focal neurological deﬁcits than meningitis,
although it should be noted that clinical presentation of these con-
ditions often overlap. The incidence of encephalitis in the United
States has been estimated at approximately 20,000 new cases annu-
ally according to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). While
encephalitis and meningitis can be caused by bacterial or fungal
pathogens, viruses are the major causative agents of CNS infec-
tion worldwide, with an overall incidence of 6.34 per 100,000 for
all ages (Jmor et al., 2008). However, it must be noted that this
number is likely to be an underestimation given the problems
associated with diagnosis, particularly in developing countries
(Sejvar, 2006).

Viral CNS infections can be very difﬁcult to treat due to the
rapid onset of severe disease symptoms that can occur even in
otherwise healthy individuals. Such infections trigger broad acti-
vation of glial cells including microglia and astrocytes, and the
concomitant release of an array of pro-inﬂammatory molecules

that can elicit both innate and adaptive immune responses. While
host responses limit viral replication and dissemination and can
lead to infection resolution, overzealous, or sustained inﬂam-
mation within the CNS can result in signiﬁcant neurological
damage.

One of the major challenges in the study and treatment of viral
CNS infections is the wide range of etiological agents (Tunkel et al.,
2008). Both RNA and DNA viruses can infect the CNS and cause
meningitis or encephalitis, although an etiological diagnosis is
established in less than 30% of cases (Stahl et al., 2008). While
historically important RNA viruses that can cause encephalitis
such as measles, mumps, and rubella have seen steep decreases
in incidence as a result of immunization (Koskiniemi et al., 1997),
rabies virus (RABV) remains an endemic cause of viral encephalitis
in the United States and a serious public health concern. RABV
is transmitted from animals to humans and although rare, CNS
infection results in uncontrolled virus replication, a prominent
pro-inﬂammatory response, and is 100% fatal once neurological
symptoms develop (Theerasurakarn and Ubol, 1998).

In addition, emerging RNA viral pathogens such as West Nile
virus (WNV; Gubler, 2008), Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV),
Australian bat Lyssavirus (Samaratunga et al., 1998), retroviruses,
and Nipah virus (McCormack and Allworth, 2002) have become
increasingly important causes of encephalitis. Nipah virus was
ﬁrst identiﬁed in 1999 and the mortality rate associated with acute
encephalitis caused by this virus has been estimated to be between

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 201 | 1

“fmicb-03-00201” — 2012/6/21 — 13:37 — page 1 — #1

Furr and Marriott

Glial cells and viral neuroinﬂammation

40 and 75% (as reviewed in Tyler, 2009). While most survivors
make a full recovery, 20% demonstrate neurological sequelae and
a small number develop delayed-onset encephalitis.

Worldwide, the ﬂavivirus JEV is the most common cause of
arthropod-borne encephalitis with over 50,000 cases reported per
year in China, Southeast Asia, and India (Whitley and Kimber-
lin, 1999). Epidemics due to this arbovirus result in a mortality
rate that ranges from 30 to 50% with death usually occurring
within the ﬁrst week (Roos, 1999; Solomon et al., 2003), and
the development of sustained neurological deﬁcits in approxi-
mately half of the survivors (Ghosh and Basu, 2009). Another
ﬂavivirus, WNV, is also transmitted by Culex spp. mosquitoes
and can cause fatal encephalitis or long-term neurological seque-
lae. Once inside the CNS, JEV, and WNV infect neurons (Wang
et al., 1997; Shrestha et al., 2003; Koh and Ng, 2005) leading to
neuronal apoptosis (Liao et al., 1998; Parquet et al., 2001) and
causing severe immunopathology (Licon Luna et al., 2002). WNV
has been associated with over 12,000 cases of encephalitis and/or
meningitis in the U.S. with a mortality rate of 9.5% as reported
by the CDC.

DNA viral agents that can infect the CNS include varicella zoster
virus (VZV) and several viruses in the human herpesvirus fam-
ily that can cause encephalitis, including human herpesvirus 6
(Isaacson et al., 2005), herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1), and HSV-2
(Baringer, 2008). VZV is a medically important cause of encephali-
tis characterized by up to 25% mortality and rates close to 100% in
immunocompromised patients (Stahl et al., 2008). However, HSV
is considered to be an endemic cause of encephalitis in the United
States and is the most frequent cause of this disease in adults
(Stahl et al., 2008) while HSV-2 is the most signiﬁcant etiological
agent of severe encephalitis in children (Roos, 1999; Bingham and
Saiman, 2000). Neonatal HSV-2 encephalitis, with treatment, has
a mortality rate of 14% (compared to 85% without treatment)
and severe neurological dysfunction is observed in 50–70% of
surviving individuals. HSV-1 encephalitis in older children repre-
sents the most common cause of sporadic fatal viral encephalitis
(Baringer, 2008). Untreated patients with HSV-1 encephalitis have
a 70% mortality rate, while patients who receive early treatment
have a 40% chance of recovering without neurological deﬁcits.
However, despite appropriate diagnosis and therapy, the mortal-
ity rate remains at 30% (Xu et al., 2006; Baringer, 2008). HSV
encephalitis may follow primary infection but most cases are the
due to the reactivation of latent virus in the olfactory bulb or
trigeminal ganglia and subsequent retrograde axonal transport
into the CNS (as reviewed in Conrady et al., 2010).

The complexity seen in viral encephalitis due to the array of
causative agents, clinical presentations, and severity has made
deﬁning the mechanisms that underlie disease pathology challeng-
ing. Ideally, host responses following CNS infection should result
in rapid neutralization of the invading pathogen with minimal
collateral damage to the sensitive and poorly regenerating neural
tissue. However, viral CNS infections are often associated with
inadequate anti-viral responses and/or the rapid and severe onset
of damaging inﬂammation (as reviewed in Savarin and Bergmann,
2008). While the brain has traditionally been viewed as a
“victim organ” of inﬁltrating leukocytes, it has become apparent
that specialized resident glial cells, such as microglia and astrocytes,

play an essential role in regulating the permeability of the blood–
brain barrier, promoting the recruitment of leukocytes, and the
activation of such cells following inﬁltration.

GLIAL CELLS PLAY A CRITICAL ROLE IN THE INITIATION OF
VIRALLY INDUCED NEUROINFLAMMATION
Microglia and astrocytes are well known to play an important
role in homeostasis within the CNS and to support neuronal cell
function. However, these cell types are now recognized to be
key players in the development of protective immune responses
or the progression of damaging inﬂammation during CNS dis-
ease states (Bauer et al., 1995; Stoll and Jander, 1999; Dong and
Benveniste, 2001; Fischer and Reichmann, 2001). Microglia are
resident myeloid immune cells of the CNS and, similar to other
myeloid cells such as macrophages and dendritic cells, these
cells are facultative phagocytes and express antigen presenting
MHC class II molecules (Hickey and Kimura, 1988). Importantly,
microglia produce key pro-inﬂammatory mediators such as IL-1β
(Martin et al., 1993), TNF-α (Streit et al., 1998), IL-6 (Kiefer et al.,
1993), and bioactive IL-12 p70 (Aloisi et al., 1997; Suzumura
et al., 1998) following activation. Astrocytes are the major glial cell
type in the brain and may also function as immune effector cells
(Dong and Benveniste, 2001). Stimulated astrocytes can express an
array of inﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines that can initiate
leukocyte migration across the blood–brain barrier and promote
effector functions in these inﬁltrating cells (Dong and Benveniste,
2001). As such, these cells are ideally situated to detect and respond
to invading pathogens including neurotropic viruses.

Viral infections in the CNS are known to broadly trigger glial
activation and the release of pro-inﬂammatory molecules. For
example, it is known that pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, IFN-γ
and TNF-α, are markedly increased in CNS tissues during
HSV-1 infection in the brain and microglia have been shown to
respond to HSV-1 by secreting pro-inﬂammatory and chemotactic
molecules such as TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, CCL7, CCL8, CCL9,
CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL4, and CXCL5 (Lokensgard et al., 2001;
Aravalli et al., 2006). Human microglia have also been shown to
respond to RNA viruses including WNV by producing cytokines
and chemokines (Cheeran et al., 2005). Elevated levels of IL-1β
are readily detectable in neural tissue from WNV encephalitis
patients and cultured human glia produce this potent inﬂamma-
tory cytokine in response to WNV challenge (van Marle et al.,
2007). We have also documented the ability of primary cultured
microglia and astrocytes to respond to several RNA and DNA
viruses, including vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), Sendai virus,
murine gammaherpesvirus (MHV)-68, and HSV-1, by producing
inﬂammatory mediators such as IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-1β (Rasley
et al., 2004; Chauhan et al., 2010; Furr et al., 2010, 2011). Impor-
tantly, we conﬁrmed that in vivo VSV administration results in
viral infection of both glial cell types in situ, while earlier stud-
ies demonstrated that microglia and astrocytes respond to VSV
by proliferating, producing inducible nitric oxide synthase, and
increasing the expression of cell surface MHC class II molecules
(Bi et al., 1995), responses that are likely to set the stage for
subsequent inﬂammatory damage.

An immune response to a virus in the CNS requires the recog-
nition of this pathogen and the mechanisms by which innate

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 201 | 2

“fmicb-03-00201” — 2012/6/21 — 13:37 — page 2 — #2

Furr and Marriott

Glial cells and viral neuroinﬂammation

immune cells achieve this have only recently become apparent with
the discovery of a variety of cell surface and cytosolic molecules
that serve as sensors for viral components. Such pattern recogni-
tion receptors (PRRs) are present on and within immune sentinel
cells (Furr et al., 2008, 2011; Kielian, 2009) and appear to bind con-
served viral structures known as pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs). These PAMPs have several features that make
them ideal targets for innate immune recognition. First, PAMPs
are unique to microbes and viruses allowing for “self ” versus “non-
self ” recognition by the innate immune system. Second, PAMPs
are often conserved among similar pathogens allowing a relatively
small number of PRRs to detect a broad array of challenges. In
addition, PAMPs tend to be essential for microbial/viral survival
making pathogen evasion by genetic mutation or deletion unlikely
(Medzhitov and Janeway, 2002).

Pattern recognition receptor engagement by PAMPs can pre-
cipitate the production of anti-viral type I interferons (IFN)
and/or the release of chemotactic and inﬂammatory molecules
that can then direct a subsequent adaptive immune response.
Three families of PRRs have been deﬁned: Toll-like receptors
(TLRs), nucleotide oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors
(NLRs), and retinoic acid inducible gene (RIG)-I-like receptors
(RLRs). As such, these molecules represent important mecha-
nisms by which a protective host response or potentially damaging
inﬂammation is initiated (Kawai and Akira, 2007; Yoneyama and
Fujita, 2010).

TLRs MEDIATE GLIAL RESPONSES TO EXTRA CELLULAR OR
ENDOSOMAL VIRAL MOTIFS
Toll was ﬁrst identiﬁed as a gene critical for fruit ﬂy embryogen-
esis (Hashimoto et al., 1988) but its products were subsequently
shown to play an important role in Drosophila’s immunity to fun-
gal infections (Lemaitre et al., 1996). Interestingly, similar gene
products were found in mammalian cells and these TLRs have
since been shown to play an important role in the initiation of
innate immune responses to infection (Medzhitov et al., 1997).
To date, at least 13 TLRs have been discovered in mammals and
members of this family of cell surface receptors can elicit inﬂam-
matory and/or anti-viral mediator production and can serve to
initiate or modify adaptive immune responses (as reviewed in
Kawai and Akira, 2008). Acute virally induced CNS inﬂamma-
tory responses occur within the ﬁrst few days following infection
and this argues against a central role for activated T cell clones in
such responses. Indeed, previous studies have shown that acute
viral encephalitis can occur in athymic mice (Bi et al., 1995). That
being said, T cell subpopulations, such as Th1 and Th17 cells, are
almost certain to play a key role in sustained virally induced neu-
roinﬂammation (Kalinke and Prinz, 2012). As such, glial activation
via TLRs and other PRRs is likely to facilitate antigen presentation
to, and costimulation of, such cells and the role of these recep-
tors in the antigen-speciﬁc activation of T cells following viral
challenge has been extensively reviewed elsewhere (Kawai and
Akira, 2008).

Several TLRs have been demonstrated to speciﬁcally recog-
nize viral motifs, including TLRs 2, 3, 7, 8, and 9. While TLR2
is best known to bind a variety of microbial cell wall compo-
nent including lipoproteins, peptidoglycans, and lipoteichoic acid

present in bacterial cell walls and the yeast cell wall component
zymosan, this sensor can also recognize as yet unidentiﬁed viral
motifs. In contrast, endosomal TLRs such as TLR3 recognize
viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) and its synthetic analog,
polyinosine-deoxycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)), while TLR7 and TLR8
mediate responses to GU-rich single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) pro-
duced in virus-infected cells. Finally, TLR9 detects bacterial and
viral DNA with unmethylated CpG motifs. Studies from our group
and others have demonstrated that microglia and astrocytes con-
stitutively express low levels of TLR3 (Jack et al., 2005; Bsibsi et al.,
2006), TLR7 (Jack et al., 2005), and TLR9 (Bowman et al., 2003;
Jack et al., 2005), but such expression shows marked upregulation
following viral infection and/or stimulation with viral compo-
nents (Bowman et al., 2003; Carpentier et al., 2005; Jack et al.,
2005; McKimmie and Fazakerley, 2005; McKimmie et al., 2005;
Bsibsi et al., 2006). While these ﬁndings suggest that glial cells
could become sensitized to the presence of viral pathogens, it is
presently unclear whether sustained stimulation via these sensors
can alter the pattern of immune mediator production by glial cells
to one that favors the resolution of inﬂammation.

Upon ligand binding, TLRs dimerize and undergo conforma-
tional changes precipitating a complex cascade of intracellular
signaling events that ultimately result in activation of transcription
factors including nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), and interferon-
regulatory factors (IRF) 3 and 7 (as reviewed in Kawai and Akira,
2008; Wilkins and Gale, 2010). NF-κB is a critical transcription
factor in the regulation of inﬂammatory cytokine production,
while IRF-3 and IRF-7 activation stimulates expression of anti-
viral genes including IFN-β. Hence, activation of cells via these
receptors can initiate the repertoire of defense mechanisms used
by the innate immune system against viral pathogens.

TLR3 is perhaps the most widely studied PRR in the percep-
tion of viral pathogens by glial cells. Isolated murine wild-type
microglia are known to respond to the TLR3 ligand poly(I:C) by
secreting TNF-α and IL-6 (Melton et al., 2003). In line with these
ﬁndings, intracerebral administration of poly(I:C) has been shown
to elicit microglial (Melton et al., 2003; Town et al., 2006) and
astrocyte (Melton et al., 2003) activation associated with neuronal
loss, a response that is nearly absent in TLR3 knockout animals
(Town et al., 2006). Circumstantial evidence for the involvement
of TLR3 in viral encephalitis comes from the ﬁnding that the
expression of this PRR is upregulated following RABV infection
prior to the onset of lethal neuroinﬂammation (McKimmie and
Fazakerley, 2005; McKimmie et al., 2005).

Several studies have implicated TLR3 activation in WNV-
associated pathogenicity. dsRNA, a ligand for TLR3, is produced by
WNV during infection and has been shown to trigger the release of
cytokines and chemokines from human microglia (Cheeran et al.,
2005). Seemingly in keeping with these observations, TLR3 deﬁ-
cient mice were found to be resistant to lethal WNV-associated
encephalitis. The fulminate CNS inﬂammatory response seen
in wild-type mice, characterized in part by activated microglia,
was markedly reduced or absent in knockout animals following
intraperitoneal WNV infection (Wang and Fikrig, 2004). How-
ever, this reduced CNS disease occurs despite increased peripheral
viral loads and reduced systemic production of anti-viral and
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines (Wang et al., 2004). These results

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 201 | 3

“fmicb-03-00201” — 2012/6/21 — 13:37 — page 3 — #3

Furr and Marriott

Glial cells and viral neuroinﬂammation

suggest that decreased systemic inﬂammation in the absence of
TLR3 expression may maintain blood–brain barrier integrity and
prevent WNV access into the CNS (Wang et al., 2004). Such a
hypothesis is supported by the demonstration that direct intrac-
erebral administration of WNV leads to identical outcomes in
wild-type and TLR3 deﬁcient mice (Wang et al., 2004). However,
it must be noted that at least one study appears to contradict
this ﬁnding in that neuronal WNV replication was increased
in TLR3 knockout animals following subcutaneous infection
and the reason for this apparent disparity is presently unclear
(Dafﬁs et al., 2008).

Another endosome-associated PRR, TLR7, also appears to
play an important role in inﬂammatory and/or protective glial
responses to viral pathogens. Intracerebral administration of the
TLR7 agonist imiquimod leads to pronounced neuroinﬂamma-
tion, with upregulated expression of TNF-α, IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6,
and IL-12 as well as the chemokines CCL2, CCL3, CXCL1, CXCL9,
and CXCL10 (Butchi et al., 2008). Interestingly however, this
effect appears to be predominantly due to the activation of astro-
cytes rather than microglia (Butchi et al., 2008). Upregulation of
TLR7 has been demonstrated in the brains of infected mice prior
to lethal RABV-induced inﬂammation (McKimmie et al., 2005).
Furthermore, mice lacking the expression of MyD88, a criti-
cal downstream effector molecule of TLRs including TLR7, have
increased susceptibility to an attenuated RABV strain and TLR7
deﬁcient mice exhibited a phenotype with deﬁcits in both the
development of peripheral immunity and RABV clearance from
the CNS (Li et al., 2011). As such, these data indicate a possi-
ble role for TLR7 in viral clearance from infected brain tissue.
In contrast, another report has shown that macrophages isolated
from TLR7 deﬁcient animals released less IL-12 and IL-23 in
response to in vitro WNV infection and TLR7 knockout mice
demonstrated an increased susceptibility to WNV encephalitis
(Town et al., 2009).

It has recently been shown that TLR2 contributes to detrimental
inﬂammatory cytokine production in mice following intracranial
administration with HSV-1, with the absence of TLR2 expres-
sion leading to decreased peripheral (Kurt-Jones et al., 2004) and
CNS (Aravalli et al., 2006) inﬂammatory response sand increased
survival. In addition, multiple reports have shown that maximal
in vitro microglial and astrocyte responses to HSV-1 are depen-
dent on the presence of TLR2 (Lokensgard et al., 2001; Aravalli
et al., 2006; Schachtele et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2012) and HSV-1-
infected microglia derived from TLR2 deﬁcient mice have been
demonstrated to elicit less neuronal oxidative damage and death
in mixed neural cell cultures in comparison to infected wild-type
microglia (Schachtele et al., 2010). However, it should be noted
that these studies differ in their assessments of the relative impor-
tance of this PRR in such responses, and marked elevations in
serum IL-6 concentrations have been found in TLR2 deﬁcient
mice following HSV-1 infection (Kurt-Jones et al., 2004). Together,
these data suggest while TLR2 may play a major role in HSV-
induced pathology and mortality, additional mechanism(s) are
likely to be involved.

In addition to the detection of HSV virion motifs by TLR2,
genomic HSV DNA can be recognized by TLR9 and at least one
study suggests that this sensor might play a more signiﬁcant role

in lethal HSV-1 encephalitis than TLR2 (Lima et al., 2010). In
contrast, others have shown that the absence of TLR9 alone does
not impact survival, type I IFN levels, or viral replication in the
brain following HSV infection (Wang et al., 2012). Since TLR2/9
double knockout mice show signiﬁcantly greater susceptibility to
HSV-1 infection than mice deﬁcient in either TLR2 or TLR9 alone
(Lima et al., 2010), it appears likely that these sensors act in a
cooperative or synergistic manner.

Taken together, this body of work suggests that TLR activation
is a signiﬁcant contributor to sustained glial activation, inﬂam-
matory mediator production, and neuronal loss during viral CNS
infections. However, it is important to note that TLRs can also
mediate beneﬁcial effects. For example, the activation of glial cells
via TLR2, 3, or 9 has been shown to initiate the production of type
I IFNs (Zhou et al., 2009; Conrady et al., 2010) which limit viral
replication through the induction of proteins such as RNase L and
IFN-induced dsRNA-activated protein kinase, resulting in mRNA
degradation and cessation of translation, respectively (Samuel,
2001). Furthermore, two recent studies (Zhang et al., 2007; Guo
et al., 2011) indicate that a genetic deﬁciency in TLR3 expression
can predispose children to HSV-1 encephalitis and implicate a
key role for this PRR in protective CNS immune responses against
this, but not other, pathogens. However, the mechanisms that keep
the balance between damaging and protective glial responses have
not been identiﬁed and are likely to include a multitude of vari-
ables including the number of infectious organisms, the kinetics
of glial activation and immune mediator production, the speciﬁc
identity of the responsive glial cell, and the direct inﬂuence of
the pathogen itself on the cellular response. Moreover, evidence
is accumulating that TLR expression is not limited to glial cells
and that neurons can also express such PRRs under certain con-
ditions (as reviewed in Carty and Bowie, 2011), although, the
functional relevance of TLR expression in neurons has not been
resolved.

While cell-surface receptors like TLRs appear to play an impor-
tant role in glial responses to extracellular pathogens or those
present in intracellular compartments, the ability of such cells
to respond to pathogens in the absence of TLR expression suggests
that additional mechanisms are present. Furthermore, our recent
studies employing the model neurotropic RNA virus, VSV, demon-
strate that viral replication is required to elicit robust immune
responses by infected microglia and astrocytes, and indicate that
mechanisms exist to sense the presence of replicative viral prod-
ucts within infected cells. We have shown that heat inactivated
wild-type VSV or a host-range limited VSV mutant (Grdzelishvili
et al., 2005) elicit glial immune responses that are an order of
magnitude smaller than those induced by wild-type viral particles
(Chauhan et al., 2010). These results suggest that VSV-induced
glial responses are not predominantly mediated by cell surface
and/or endosomal PRRs and indicate that active viral replication
is a critical requirement for such responses.

The recent demonstration that microglia and astrocytes express
members of the newly described RLR family of PRRs may pro-
vide a mechanism underlying the replication-dependent nature
of glial responses (Furr et al., 2008). RLRs such as RIG-I and
melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) have been
shown to serve as intracellular PRRs for viral nucleic acid motifs

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 201 | 4

“fmicb-03-00201” — 2012/6/21 — 13:37 — page 4 — #4

Furr and Marriott

Glial cells and viral neuroinﬂammation

(Kato et al., 2006; Takeuchi and Akira, 2008), and their involve-
ment in inﬂammatory and anti-viral responses in other cell
types raises the intriguing possibility that these cytosolic sen-
sors could play an important role in glial responses to viral
infection.

RIG-LIKE RECEPTORS CAN MEDIATE PROTECTIVE IMMUNE
RESPONSES AND DAMAGING CNS INFLAMMATION
FOLLOWING RNA VIRUS INFECTION
In contrast to cell-surface TLRs, RLRs detect viral RNA motifs or
processed self-RNA in the cytoplasm to trigger innate immunity
and inﬂammation (Takeuchi and Akira, 2010). These intracel-
lular sensors are responsible for the production of type I IFNs
in most cell types in response to RNA virus infection (Sumpter
et al., 2005; Kato et al., 2006; Saito et al., 2007; Lui et al., 2008).
In addition to such anti-viral responses, RLR engagement also
elicits robust inﬂammatory cytokine production (Takeuchi and
Akira, 2010). As shown in Figure 1, helicase interaction with viral

RNA induces the recruitment of downstream effector molecules
including interferon promoter stimulator (IPS)-1 (also known as
VISA, Cardif, or MAVS), TNF receptor associated factor (TRAF)
3 (Takeuchi and Akira, 2010), and perhaps stimulator of inter-
feron genes (STING; Ishikawa and Barber, 2008), leading to the
activation of mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinases, and the
IκB kinase (IKK)-related kinases, TRAF family member-associated
NF-κB activator (TANK) binding kinase 1 and IKK-I. These
kinases activate the transcription factors NF-κB and IRF-3, which
translocate into the nucleus and activate transcription of IFN stim-
ulated genes and inﬂammatory cytokines. RLRs are comprised
of three domains: N-terminal caspase activation and recruitment
domains (CARDs), a helicase domain, and a C-terminal domain
(CTD). Although RIG-I and MDA5 show structural homology
(Yoneyama et al., 2004) and share signaling features (Yoneyama
et al., 2005), it is now known that the two helicases discriminate
between differing ligands to trigger innate immune responses to
RNA viruses.

FIGURE 1 | Retinoic acid inducible gene (RIG)-I-like receptors serve as
cytosolic sensors for viral RNA motifs and can initiate anti-viral and
inﬂammatory cell responses. Melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5
(MDA5) recognizes double-stranded RNA moieties (dsRNA), while RIG-I
perceives short single or double-stranded RNAs with 5’ triphosphate ends
(ppp-ssRNA). Helicase interaction with these viral RNAs induces the
recruitment of downstream effector molecules including mitochondrial- or

peroxisomal-associated interferon promoter stimulator (IPS)-1, TNF receptor
associated factor (TRAF) 3, and/or stimulator of interferon genes (STING),
leading to the activation of IκB kinase (IKK)-related kinases, TRAF family
member-associated NF-κB activator binding kinase 1 (TBK1), and IKK-I. These
kinases activate the transcription factors NF-κB and interferon-regulatory
factors (IRF) 3, which translocate into the nucleus and activate transcription of
anti-viral and inﬂammatory cytokines.

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 201 | 5

“fmicb-03-00201” — 2012/6/21 — 13:37 — page 5 — #5

Furr and Marriott

Glial cells and viral neuroinﬂammation

(cid:2)

(cid:2)
ppp-ssRNA and 5

Signaling by RIG-I is triggered during infection by a number
of RNA viruses and by the presence of synthetic RNA transcribed
in vitro (Sumpter et al., 2005; Kato et al., 2006; Saito et al., 2007;
Lui et al., 2008; Rehwinkel et al., 2010). It appears that RIG-I
recognizes ssRNA or dsRNA moieties with 5
triphosphate ends
(cid:2)
(5
ppp-dsRNA, respectively; Hornung et al.,
2006; Pichlmair et al., 2006) or RNAs that assume complex sec-
ondary structures (Sumpter et al., 2005; Saito et al., 2007). More
recent studies have elucidated the structural basis underlying
RIG-I activation. Inactive RIG-I has an open conformation in
which the CARD domains are sequestered by a helical domain
inserted between the helicase moieties. When activated, ATP
and RNA binding induce a major rearrangement in RIG-I to a
closed conformation in which the helicase and the CTD bind
(cid:2)
to the blunt end 5
ppp-dsRNA with perfect complementarity
(Kowalinski et al., 2011).

In contrast, MDA5 has been reported to be more selective and
is triggered during picornavirus infections or in the presence of
poly(I:C) (Gitlin et al., 2006; Kato et al., 2006; Loo et al., 2008).
The CTD domains of MDA5 and RIG-I involved in RNA binding
have been suggested to be responsible for the differences in ligand
afﬁnity seen between these RLRs. Each have a similar fold and
basic surface but distinct RNA binding loops exist within the CTD
for RIG-I and MDA5, and the conformation of this RNA binding
loop seems to be responsible for sensitivity to dsRNA or 5
ppp-
ssRNA. Such a conclusion is supported by RLR structural analysis
and studies featuring mutation of the basic surface and the RNA
binding loop (Li et al., 2009; Takahasi et al., 2009).

(cid:2)

We have recently demonstrated that expression of both RIG-I
and MDA5 is discernable in uninfected mouse brain tissue (Furr
et al., 2008). Importantly, we have shown that isolated murine
microglia and astrocytes constitutively express RIG-I and MDA5
transcripts and protein, as well as the critical downstream effector
molecule, IPS-1 (Furr et al., 2008). Furthermore, the expression of
these novel viral sensors has been conﬁrmed in human glial cells
(Yoshida et al., 2007; Furr et al., 2010). Circumstantial evidence of
a role for these RLRs in RNA virus infections of the CNS comes
from our observation that RIG-I and MDA5 expression is elevated
in the brains of mice following intranasal administration of VSV
(Furr et al., 2008). VSV is a neurotropic negative-sense ssRNA virus
that closely resembles RABV. In mice, intranasal VSV infection
results in a severe encephalitis with rapid activation and prolifer-
ation of microglia and astrocytes (Huneycutt et al., 1993; Bi et al.,
1995) and our in vitro studies show that this virus elicits marked
increases in RIG-I expression by murine and human glial cells
(Furr et al., 2008, 2010).

(cid:2)

More direct evidence for the functional nature of RIG-I expres-
sion in glia comes from our observation that this molecule
associates with IPS-1 following VSV infection and from the ﬁnd-
ing that the speciﬁc RIG-I ligand, 5
ppp-ssRNA, elicits human
astrocyte immune responses (Furr et al., 2010). Importantly, we
also showed that RIG-I knockdown signiﬁcantly reduces inﬂam-
matory cytokine production by VSV-infected human astrocytes
and inhibits the production of soluble neurotoxic mediators
by virally challenged cells (Furr et al., 2010). These ﬁndings
directly implicate RIG-I in the initiation of glial
inﬂamma-
tory immune responses and suggest a potential mechanism

underlying the neuronal cell death associated with acute viral CNS
infections.

In contrast to the proposed detrimental role for RLR activa-
tion following challenge with VSV, other work suggests that IPS-1
is essential for triggering protective innate and adaptive immu-
nity against WNV in the CNS. In these studies, mice deﬁcient in
the RLR adaptor molecule IPS-1 exhibited increased susceptibil-
ity to WNV infection, characterized by enhanced inﬂammation,
viral replication, and rapid dissemination into the CNS (Suthar
et al., 2010). However, it is important to note that glial cells were
not the focus of this study and IPS-1 dependent IFN responses
and limiting of viral replication was attributed to effects on sys-
temically generated immune cells and cortical neurons, perhaps
via changes in the numbers and/or function of regulatory T cells
(Suthar et al., 2010). As such, these data suggest an innate/adaptive
immune interface mediated through RLR signaling that regulates
the balance of the immune response to WNV infection. Together,
these ﬁndings raise the exciting possibility that RLR molecules
play important roles in the detection of viral CNS pathogens and,
depending upon the host cell type and viral pathogen, the initia-
tion of protective immune responses or damaging inﬂammation
within the brain.

NEWLY DISCOVERED CYTOSOLIC VIRAL SENSORS MAY
MEDIATE GLIAL RESPONSES TO DNA VIRUSES
Recently, novel cytosolic DNA sensors have been discovered that
include DNA-dependent activator of interferon-regulatory fac-
tors (DAI; also known as Z-DNA binding protein 1; Takaoka
et al., 2007) and a DNA-sensing inﬂammasome consisting of the
HIN200 protein, absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2; Schroder and
Tschopp, 2010). Acting in concert with TLRs, these receptors may
provide a diverse repertoire of mechanisms to alert the cell to
viral and microbial DNA, leading to the activation of the innate
immune system in a similar manner to that seen with RLR-
mediated responses to viral RNA. DAI reportedly senses cytosolic
DNA using two N-terminal Z-DNA binding domains (ZBDs) and
a third putative DNA binding domain located next to the sec-
ond ZBD. Analysis of the DAI/Z-DNA complex structure reveals
that DAI adopts an unusual binding mode for Z-DNA recognition
(Ha et al., 2008). The DAI ZBDs bind DNA and both must be
bound for full B-to-Z conversion, and so it is conceivable that
the binding of two DAI proteins to each cytoplasmic dsDNA elic-
its DAI dimerization and subsequent innate immune activation
(Ha et al., 2008; Wang et al., 2008).

Importantly, DAI has been shown to recognize double-stranded
DNA in its canonical B helical form (B-DNA; Takaoka et al., 2007)
and elicit type I IFN and inﬂammatory cytokine production in a
TLR9-independent manner (Ishii et al., 2006; Stetson and Medzhi-
tov, 2006) in other cells types. As shown in Figure 2, DAI elicits
such immune functions via activation of the IRF and NF-κB
transcription factors. DAI-induced IRF activation is dependent
upon TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1). In contrast, DAI-induced
NF-κB activation is mediated through interactions between two
receptor-interacting protein (RIP) homotypic interaction motifs
(RHIMs) in the DAI protein and RHIM-containing kinases, RIP1
and RIP3 (Kaiser et al., 2008; Rebsamen et al., 2009), as shown
by the demonstration that knockdown of either RIP1 or RIP3

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 201 | 6

“fmicb-03-00201” — 2012/6/21 — 13:37 — page 6 — #6

Furr and Marriott

Glial cells and viral neuroinﬂammation

FIGURE 2 | DNA-dependent activator of IFN regulatory factors (DAI) can
serve as a cytosolic sensor for viral or microbial double-stranded DNA
(dsDNA) motifs and initiate anti-viral and inﬂammatory cell responses.
DAI elicits such immune functions via possible interactions with
mitochondrial- or peroxisomal-associated interferon promoter stimulator

(IPS)-1, and/or stimulator of interferon genes (STING), facilitating the
activation of the interferon-regulatory factors (IRF) and NF-κB transcription
factors. DAI-induced IRF activation is dependent on TANK-binding kinase 1
(TBK1). In contrast, DAI-induced NF-κB activation is mediated through
interactions involving receptor-interacting protein (RIP) 1 and RIP3 kinases.

inhibits DAI-induced NF-κB activation. Both of these activa-
tion pathways appear to be induced via the recruitment of the
adaptor molecules IPS-1, TRAF3, and STING. The importance
of these adaptor molecules in host immune responses to DNA
viruses is exempliﬁed by the demonstration that the loss of STING
renders mice susceptible to lethal HSV-1 infection (Ishikawa and
Barber, 2008).

Overexpression of DAI in mouse ﬁbroblasts enhances DNA-
mediated type I IFN production while DAI knockdown attenuates
responses to viral DNA (Takaoka et al., 2007). In an additional
study, DNA-mediated activation of NF-κB and the induction of
NF-κB-dependent genes and their products were also signiﬁcantly
inhibited in cells following DAI knockdown (Rebsamen et al.,
2009). As such, these data are suggestive of a signiﬁcant role for
DAI in DNA-mediated activation of the NF-κB pathway and viral
recognition. However, it is interesting to note that DAI-mediated
NF-κB activation appears to facilitate HIV-1 replication although

the mechanisms underlying this effect remain unclear (Hayashi
et al., 2010).

DAI is reported to be expressed in the lymph nodes and
spleen constitutively, but detectable levels are also found in cir-
culating leukocytes and other tissues including bone marrow
and small intestines (Rothenburg et al., 2002). In the CNS, we
have shown that microglia and astrocytes constitutively express
DAI and its effector molecules RIP3 and STING, and show that
such expression is upregulated following DNA virus challenge
(Furr et al., 2011). In vivo HSV-1 infection elicited an upreg-
ulation in microglial DAI expression by up to 23.8-fold over
that seen in resting cells, and despite strong constitutive expres-
sion, HSV-1 exposure was also able to further increase DAI
expression in astrocytes with a maximal increase of 2.2-fold
over that seen in unstimulated cells. Interestingly, the ability of
viral challenge to augment DAI expression by primary glial cells
was not limited to this neurotropic alpha herpesvirus, as the

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 201 | 7

“fmicb-03-00201” — 2012/6/21 — 13:37 — page 7 — #7

Furr and Marriott

Glial cells and viral neuroinﬂammation

lymphotropic gammaherpesvirus, MHV-68, was also capable of
eliciting robust increases in microglial DAI expression and caused
modest increases in the expression of this molecule in astrocytes.
Importantly, we showed that transfection with the DAI spe-
ciﬁc ligand B-DNA elicits inﬂammatory cytokine production by
isolated glial cells, with induced production of the inﬂammatory
cytokines TNF-α and IL-6 as rapidly as 6 h post-transfection at lev-
els that matched or exceeded those elicited following a 24-h HSV-1
challenge (Furr et al., 2011). To conﬁrm the functional status of
DAI in glial cells and to begin to determine the relative importance
of this innate immune sensor in their responses to neurotropic
DNA viruses, we also assessed the effect of DAI knockdown on
inﬂammatory cytokine production by HSV-1 challenged microglia
and astrocytes (Furr et al., 2011). We found that siRNA directed
against DAI signiﬁcantly attenuated HSV-1 induced TNF-α and
IL-6 production by murine microglia. Such an approach also
markedly reduced IL-6 release by HSV-1 infected astrocytes but
was not as effective in reducing TNF-α expression by these cells,
where a statistically signiﬁcant reduction was only observed at the
highest viral MOI used (Furr et al., 2011). Finally, we demonstrated
that HSV-1 challenged microglia and astrocytes release neuro-
toxic mediators and showed that such production is signiﬁcantly
attenuated following DAI knockdown (Furr et al., 2011).

As such, the functional expression of DAI by microglia and
astrocytes may represent an important innate immune mecha-
nism underlying the rapid and potentially lethal inﬂammation
associated with neurotropic DNA virus infection. However, the
involvement of DNA sensor(s) other than DAI cannot be excluded.
For example, a new DNA sensor, AIM2, has been identiﬁed which
binds to DNA (as reviewed in Ranjan et al., 2009). Upon DNA
ligation, AIM2 associates with the apoptosis-associated speck-like
protein containing a CARD (ASC) leading to NF-κB and caspase-1
activation and inﬂammatory cytokine production. AIM2 knock-
down has been shown to reduce such inﬂammasome formation
and caspase-1 activation in response to dsDNA administration
and infection with vaccinia virus (Hornung et al., 2009) and stable
transfection of cell-lines with AIM2 has been demonstrated to con-
fer responsiveness to cytoplasmic DNA (Fernandes-Alnemri et al.,
2009). To date, the role of AIM2 in innate immune responses to
DNA viruses in the CNS has not been explored.

PRRs ACT IN A COOPERATIVE MANNER TO INDUCE GLIAL
RESPONSES TO VIRAL CHALLENGES
While the preceding sections have focused on the roles of speciﬁc
individual PRRs in the detection of viral pathogens by CNS cells,
it is highly likely that glial responses represent the sum of the inputs
from disparate cell surface, endosomal, and cytosolic viral sensors
(as shown in Figure 3). We, and others, have demonstrated that the
level of expression of a particular TLR, NLR, or RLR by microglia
and astrocytes can be regulated by ligands for dissimilar PRRs
(Bowman et al., 2003; Jack et al., 2005; Carpentier et al., 2008).
Furthermore, mechanisms of positive and negative regulation of
RLR signaling have been identiﬁed that include signaling cross-
talk between RLR, NLR and DNA-sensing pathways, and caspase
networks. For example, it has been shown that mice deﬁcient in
the expression of the DAI downstream effector molecule STING
are highly susceptible to infection by negative-stranded viruses

including VSV suggesting a role for this signaling molecule in both
DAI and RIG-I mediated cell activation (Ishikawa and Barber,
2008). Immunoprecipitation studies indicate STING associates
with RIG-I complexes in close proximity to endoplasmic reticulum
associated mitochondria (Ishikawa et al., 2009; Dixit et al., 2010).
Interestingly, a number of RNA viruses including yellow fever
virus, dengue virus, and hepatitis C virus, encode proteins with
signiﬁcant structural homology to STING and at least one of these
proteins produced by the dengue virus has been shown to inhibit
STING function (Ishikawa et al., 2009). As such, these observations
suggest a role for STING in anti-viral host responses to both DNA
and RNA viruses.

(cid:2)

Another example of cross-talk between viral sensing pathways is
the recent demonstration that RIG-I may be important in the pro-
duction of type I IFNs by cells in response to DNA viral challenge
in a DNA-dependent RNA polymerase III manner (Ablasser et al.,
2009; Chiu et al., 2009). In the proposed model, AT-rich double-
stranded DNA serves as a template for RNA polymerase III and
is transcribed into RNA containing a 5
-triphosphate, the ligand
for RIG-I. Subsequent activation of RIG-I by this ligand has been
shown to induce type I IFN production and to activate NF-κB, and
studies employing RNA polymerase III knockdown or pharmaco-
logical inhibitors of this enzyme have shown that this pathway is
important in cell responses to the gammaherpesvirus Epstein-Barr
virus (Ablasser et al., 2009; Chiu et al., 2009). Together, these stud-
ies suggest that the transcription of cytosolic viral DNA by RNA
polymerase III and subsequent RNA recognition by RIG-I could
provide an additional mechanism by which glial cells perceive
DNA viruses.

Interestingly, there has been a recent report of a role for the
well-characterized bacterial sensor, NOD2, in the recognition of
viral infections and the activation of IRF-3 via IPS-1 (Sabbah et al.,
2009). While NOD2 is known to recognize the bacterial cell wall
component muramyl dipeptide and trigger NF-κB activation via
the adaptor molecule RIP2, Sabbah et al. (2009) have provided evi-
dence that this sensor is also important in the detection of ssRNA
derived from respiratory syncytial virus. However, it is currently
unknown if NOD2 is directly activated by this viral ligand, or
is activated secondarily following association with other PRRs or
RNA binding factors. Furthermore, it remains to be determined
whether such interactions between NLRs and RIG-I-associated
signaling components occur in glial cells or whether they play a
signiﬁcant role during viral CNS infections.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
The importance of innate immunity in host responses to viral CNS
infection is evident. Microglia and astrocytes express a diverse
array of cell surface, endosomal, and cytosolic molecules that can
serve as sensors for RNA and DNA viruses, either constitutively
or following activation. It is also clear that resident CNS cells can
respond to a diverse array of ligands and that exquisite control of
the associated signaling pathways exists leading to the observed
complexity in the interactions between the innate and adaptive
arms of the host immune response. However, it is obvious that
we still do not fully understand the precise nature and structure
of the ligands for many of these PRRs or their mode of gener-
ation during infection. Furthermore, the available data suggest

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 201 | 8

“fmicb-03-00201” — 2012/6/21 — 13:37 — page 8 — #8

Furr and Marriott

Glial cells and viral neuroinﬂammation

FIGURE 3 | Possible interactions between Toll-like receptors (TLRs;
e.g.,TLR3 and TLR7/8), nucleotide oligomerization domain (NOD)-like
receptors (NLRs; e.g., NOD2), retinoic acid inducible gene (RIG)-I-like
receptors (RLRs; e.g., RIG-I and MDA5) and DNA-dependent activator
of IFN regulatory factors (DAI) in the detection of viruses and the
initiation of glial immune responses. These disparate cell surface,
endosomal, and cytosolic sensors share common signaling components

including interferon promoter stimulator (IPS)-1 and stimulator of
interferon genes (STING), leading to the activation of the transcription
factors NF-κB and interferon-regulatory factor (IRF) 3, which translocate
into the nucleus and initiate anti-viral and inﬂammatory cytokine
production. In addition, the activity of RNA polymerase III (Pol III)
could provide an additional mechanism for the perception of DNA
viruses via RLRs.

that models that ascribe discrete PRRs to each particular pathogen
are overly simplistic. Rather, it appears that TLRs, RLRs, NLRs,
and DAI function as PRRs and/or adaptor molecules that act in a
cooperative/synergistic manner to promote glial responses to viral
pathogens.

In addition to these caveats, it is almost certain that additional
PRRs await discovery in glial cells and the nature of the interactions
between these viral sensors and cellular activation pathways

have yet to be determined. Finally, it is unclear whether and to
what degree viral CNS pathogens evade detection or manipulate
immune responses to their advantage. Answering these questions
will lead to greater understanding of the fundamental mecha-
nisms underlying glial activation by neurotropic viruses and will
contribute signiﬁcantly to our understanding of the events that
underlie the development of either protective host responses or
life threatening neuroinﬂammation.

E.,

REFERENCES
Ablasser, A., Bauernfeind, F., Hart-
Latz,
Fitzger-
mann, G.,
and Hornung, V.
ald, K. A.,
(2009). RIG-I-dependent
sensing
of poly(dA:dT) through the induc-
tion of an RNA polymerase III-
transcribed RNA intermediate. Nat.
Immunol. 10, 1065–1072.

Aloisi, F., Penna, G., Cerase, J., Menen-
dez Iglesias, B., and Adorini, L.
(1997). IL-12 production by central
nervous system microglia is inhib-
ited by astrocytes. J. Immunol. 159,
1604–1612.

Aravalli, R. N., Hu, S., Rowen, T.
N., Gekker, G., and Lokensgard,
J. R. (2006). Differential apoptotic

in primary

signaling
cells
infected with herpes simplex virus 1.
J. Neurovirol. 12, 501–510.

glial

Baringer,

J. R. (2008). Herpes sim-
plex infections of the nervous system.
Neurol. Clin. 26, 657–674.

Bauer,

J., Huitinga,

I., Zhao, W.,
Lassmann, H., Hickey, W. F., and
Dijkstra, C. D. (1995). The role

of macrophages, perivascular cells,
and microglial cells in the patho-
genesis of
experimental autoim-
mune encephalomyelitis. Glia 15,
437–446.

Bi, Z., Barna, M., Komatsu, T., and
Reiss, C. S. (1995). Vesicular stom-
atitis virus infection of the central
nervous system activates both innate

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 201 | 9

“fmicb-03-00201” — 2012/6/21 — 13:37 — page 9 — #9

Furr and Marriott

Glial cells and viral neuroinﬂammation

and acquired immunity. J. Virol. 69,
6466–6472.

Bingham, A. C., and Saiman, L. (2000).
Short course viral encephalitis. Ofﬁce
Emerg. Pediatr. 13, 184–189.

Bowman, C. C., Rasley, A., Tranguch, S.
L., and Marriott, I. (2003). Cultured
astrocytes express Toll-like recep-
tors for bacterial products. Glia 43,
281–291.

Bsibsi, M., Persoon-Deen, C., Verwer, R.
W., Meeuwsen, S., Ravid, R., and Van
Noort, J. M. (2006). Toll-like receptor
3 on adult human astrocytes trig-
gers production of neuroprotective
mediators. Glia 53, 688–695.

Butchi, N. B., Pourciau, S., Du, M.,
Morgan, T. W., and Peterson, K. E.
(2008). Analysis of the neuroinﬂam-
matory response to TLR7 stimulation
in the brain: comparison of multi-
ple TLR7 and/or TLR8 agonists. J.
Immunol. 11, 7604–7612.

Carpentier, P. A., Begolka, W. S., Olson,
J. K., Elhofy, A., Karpus, W. J., and
Miller, S. D. (2005). Differential acti-
vation of astrocytes by innate and
adaptive immune stimuli. Glia 49,
360–374.

Carpentier, P. A., Duncan, D. S., and
Miller, S. D. (2008). Glial toll-like
receptor signaling in central ner-
vous system infection and autoim-
munity. Brain Behav.
Immun. 22,
140–147.

Carty, M., and Bowie, A. G. (2011).
Evaluating the role of Toll-like recep-
tors in diseases of the central ner-
vous system. Biochem. Pharmacol. 81,
825–837.

Chauhan, V. S., Furr, S. R., Sterka,
D. G. Jr., Nelson, D. A., Moerdyk-
Schauwecker, M., Marriott, I., and
Grdzelishvili, V. Z. (2010). Vesicu-
lar stomatitis virus infects resident
cells of the central nervous system
and induces replication-dependent
inﬂammatory responses. Virology 10,
187–196.

Cheeran, M. C., Hu, S., Sheng, W.
S., Rashid, A., Peterson, P. K., and
Lokensgard, J. R. (2005). Differen-
tial responses of human brain cells to
West Nile virus infection. J. Neurovi-
rol. 11, 512–524.

Chiu, Y. H., Macmillan, J. B., and Chen,
Z. J. (2009). RNA polymerase III
detects cytosolic DNA and induces
type I interferons through the RIG-I
pathway. Cell 138, 576–591.

Conrady, C. D., Drevets, D. A., and Carr,
D. J. (2010). Herpes simplex type I
(HSV-1) infection of the nervous sys-
tem: is an immune response a good
thing? J. Neuroimmunol. 220, 1–9.

Dafﬁs, S., Samuel, M. A., Suthar, M.
S., Gale, M. Jr., and Diamond, M.
S. (2008). Toll-like receptor 3 has a

protective role against West Nile virus
infection. J. Virol. 82, 10349–10358.

Dixit, E., Boulant, S., Zhang, Y., Lee, A.
S., Odendall, C., Shum, B., Hacohen,
N., Chen, Z. J., Whelan, S. P., Fransen,
M., Nibert, M. L., Superti-Furga,
G., and Kagan, J. C. (2010). Per-
oxisomes are signaling platforms for
antiviral innate immunity. Cell 141,
668–681.

Dong, Y., and Benveniste, E. N. (2001).
Immune function of astrocytes. Glia
36, 180–190.

Fernandes-Alnemri, T., Yu, J., Datta, P.,
Wu, J., and Alnemri, E. S. (2009).
AIM2 activates the inﬂammasome
and cell death in response to cytoplas-
mic DNA. Nature 458, 509–513.

Fischer, H. G.,

and Reichmann,
G.
(2001). Brain dendritic cells
and macrophages/microglia in cen-
tral nervous system inﬂammation. J.
Immunol. 166, 2717–2726.

Furr, S. R., Chauhan, V. S., Moerdyk-
Schauwecker, M. J., and Marriott, I.
(2011). A role for DNA-dependent
activator of interferon regulatory fac-
tor in the recognition of herpes sim-
plex virus type 1 by glial cells.
J.
Neuroinﬂammation 8, 99.

Furr, S. R., Chauhan, V. S., Sterka, D.
Jr., Grdzelishvili, V., and Marriott, I.
(2008). Characterization of retinoic
acid-inducible gene-I expression in
primary murine glia following expo-
sure to vesicular stomatitis virus. J.
Neurovirol. 14, 503–513.

Furr,

S. R., Moerdyk-Schauwecker,
and
M., Grdzelishvili, V. Z.,
Marriott,
I. (2010). RIG-I medi-
ates nonsegmented negative-sense
RNA virus-induced inﬂammatory
immune responses of primary hu-
man astrocytes. Glia 58, 1620–1629.
and Basu, A. (2009).
Japanese encephalitis – a pathological
and clinical perspective. PLoS Negl.
Trop. Dis. 3, e437. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pntd.0000437

Ghosh, D.,

Gitlin, L., Barchet, W., Gilﬁllan, S.,
Cella, M., Beutler, B., Flavell, R.
A., Diamond, M. S., and Colonna,
M. (2006). Essential role of mda-5
in type I IFN responses to polyri-
boinosinic:polyribocytidylic acid and
encephalomyocarditis picornavirus.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 30,
8459–8464.

Grdzelishvili, V. Z., Smallwood, S.,
Tower, D., Hall, R. L., Hunt, D.
M., and Moyer, S. A. (2005). A
single amino acid change in the
L-polymerase protein of vesicular
stomatitis virus completely abolishes
viral mRNA cap methylation. J. Virol.
79, 7327–7337.

Gubler, D. J. (2008). The continu-
ing spread of west Nile virus in the

Western hemisphere. Clin. Infect. Dis.
45, 1039–1046.

Guo, Y., Audry, M., Ciancanelli, M.,
Alsina, L., Azevedo, J., Herman, M.,
Anguiano, E., Sancho-Shimizu, V.,
Lorenzo, L., Pauwels, E., Philippe, P.
B., Pérez de Diego, R., Cardon, A.,
Vogt, G., Picard, C., Andrianirina, Z.
Z., Rozenberg, F., Lebon, P., Plan-
coulaine, S., Tardieu, M., Doireau,
V.,
Jouanguy, E., Chaussabel, D.,
Geissmann, F., Abel, L., Casanova,
J. L., and Zhang, S. Y. (2011). Her-
pes simplex virus encephalitis in a
patient with complete TLR3 deﬁ-
ciency: TLR3 is otherwise redundant
in protective immunity. J. Exp. Med.
208, 2083–2098.

Ha, S. C., Kim, D., Hwang, H. Y., Rich,
A., Kim, Y. G., and Kim, K. K. (2008).
The crystal structure of the second
Z-DNA binding domain of human
DAI (ZBP1) in complex with Z-DNA
reveals an unusual binding mode to
Z-DNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
105, 20671–20676.

Hashimoto, C., Hudson, K. L., and
Anderson, K. V. (1988). The Toll gene
of Drosophila, required for dorsal–
ventral embryonic polarity, appears
to encode a transmembrane protein.
Cell 52, 269–279.

Hayashi, T., Nishitsuji, H., Takamori,
A., Hasegawa, A., Masuda, T., and
Kannagi, M. (2010). DNA-dependent
activator of IFN-regulatory factors
enhances the transcription of HIV-1
through NF-κB. Microbes Infect. 12,
937–947.

Hickey, W. F., and Kimura, H. (1988).
Perivascular microglial cells of the
CNS are bone marrow-derived and
present antigen in vivo. Science 239,
290–292.

Hornung, V., Ablasser, A., Charrel-
Dennis, M., Bauernfeind, F., Horvath,
G., Caffrey, D. R., Latz, E., and
Fitzgerald KA. (2009). AIM2 recog-
nizes cytosolic dsDNA and forms a
caspase-1-activating inﬂammasome
with ASC. Nature 458, 514–518.

Hornung, V., Ellegast,

J., Kim, S.,
Brzozka, K., Jung, A., Kato, H., Poeck,
H., Akira, S., Conzelmann, K. K.,
Schlee, M., Endres, S., and Hart-
-Triphosphate
mann, G. (2006). 5
RNA is the ligand for RIG-I. Science
314, 994–997.

(cid:2)

Huneycutt, B. S., Bi, Z., Aoki, C. J.,
and Reiss, C. S. (1993). Central neu-
ropathogenesis of vesicular stomatitis
virus infection of immunodeﬁcient
mice. J. Virol. 67, 6698–6706.

Isaacson, E., Glaser, C. A., Forghani,
B., Amad, Z., Wallace, M., Arm-
strong, R. W., Exner, M. M., and
Schmid,
S. (2005). Evidence of
human herpesvirus 6 infection in

4 immunocompetent patients with
encephalitis. Clin.
Infect. Dis. 40,
890–893.

Ishii, K. J., Coban, C., Kato, H., Taka-
hashi, K., Torii, Y., and Takeshita,
(2006). A Toll-like receptor-
F.
independent
response
induced by double-stranded B-form
DNA. Nat. Immunol. 7, 40–48.

antiviral

Ishikawa, H., and Barber, G. N. (2008).
STING is an endoplasmic reticu-
lum adaptor that facilitates innate
immune signalling. Nature 455,
674–678. Erratum in Nature 2008;
456, 274.

Ishikawa, H., Ma, Z., and Barber, G. N.
(2009). STING regulates intracellular
DNA-mediated,
type I interferon-
dependent innate immunity. Nature
461, 788–792.

Jack, C. S., Arbour, N., Manusow, J.,
Montgrain, V., Blain, M., McCrea, E.,
Shapiro, A., and Antel, J. P. (2005).
TLR signaling tailors innate immune
responses in human microglia and
astrocytes. J. Immunol. 175, 4320–
4330.

Jmor, F., Emsley, H. C., Fischer,
M., Solomon, T., and Lewthwaite,
P. (2008). The incidence of acute
encephalitis syndrome in Western
industrialised and tropical countries.
Virol. J. 30, 134.

Kaiser, W. J., Upton, J. W., and Mocarski,
E. S. (2008). Receptor-interacting
protein homotypic interaction motif-
dependent control of NF-kappa B
activation via the DNA-dependent
activator of IFN regulatory factors. J.
Immunol. 181, 6427–6434.

or

Kalinke, U., and Prinz, M. (2012).
Endogenous,
therapeutically
induced, type I interferon responses
differentially modulate Th1/Th17-
mediated autoimmunity in the CNS.
Immunol. Cell Biol. 90, 505–509.

Kato, H., Takeuchi, O., Sato, S.,
Yoneyama, M., Yamamoto, M., Mat-
sui, K., Uematsu, S., Jung, A., Kawai,
T., Ishii, K. J., Yamaguchi, O., Otsu, K.,
Tsujimura, T., Koh, C. S., Reis e Sousa,
C., Matsuura, Y., Fujita, T., and Akira,
S. (2006). Differential roles of MDA5
and RIG-I helicases in the recogni-
tion of RNA viruses. Nature 441,
101–105.

Kawai, T., and Akira, S. (2007). Antivi-
ral signaling through pattern recog-
nition receptors.
J. Biochem. 141,
137–145.

Kawai, T., and Akira, S. (2008). Toll-
like receptor and RIG-I-like receptor
signaling. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1143,
1–20.

Kiefer, R., Lindholm, D., and Kreutz-
berg, G. W. (1993).
Interleukin-6
and transforming growth factor-beta
1 mRNAs are induced in rat facial

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 201 | 10

“fmicb-03-00201” — 2012/6/21 — 13:37 — page 10 — #10

Furr and Marriott

Glial cells and viral neuroinﬂammation

nucleus following motoneuron axo-
tomy. Eur. J. Neurosci. 5, 775–781.

Kielian, T. (2009). Overview of toll-
like receptors in the CNS. Curr. Top.
Microbiol. Immunol. 336, 1–14.

Koh, W. L., and Ng, M. L. (2005). Molec-
ular mechanisms of West Nile virus
pathogenesis in brain cell. Emerg.
Infect. Dis. 11, 629–632.

Koskiniemi, M., Korppi, M., Musto-
nen, K., Rantala, H., Muttilainen,
M., Herrgård, E., Ukkonen, P., and
Vaheri, A. (1997). Epidemiology of
encephalitis in children: a prospective
multicentre study. Eur. J. Pediatr. 156,
541–545.

Kowalinski, E., Lunardi, T., McCarthy,
A. A., Louber, J., Brunel, J., Grigorov,
B., Gerlier, D., and Cusack, S. (2011).
Structural basis for the activation of
innate immune pattern-recognition
receptor RIG-I by viral RNA. Cell 147,
423–435.

Kurt-Jones, E. A., Chan, M., Zhou,
S., Wang,
J., Reed, G., Bronson,
R., Arnold, M. M., Knipe, D. M.,
and Finberg, R. W. (2004). Herpes
simplex virus 1 interaction with Toll-
like receptor 2 contributes to lethal
encephalitis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 101, 1315–1320.

Lemaitre, B., Nicolas, E., Michaut, L.,
Reichhart, J. M., and Hoffmann, J. A.
(1996). The dorsoventral regulatory
gene cassette spätzle/Toll/cactus con-
trols the potent antifungal response
in Drosophila
86,
973–983.

adults.

Cell

Li, J., Faber, M., Dietzschold, B., and
Hooper, D. C. (2011). The role of
toll-like receptors in the induction
of immune responses during rabies
virus infection. Adv. Virus Res. 79,
115–126.

Li, X., Lu, C., Stewart, M., Xu, H.,
Strong, R. K., Igumenova, T., and
Li, P. (2009). Structural basis of
double-stranded RNA recognition by
the RIG-I like receptor MDA5. Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 488, 23–33.

Liao, C. L., Lin, Y. L., Shen, S. C., Shen,
J. Y., Su, H. L., Huang, Y. L., Ma, S. H.,
Sun, Y. C., Chen, K. P., and Chen, L. K.
(1998). Antiapoptotic but not antivi-
ral function of human bcl-2 assists
establishment of Japanese encephali-
tis virus persistence in cultured cells.
J. Virol. 72, 9844–9854.

Licon Luna, R. M., Lee, E., Müll-
bacher, A., Blanden, R. V., Langman,
R., and Lobigs, M. (2002). Lack of
both Fas ligand and perforin protects
from ﬂavivirus-mediated encephali-
tis in mice. J. Virol. 76, 3202–3211.

Lima, G. K., Zolini, G. P., Mansur, D.
S., Freire Lima, B. H., Wischhoff, U.,
Astigarraga, R. G., Dias, M. F., das
Graças Almeida Silva, M., Béla, S.

R., do Valle Antonelli, L. R., Arantes,
R. M., Gazzinelli, R. T., Báﬁca, A.,
Kroon, E. G., and Campos, M. A.
(2010). Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 and
TLR9 expressed in trigeminal ganglia
are critical to viral control during her-
pes simplex virus 1 infection. Am. J.
Pathol. 177, 2433–2445.

Lokensgard, J. R., Hu, S., Sheng, W.,
vanOijen, M., Cox, D., Cheeran,
M. C., and Peterson, P. K. (2001).
Robust expression of TNF-alpha, IL-
1beta, RANTES, and IP-10 by human
microglial cells during nonproduc-
tive infection with herpes simplex
virus. J. Neurovirol. 7, 208.

Loo, Y. M., Fornek, J., Crochet, N.,
Bajwa, G., Perwitasari, O., Martinez-
Sobrido, L., Akira, S., Gill, M. A.,
García-Sastre, A., Katze, M. G., and
Gale, M. Jr. (2008). Distinct RIG-I
and MDA5 signaling by RNA viruses
in innate immunity.
J. Virol. 82,
335–345.

Lui, P., Li, K., Garofalo, R. P., and
Brasier, A. R. (2008). Respiratory
syncytial virus induces RelA release
from cytoplasmic 100-kDa NF-kappa
B2 complexes via a novel retinoic
acid-inducible gene-I NF- kappa B-
inducing kinase signaling pathway. J.
Biol. Chem. 283, 23169–23178.

Martin, F. C., Anton, P. A., Gornbein,
J. A., Shanahan, F., and Merrill, J. E.
(1993). Production of interleukin-1
by microglia in response to substance
P: role for a non-classical NK-1 recep-
tor. J. Neuroimmunol. 42, 53–60.

McCormack, J. G., and Allworth, A. M.
(2002). Emerging viral infections in
Australia. Med. J. Aust. 177, 45–49.

McKimmie, C. S., Johnson, N., Fooks,
A. R., and Fazakerley, J. K. (2005).
Viruses selectively upregulate Toll-
like receptors in the central nervous
system. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Com-
mun. 28, 925–933.

McKimmie, C. S., and Fazakerley, J.
K. (2005). In response to pathogens,
glial cells dynamically and differen-
tially regulate Toll-like receptor gene
expression.
J. Neuroimmunol. 169,
116–125.

Medzhitov, R., and Janeway, C. A.
(2002). Decoding the patterns of self
and nonself by the innate immune
system. Science 296, 298–300.

Medzhitov, R., Preston-Hurlburt, P.,
and Janeway, C. A.
(1997). A
human homologue of the Drosophila
Toll protein signals activation of
adaptive immunity. Nature 388,
394–397.

Melton, L. M., Keith, A. B., Davis,
S., Oakley, A. E., Edwardson, J. A.,
and Morris, C. M. (2003). Chronic
glial activation, neurodegeneration,
and APP immunoreactive deposits

following acute administration of
double-stranded RNA. Glia 44, 1–12.
Parquet, M. C., Kumatori, A., Hasebe,
F., Morita, K., and Igarashi, A.
(2001). West Nile virus-induced bax-
dependent apoptosis. FEBS Lett. 500,
17–24.

Pichlmair, A., Schulz, O., Tan, C. P.,
Näslund, T. I., Liljeström, P., Weber,
F., and Reis e Sousa, C. (2006).
RIG-I-mediated antiviral responses
(cid:2)
-
to single-stranded RNA bearing 5
phosphates. Science 314, 997–1001.

Ranjan, P., Bowzard, J. B., Schwerz-
mann, J. W., Jeisy-Scott, V., Fujita,
T., and Sambhara, S. (2009). Cyto-
plasmic nucleic acid sensors in antivi-
ral immunity. Trends Mol. Med. 15,
359–368.

Rasley, A., Bost, K. L., and Marriott, I.
(2004). Murine gammaherpesvirus-
68 elicits robust levels of interleukin-
12 p40, but not interleukin-12 p70
production, by murine microglia
and astrocytes.
J. Neurovirol. 10,
171–180.

Rebsamen, M., Heinz, L. X., Mey-
lan, E., Michallet, M. C., Schroder,
K., Hofmann, K., Vazquez, J., Bene-
dict, C. A., and Tschopp, J. (2009).
DAI/ZBP1 recruits RIP1 and RIP3
through RIP homotypic interaction
motifs to activate NF-kappaB. EMBO
Rep. 10, 916–922.

Rehwinkel, J., Tan, C. P., Goubau, D.,
Schulz, O., Pichlmair, A., Bier, K.,
Robb, N., Vreede, F., Barclay, W.,
Fodor, E., and Reis e Sousa, C. (2010).
RIG-I detects viral genomic RNA
during negative-strand RNA virus
infection. Cell 140, 397–408.

Roos, K. L. (1999). Central nervous
system infections. Neurol. Clin. 17,
813–833.

Rothenburg, S., Schwartz, T., Koch-
Nolte, F., and Haag, F. (2002). Com-
plex regulation of the human gene for
the Z-DNA binding protein DLM-1.
Nucleic Acids Res. 30, 993–1000.

Sabbah, A., Chang, T. H., Harnack, R.,
Frohlich, V., Tominaga, K., Dube, P.
H., Xiang, Y., and Bose, S. (2009).
Activation of innate immune antivi-
ral responses by Nod2. Nat. Immunol.
10, 1073–1080.

Saito, T., Hirai, R., Loo, Y. M., Owen,
D.,
Johnson, C. L., Sinha, S. C.,
Akira, S., Fujita, T., and Gale, M. Jr.
(2007). Regulation of innate antiviral
defenses through a shared repressor
domain in RIG-I and LGP2. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 582–587.
Samaratunga, H., Searle, J. W., and Hud-
son, N. (1998). Non-rabies lyssavirus
human encephalitis from fruit bats:
Australian bat lyssavirus (pteropid
lyssavirus) infection. Neuropathol.
Appl. Neurobiol. 24, 331–335.

Samuel, C. E. (2001). Antiviral actions
of interferons. Clin. Microbiol. Rev.
14, 778–809.

Savarin, C., and Bergmann, C. C.
(2008). Neuroimmunology of cen-
tral nervous system viral infections:
the cells, molecules and mechanisms
involved. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 8,
472–479.

Schachtele, S. J., Hu, S., Little, M. R., and
Lokensgard, J. R. (2010). Herpes sim-
plex virus induces neural oxidative
damage via microglial cell Toll-like
receptor-2. J. Neuroinﬂammation 28,
7–35

Schroder, K., and Tschopp, J. (2010).
140,

inﬂammasomes.

Cell

The
821–832.

Sejvar, J. J. (2006). The evolving epi-
demiology of viral encephalitis. Curr.
Opin. Neurol. 19, 350–357.

Shrestha, B., Gottlieb, D., and Diamond,
M. S. (2003). Infection and injury
of neurons by West Nile encephalitis
virus. J. Virol. 77, 13203–13213.

Solomon, T., Ni, H., Beasley, D. W.,
Ekkelenkamp, M., Cardosa, M. J.,
and Barrett, A. D. (2003). Origin
and evolution of Japanese encephali-
tis virus in southeast Asia. J. Virol. 77,
3091–3098.

Stahl, J. P., Mailles, A., Vaillant, V., Floret,
D., and Encephalitis Protocol Group.
(2008). Acute infectious encephalitis
and pathogens coming from animals.
Medicina (Kaunas) 44, 821–826.

Stetson, D. B., and Medzhitov, R.
(2006). Recognition of cytosolic
DNA activates an IRF3-dependent
innate immune response. Immunity
24, 93–103.

Stoll, G., and Jander, S. (1999). The
role of microglia and macrophages
in the pathophysiology of the CNS.
Prog. Neurobiol. 58, 233–247.

Streit, W. J., Semple-Rowland, S. L.,
Hurley, S. D., Miller, R. C., Popovich,
P. G., and Stokes, B. T. (1998).
Cytokine mRNA proﬁles in contused
spinal cord and axotomized facial
nucleus suggest a beneﬁcial role for
inﬂammation and gliosis. Exp. Neu-
rol. 152, 74–87.

Sumpter, R. Jr., Loo, Y. M., Foy, E., Li, K.,
Yoneyama, M., Fujita, T., Lemon, S.
M., and Gale, M. Jr. (2005). Regulat-
ing intracellular antiviral defense and
permissiveness to hepatitis C virus
RNA replication through a cellular
RNA helicase, RIG-I. J. Virol. 79,
2689–2699.

Suthar, M. S., Ma, D. Y., Thomas,
S., Lund, J. M., Zhang, N., Dafﬁs,
S., Rudensky, A. Y., Bevan, M. J.,
Clark, E. A., Kaja, M. K., Dia-
mond, M. S., and Gale, M. Jr.
(2010). IPS-1 is essential for the con-
trol of West Nile virus infection and

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 201 | 11

“fmicb-03-00201” — 2012/6/21 — 13:37 — page 11 — #11

Furr and Marriott

Glial cells and viral neuroinﬂammation

immunity. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000757.
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000757

Suzumura, A.,

Sawada, M.,

and
Takayanagi, T. (1998). Production of
interleukin-12 and expression of its
receptors by murine microglia. Brain
Res. 787, 139–142.

Takahasi, K., Kumeta, H., Tsuduki,
N., Narita, R., Shigemoto, T., Hirai,
R., Yoneyama, M., Horiuchi, M.,
Ogura, K., Fujita, T., and Inagaki, F.
(2009). Solution structures of cytoso-
lic RNA sensor MDA5 and LGP2 C-
terminal domains:
identiﬁcation of
the RNA recognition loop in RIG-
I-like receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 284,
17465–17474.

Takaoka, A., Wang, Z., Choi, M., Yanai,
H., Negishi, H., Ban, T., Lu, Y.,
Miyagishi, M., Kodama, T., Hon-
dra, K., Ohba, Y., and Taniguchi,
T. (2007). DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) is a
cytosolic DNA sensor and an acti-
vator of innate immune response.
Nature 448, 501–506.

Takeuchi, O., and Akira, S. (2008).
MDA5/RIG-I and virus recognition.
Curr. Opin. Immunol. 20, 17–22.

Takeuchi, O., and Akira, S. (2010).
Pattern recognition receptors and
inﬂammation. Cell 140, 805–820.

Theerasurakarn, S., and Ubol, S. (1998).
Apoptosis induction in brain dur-
ing the ﬁxed strain of rabies virus
infection correlates with onset and
severity of illness. J. Neurovirol. 4,
407–414.

Town, T., Jeng, D., Alexopoulou, L., Tan,
J., and Flavell, R. A. (2006). Microglia
recognize double-stranded RNA via
TLR3. J. Immunol. 176, 3804–3812.

Town, T., Bai, F., Wang, T., Kaplan, A. T.,
Qian, F., Montgomery, R. R., Ander-
son, J. F., Flavell, R. A., and Fikrig, E.
(2009). Toll-like receptor 7 mitigates
lethal West Nile encephalitis via inter-
leukin 23-dependent
immune cell
inﬁltration and homing. Immunity
30, 242–253.

Tunkel, A. R., Glaser, C. A., Bloch, K. C.,
Sejvar, J. J., Marra, C. M., Roos, K. L.,
Hartman, B. J., Kaplan, S. L., Scheld,
W. M., and Whitley, R. J. (2008). The
management of encephalitis: clinical
practice guidelines by the Infectious
Disease Society of America. Clin.
Infect. Dis. 47, 303–327.

Tyler, K. L. (2009). Emerging viral infec-
tions of the central nervous system:
part 2. Arch. Neurol. 66, 1065–1074.

van Marle, G., Antony, J., Ostermann,
H., Dunham, C., Hunt, T., Halli-
day, W., Maingat, F., Urbanowski,
M. D., Hobman, T., Peeling,
J.,
and Power, C. (2007). West Nile
virus-induced neuroinﬂammation:
glial
infection and capsid protein-
mediated neurovirulence. J. Virol. 81,
10933–10949.

Wang,

J. J., Liao, C. L., Chiou, Y.
W., Chiou, C. T., Huang, Y. L.,
and Chen, L. K. (1997). Ultrastruc-
ture and localization of E proteins in
cultured neuron cells infected with
Japanese encephalitis virus. Virology
238, 30–39.

Wang,

J. P., Bowen, G. N., Zhou,
S., Cerny, A., Zacharia, A., Knipe,
D. M., Finberg, R. W., and Kurt-
Jones, E. A. (2012). Role of speciﬁc
innate immune responses in herpes
simplex virus infection of the cen-
tral nervous system.
J. Virol. 86,
2273–2281.

Wang, T., and Fikrig, E. (2004). Immu-
nity to West Nile virus. Curr. Opin.
Immunol. 16, 519–523.

Wang, T., Town, T., Alexopoulou, L.,
Anderson, J. F., Fikrig, E., and Flavell,
R. A. (2004). Toll-like receptor 3
mediates West Nile virus entry into
the brain causing lethal encephalitis.
Nat. Med. 10, 1366–1373.

Wang, Z., Choi, M. K., Ban, T.,
Yanai, H., Negishi, H., Lu, Y.,
Tamura, T., Takaoka, A., Nishikura,
K., and Taniguchi, T. (2008). Regula-
tion of innate immune responses by

DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) and other DNA-
sensing molecules. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 105, 5477–5482.

Whitley, R. J., and Kimberlin, D. W.
(1999). Viral encephalitis. Pediatr.
Rev. 20, 192–198.

Wilkins, C., and Gale, M. Jr. (2010).
Recognition of viruses by cytoplas-
mic sensors. Curr. Opin. Immunol.
22, 41–47.

Xu, F., Sternberg, M. R., Kottiri, B.
J., McQuillan, G. M., Lee, F. K.,
Nahmias, A. J., Berman, S. M., and
Markowitz, L. E. (2006). Trends in
herpes simplex virus type 1 and type
2 seroprevalence in the United States.
JAMA 296, 964–973.

Yoneyama, M., and Fujita, T. (2010).
Recognition of viral nucleic acids in
innate immunity. Rev. Med. Virol. 20,
4–22.

Yoneyama, M., Kikuchi, M., Mat-
sumoto, K., Imaizumi, T., Miyagishi,
M.,. Taira, K., Foy, E., Loo, Y. M., Gale,
M. Jr., Akira, S., Yonehara, S., Kato,
A., and Fujita, T. (2005). Shared and
unique functions of the DExD/H-
box helicases RIG-I, MDA5, and
LGP2 in antiviral innate immunity.
J. Immunol. 175, 2851–2858.

and Fujita, T.

Yoneyama, M., Kikuchi, M., Nat-
sukawa, T., Shinobu, N., Imaizumi,
T., Miyagishi, M., Taira, K., Akira,
S.,
(2004). The
RNA helicase RIG-I has an essential
function in double-stranded RNA-
induced innate antiviral responses.
Nat. Immunol. 7, 730–737.

Yoshida, H.,

Imaizumi, T., Lee, S.
J., Tanji, K., Sakaki, H., Mat-
sumiya, T., Ishikawa, A., Taima, K.,
Yuzawa, E., Mori, F., Wakabayashi,
K., Kimura, H., and Satoh, K.
(2007). Retinoic acid-inducible gene-
I mediates RANTES/CCL5 expres-
sion in U373MG human astrocy-
toma cells stimulated with double-
stranded RNA. Neurosci. Res. 58,
199–206.

Zhang, S. Y., Jouanguy, E., Ugolini,
S., Smahi, A., Elain, G., Romero,
P., Segal, D., Sancho-Shimizu, V.,
Lorenzo, L., Puel, A., Picard, C.,
Chapgier, A., Plancoulaine, S., Titeux,
M., Cognet, C., von Bernuth, H.,
Ku, C. L., Casrouge, A., Zhang, X.
X., Barreiro, L., Leonard, J., Hamil-
ton, C., Lebon, P., Héron, B., Vallée,
L., Quintana-Murci, L., Hovnanian,
A., Rozenberg, F., Vivier, E., Geiss-
mann, F., Tardieu, M., Abel, L., and
Casanova, J. L. (2007). TLR3 deﬁ-
ciency in patients with herpes simplex
encephalitis. Science 317, 1522–1527.
Zhou, Y., Ye, L., Wan, Q., Zhou, L.,
Wang, X., Li, J., Hu, S., Zhou, D., and,
Ho, W. (2009). Activation of Toll-
like receptors inhibits herpes simplex
virus-1 infection of human neuronal
cells. J. Neurosci. Res. 87, 2916–2925.

Conflict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 19 March 2012; paper pend-
ing published: 04 April 2012; accepted:
15 May 2012; published online: 20 June
2012.
Citation: Furr SR and Marriott I (2012)
Viral CNS infections: role of glial pat-
tern recognition receptors in neuroin-
ﬂammation. Front. Microbio. 3:201. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00201
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Microbial Immunology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Furr and Marriott.
This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non Commercial License,
which permits non-commercial use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in other
forums, provided the original authors and
source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 201 | 12

“fmicb-03-00201” — 2012/6/21 — 13:37 — page 12 — #12

