ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 07 February 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00033

Phosphorus cycling in the red tide incubator region of
Monterey Bay in response to upwelling

Katherine R. M. Mackey 1*, Cécile E. Mioni 2, John P. Ryan3 and Adina Paytan2

1 Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, MA, USA
2 Institute of Marine Science, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA, USA
3 Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, Moss Landing, CA, USA

Edited by:
Sonya Dyhrman, Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, USA
Reviewed by:
Lisa Moore, University of Southern
Maine, USA
Bethany Jenkins, University of Rhode
Island, USA
Jason B. Sylvan, University of
Southern California, USA
*Correspondence:
Katherine R. M. Mackey, Marine
Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution,
Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA.
e-mail: mackeykrm@gmail.com

This study explores the cycling of phosphorus (P) in the euphotic zone following upwelling
in northeastern Monterey Bay (the Red Tide Incubator region) of coastal California, with
particular emphasis on how bacteria and phytoplankton that form harmful algal blooms
mediate and respond to changes in P availability. In situ measurements of nutrient con-
centrations, phytoplankton community composition, and cell-speciﬁc alkaline phosphatase
(AP) activity (determined via enzyme-labeled ﬂuorescence assay) were measured during
three cruises. Upwelling led to a 10-fold increase in dissolved inorganic (DIP) in surface
waters, reaching ∼0.5 μmol L−1. This DIP was drawn down rapidly as upwelling relaxed
over a period of 1 week. Ratios of nitrate to DIP drawdown (∼5:1, calculated as the change
in nitrate divided by the change in DIP) were lower than the Redﬁeld ratio of 16:1, suggest-
ing that luxury P uptake was occurring as phytoplankton bloomed. Dissolved organic (DOP)
remained relatively constant (∼0.3 μmol L−1) before and immediately following upwelling,
but doubled as upwelling relaxed, likely due to phytoplankton excretion and release dur-
ing grazing. This transition from a relatively high DIP:DOP ratio to lower DIP:DOP ratio
was accompanied by a decline in the abundance of diatoms, which had low AP activity,
toward localized, spatially heterogeneous blooms of dinoﬂagellates in the genera Proro-
centrum, Ceratium, Dinophysis, Alexandrium, and Scrippsiella that showed high AP activity
regardless of ambient DIP levels. A nutrient addition incubation experiment showed that
phytoplankton growth was primarily limited by nitrate, followed by DIP and DOP, suggest-
ing that P regulates phytoplankton physiology and competition, but is not a limiting nutrient
in this region. AP activity was observed in bacteria associated with lysed cell debris and
aggregates of particulate organic material, where it may serve to facilitate P regeneration,
as well as afﬁxed to the surfaces of intact phytoplankton cells, possibly indicative of close,
beneﬁcial phytoplankton–bacteria interactions.

Keywords: phosphorus cycle, upwelling, red tide, harmful algal bloom, alkaline phosphatase, Monterey Bay

INTRODUCTION
Coastal regions cover less than 15% of the ocean’s surface, yet they
contribute nearly half of the ocean’s primary productivity (Wol-
last, 1991). The high productivity of coastal waters is due in part
to their proximity to land, where inputs from rivers, atmospheric
deposition, and groundwater can all transport terrestrial nutrients
from the Earth’s crust into the ocean. However, a large portion
(∼50%) of coastal productivity is attributable to upwelling in
eastern boundary current regions (Chavez and Toggweiler, 1995).
Coastal upwelling brings nutrient rich deep water to the surface
ocean where it supports phytoplankton growth, thereby inﬂuenc-
ing the carbon (C) cycle and forming the base of marine food webs.
Harmful algal blooms (HABs), such as red tides, can also occur in
coastal waters and may be controlled by excessive nutrient input
or unbalanced nutrient stoichiometry.

Historically much emphasis has been placed on the availabil-
ity of nitrogen (N) in controlling marine productivity (Dugdale
and Goering, 1967; Falkowski, 1997). This is particularly true of

coastal upwelling regions, where productivity is strongly correlated
with N availability (Chavez and Messie, 2009) and phytoplank-
ton grow out experiments can point to N limitation even when
ambient N concentrations are high (Kudela and Dugdale, 2000;
Mackey et al., 2010). However, a growing body of literature sug-
gests that phosphorus (P) availability also exerts inﬂuence on
phytoplankton dynamics in coastal waters (Sylvan et al., 2006).
Dissolved inorganic P (DIP) has been identiﬁed as a limiting nutri-
ent along the southern coast of China (Harrison et al., 1990), the
eastern Mediterranean Sea (Krom et al., 1991), coastal Florida
(Fourqurean et al., 1993), and in the northern Red Sea, where
it is co-limiting along with N (Mackey et al., 2009, 2011). Addi-
tionally, in regions where P does not limit primary productivity
directly, DIP availability may still inﬂuence the physiological status
of various phytoplankton species in different ways. For example, in
upwelling regions along the Oregon coast, the P status of diatoms is
more tightly controlled by DIP availability than it is for dinoﬂagel-
lates (Dyhrman and Ruttenberg, 2006), and this could inﬂuence

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 1

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

competition among these groups. In addition to primary pro-
ducers, bacteria often experience P limitation in coastal waters
(Sundareshwar et al., 2003).

Recent research has also highlighted the importance of dis-
solved organic P (DOP) as a nutrient source for phytoplankton.
Many coastal phytoplankton species can grow on DOP as their
sole source of P (Bjorkman and Karl, 1994), and DOP can be
a source of P and C to heterotrophic bacteria (Kirchman et al.,
2000). Several studies conducted in coastal upwelling zones along
the California and Oregon coasts suggest that natural phytoplank-
ton assemblages in these regions access the DOP pool (Dyhrman
and Ruttenberg, 2006; Nicholson et al., 2006). Less is known about
whether HAB species access DOP, or how their P status inﬂuences
bloom dynamics. However, species-speciﬁc responses to various
types of nutrient enrichment have been recorded (Anderson et al.,
2002 and references therein), suggesting that P requirements of
HAB species are also likely to be diverse. Understanding the role
of DOP for phytoplankton nutrition in coastal upwelling regions
is particularly intriguing given the typically large inventory of
DOP relative to DIP in these regions, and the increasing supply
of anthropogenic N to coastal regions that would tend to drive
these systems toward P limitation and favor the ability of phyto-
plankton to access P bound in organic matter (Sylvan et al., 2006;
Kudela et al., 2008).

Phosphorus in the DOP pool is made accessible to phyto-
plankton and other microbes via enzyme-mediated hydrolysis
reactions that liberate orthophosphate from organic molecules.
The enzyme alkaline phosphatase (AP) is one such enzyme that
hydrolyzes phosphomonoester bonds, generating a free phosphate
group, and an alcohol as products. In many organisms AP is
synthesized in response to low ambient DIP levels, a character-
istic that has led to its use as an indicator of DIP limitation in
microbial communities (Dyhrman and Palenik, 1999). Different
approaches have been used to quantify AP activity in environ-
mental samples, and the techniques generally fall into one of
two categories. The ﬁrst are bulk community assays using phos-
phomonoester substrates (e.g., p-nitrophenyl phosphate and 4-
methylumbelliferylphosphate) that form soluble hydrolysis prod-
ucts in the presence of AP. These assays allow relatively rapid, high
throughput quantitative analysis of samples, but are unable to dis-
tinguish which species in a mixed microbial assemblage contribute
AP activity. This complicates studies on nutrient limitation of pri-
mary production, since the AP activity of phytoplankton cannot
be distinguished from that of non-photosynthetic microbes. Mea-
suring the AP activity of speciﬁc size-fractionated classes provides
a greater amount of taxonomic resolution, but cannot distinguish
between the AP activities of different species within the same size
class, and may be prone to error in systems where bacteria form
aggregates or coalesce on larger organic particles (Nicholson et al.,
2006).

The second category of AP activity assays involve the direct
labeling of cells at the location of the AP enzyme. These include
staining with azo dyes (Barka, 1960), probing with antibodies
(Dyhrman and Palenik, 2001), and precipitating lead phosphate
(Mayahara et al., 1967). More recently, enzyme-labeled ﬂuores-
cence (ELF) has been used to label phytoplankton cells with a
ﬂuorescent precipitate following hydrolysis of the non-ﬂuorescent

substrate molecule at the site of the AP enzyme (Dyhrman and
Palenik, 1999; Nicholson et al., 2006; Mackey et al., 2007). Unlike
bulk AP activity assays that provide quantitative measurement of
AP hydrolysis rates, these cell-speciﬁc assays are qualitative, mea-
suring the frequency of AP expression among a group of cells.
Direct labeling assays are therefore useful when determination of
taxon-speciﬁc AP activity is desired (such as by comparing the
labeling of different species across a mixed assemblage), or when
the degree of phosphate limitation within a given species is of inter-
est (such as by comparing the frequency of labeled and non-labeled
individuals of the same species).

This study uses ELF labeling to identify AP activity in micro-
bial communities from Monterey Bay, California following an
upwelling event that gave rise to a red tide. The red tide incubator
(RTI) is a persistent feature of northeastern Monterey Bay, where
dense dinoﬂagellate populations frequently develop (Ryan et al.,
2008), and from which blooms may spread rapidly throughout
the bay and along the adjacent coast (Ryan et al., 2009). Dinoﬂa-
gellate species that incubate in the RTI may cause harmful effects
through multiple mechanisms, including production of toxins and
surfactants (Ryan et al., 2008; Jessup et al., 2009; Kudela et al.,
2010). The ﬁrst documented case of seabird mortality caused by
a surfactant-producing red tide occurred in the RTI (Jessup et al.,
2009). The cost of such HABs in the United States is estimated to
be $82 million per year (Hoagland and Scatasta, 2006), providing
a clear economic incentive to understand HAB dynamics such that
mitigation strategies can be developed.

In this study, we use water chemistry data collected during three
sampling events to understand the fate of upwelled P and its par-
titioning between inorganic and organic reservoirs. Observations
of phytoplankton relative abundance and AP activity are used to
understand how P availability affects community composition and
contributes to HAB formation in this dynamic environment. This
study increases our understanding of the cell-speciﬁc P status of
red tide phytoplankton during bloom formation by examining
of a broad range of species and measuring their responses to P
dynamics following upwelling.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
SAMPLING
Samples were collected from an along shore transect located within
the RTI (Ryan et al., 2008, 2011) region of Monterey Bay dur-
ing three sampling events on 7, 14, and 21 of October 2008 that
spanned an upwelling event. We refer to these dates as “pre-
upwelling,” “upwelling,” and “relaxation” respectively; however,
these terms refer to the arrival of upwelled water to our sam-
pling sites rather than to the wind conditions (which can also
be used to identify upwelling). The “pre-upwelling” sampling on
7 October occurred during early arrival of upwelling favorable
winds, but prior to the arrival of recently upwelled waters in the
Bay (Ryan et al., 2011). Oceanographic conditions on that date
evidently reﬂected the lack of strong upwelling favorable winds
in the week preceding sampling. The “upwelling” sampling on 14
October occurred when the sea surface temperature response to
the strong upwelling winds (October 7–12) was at a maximum.
Accordingly, oceanographic conditions deﬁne strong upwelling
response on this date, even though winds on this sampling day were

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 2

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

not as strong. The “relaxation” sampling on 21 October occurred
when winds were moderate, but the oceanographic conditions still
reﬂected relaxation of the preceding upwelling event.

The sampling transect stretched between the outlets of Elkhorn
Slough and Pajaro Creek, extending northwest toward the San
Lorenzo River outlet with the following six stations (Figure 1):
St1 (121.8018W, 36.8161N), St2 (121.8218W, 36.8454N), St3
(121.8437W, 36.8834N), St4 (121.8674W, 36.9120N), St5
(121.8938W, 36.9406N), and St6 (121.9311W, 36.9571N). Tem-
perature and salinity were measured continuously at 2 m via an
underway system during each cruise. Temperature and chlorophyll
ﬂuorescence were also monitored continuously at two moorings
located at the northern and southern ends of the RTI (Figure 1)
throughout October as described by Ryan et al. (2011).

WATER CHEMISTRY
Sample water was syringe ﬁltered (0.45 μm) into acid washed,
sample rinsed plastic bottles and frozen until analysis. Seawa-
ter concentrations of soluble reactive phosphorus (SRP), nitrate
(NO3, including trace amounts of nitrite), and silicate were ana-
lyzed using colorimetric methods described by Hansen and Korol-
eff (1999) modiﬁed for a ﬂow injection autoanalyzer (FIA, Lachat
Instruments Model QuickChem 8000). The detection limits were
−1, and 0.04 μmol silicate
0.03 μmol SRP L
−1. SRP is operationally deﬁned and includes any P compounds
L
that can be detected using the molybdenum blue colorimetric

−1, 0.04 μmol NO

−
3 L

FIGURE 1 | Map of Monterey Bay showing the location of the six
sampling stations (closed circles, labeled Station 1–6) within the red
tide incubator. The open circle labeled “N” denotes the location of the
northern RTI mooring. The open circle labeled “S” denotes the location of
the southern mooring, which is the location where water for the incubation
experiment was collected. Shaded region shows approximate location of
the RTI.

assay. In coastal waters SRP provides a robust approximation of
DIP (Monaghan and Ruttenberg, 1999), although it can include
other forms of P. For simplicity we refer to SRP as DIP throughout
the text.

Total dissolved P and N samples were analyzed following per-
sulfate digestion as described in D’Elia et al. (1977) and Valderrama
(1981). The precision for these measurements was 4% based on
duplicate measurements from a single sample bottle. The detec-
−1 for total
tion limit was 0.2 μmol L
N. DOP was calculated as the difference of total dissolved P and
SRP. Dissolved organic N was calculated as the difference between
−
3 , and may include a small (<5%)
total dissolved N and NO
contribution from ammonium.

−1 for total P and 1.5 μmol L

Samples for DOC analysis were ﬁltered through a sterile 0.2-μm
ﬁlter and collected into acid washed and combusted borosilicate
glass scintillation vials with teﬂon lined screw caps. Samples were
acidiﬁed with HCl to pH < 2 and purged to remove inorganic
(and purgeable organic) carbon, stored cold (4˚C) in the dark until
analysis. Samples were analyzed using a Shimadzu TOC analyzer
(EPA method 415.1). The detection limit was 1 μmol L

−1.

-ochloro-2

ELF PHOSPHATASE ASSAY
The endogenous phosphatase detection kit (Molecular Probes
E 6601) was used to detect cell-speciﬁc phosphatase activity.
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
The ELF 97 phosphatase substrate, ELF-P, [2-(5
-
phosphoryloxyphenol)-6-chloro-4-(3H)-quinazolinone] is a sol-
uble molecule that forms an insoluble alcohol precipitate following
cleavage of the phosphate group by the AP enzyme. One liter sea-
water samples were ﬁltered at low pressure unto 0.45 μm ﬁlters,
gently eluted with 800 μL 70% ethanol, and stored at 0˚C until
analysis. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) was added to a ﬁnal concen-
tration of 10% to enhance cell penetration by the ELF-P substrate
and improve labeling clarity (Lomas et al., 2004). Samples were
incubated in the DMSO for 30 min in the dark, centrifuged (5 min,
5000 rpm), and the supernatant discarded. The ELF-P substrate
was diluted 1:20 into the provided buffer. The cell pellets were
resuspended in 100 μL of this mixture and incubated in the dark
at 4˚C for 1 h. To stop the reaction, the cells were rinsed with 100 μL
sterile artiﬁcial seawater, centrifuged (5 min, 5000 rpm), and the
supernatant discarded. Cell pellets were resuspended in 10 μL ster-
ile artiﬁcial seawater and stored in the dark at 4˚C. Cell counts and
scoring of ﬂuorescent labeling was conducted using a Leitz DMRB
microscope equipped with a DAPI ﬁlter set and UV excitation
(∼345 nm), and photographed with a Leica DC500 camera. Cells
were scored as being positive for AP activity if any portion of the
cell was labeled with the ELF precipitate. Phytoplankton taxa were
identiﬁed following Tomas (1997).

NUTRIENT ADDITION BIOASSAY
An incubation experiment was conducted with water collected
near the southern edge of the RTI region (Figure 1) beginning
October 4, 2009, as described in Mackey et al. (2010). Treatments
included control (no addition), as well as nutrient additions with
−1 NaH2PO4 as a source
ﬁnal concentrations of either 1.5 μmol L
−1 phytic acid as a source of DOP (equivalent to
of DIP, 1.5 μmol L
−
9 μmol P L
3 . These
concentrations are equivalent to levels that are routinely measured

−1 NaNO3 as a source of NO

−1), or 25 μmol L

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 3

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

in Monterey Bay following large upwelling events (Pennington
and Chavez, 2000). Treatments were conducted in triplicate using
acid washed, seawater rinsed polycarbonate bottles. Bottles were
incubated for 30 h in a tank with circulating seawater to main-
tain ambient temperature, and were shaded with neutral density
screen that provided 50% light attenuation. Chl a was measured
ﬂuorometrically as described previously (Mackey et al., 2010).

during relaxation (Figure 3). The ratio of DON:DOP concen-
trations was relatively consistent before, during, and after the
−
upwelling event (Figure 4), while the ratio of NO
3 : DIP con-
centrations only changed during the period of upwelling. How-
−
ever, the NO
3 : DIP ratios were always well below the Redﬁeld
ratio of 16:1 that phytoplankton typically require for growth
(Figure 4).

RESULTS
WATER CHEMISTRY
Water chemistry was monitored during three sampling events
that occurred immediately before, during, and 1 week after an
upwelling event in October 2008. Upwelling brought colder,
more saline water to the surface (Figures 2 and 3), and was
characterized by high inorganic nutrient and DOC concentra-
tions, and low organic nutrient concentrations (Figure 3). Dur-
ing relaxation of upwelling, inorganic nutrient concentrations
declined, while organic nutrient levels increased. DIP concentra-
tions increased more than 10-fold during upwelling, increasing
−1. The DIP concentration decreased
from 0.05 to 0.54 μmol L
−1 over the following week as upwelling relaxed
to 0.26 μmol L
−
(Figure 3). NO
3 followed a similar pattern, increasing 25-fold
−1 during upwelling, and then decreasing
from 0.05 to 1.76 μmol L
−1) during relaxation.
to at or below detection limit (0.04 μmol L
−
[We note that the NO
3 enrichment we observed in the RTI fol-
lowing upwelling was low compared to other nearby locations;
−1 was observed
for example, NO
in the center of Monterey Bay during this study period (Ryan
−1
et al., 2011)]. Silicate increased sharply from 1.5 to 11.0 μmol L
during upwelling, but was only drawn down slightly during relax-
−1 by October 21. In contrast to the
ation, reaching 10.1 μmol L
inorganic nutrients, DOP and DON both decreased slightly dur-
ing upwelling but doubled as upwelling relaxed, reaching 0.8 μmol
−1 respectively (Figure 3). DOC concentrations fol-
and 28 μmol L
lowed a pattern more similar to the inorganic nutrients, increasing
−1 during upwelling, and then declining
from 0.3 to 1.7 μmol L

−
3 levels as high as 15 μmol L

−1 before upwelling to nearly 20 μg L

BLOOM DEVELOPMENT AND COMMUNITY COMPOSITION
An upwelling event introduced cold, nutrient rich water into
the RTI region between October 10–15 (Figures 2 and 3). This
upwelling gave rise to a phytoplankton bloom (i.e., a rapid increase
in photosynthetic biomass), where Chl a levels within the RTI
−1
increased from ∼5 μg L
following upwelling (Figure 2). Here we report the relative abun-
dances of diatoms and dinoﬂagellates during that bloom (i.e.,
the fraction of cells belonging to either group out of the total
number of diatoms and dinoﬂagellates cells counted). Diatoms
and dinoﬂagellates were the major types of phytoplankton in our
samples, together comprising >99% of cells in the size class we
counted (>2 μm). These cells were present at concentrations on
the order of 100s to 1,000s of cells per liter based on the con-
centration factor used for samples during the ELF assay (e.g., 1 L
seawater concentrated to 10 μL). We note that an abundant and
diverse picoplankton community (cells <2 μm) of Synechococcus
and picoeukaryotes also exists in the waters of coastal California
(Toledo and Palenik, 1997; Worden, 2006); however, enumeration
of these cells (which are not known to form red tides in Mon-
terey Bay) was outside the scope of the present study. Excluding
picoplankton, the overall Shannon–Weaver diversity index (H ) for
phytoplankton in the RTI during our study was 2.82. The highest
diversity and evenness of phytoplankton was observed at station

4 (H 4 = 2.82). Stations 1, 2, 3, and 5 had slightly lower diversity

indices (2.61, 2.65, 2.68, and 2.57 respectively), and the lowest
diversity index was observed at station 6 on the edge of the RTI

furthest from the outlet of Elkhorn Slough (H 6 = 2.48, Figure 1).

FIGURE 2 | Time series for the northern and southern RTI showing (A) the intrusion of cold upwelled water, and (B) increased chlorophyll indicative of
the phytoplankton bloom that occurred in response to upwelling. Data are reproduced from Ryan et al. (2011).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 4

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

FIGURE 3 | Water chemistry before (October 7) and during (October 14)
upwelling, and during upwelling relaxation (October 21). Legend for all
panels as in (B). Error bars show SE.

The phytoplankton population initially was a complex assem-
blage composed of roughly equal densities of diatoms and dinoﬂa-
gellates, but transitioned toward a higher relative abundance of
dinoﬂagellates following upwelling (Figure 5). Diatoms initially
represented 47% of cells counted before upwelling occurred.
Following upwelling and relaxation, the relative abundance of
diatoms decreased to 8–25% in stations 1–5, but remained high
at station 6 (54%; Figure 5). The diatom community was com-
posed of a mixture of centric diatoms, pennate diatoms (e.g.,
Pseudo-nitzschia, Rhizosolenia), and chain-forming diatoms (e.g.,
Chaetoceros, Thalassiosira, Thalassionema; Figure 6). The highest
diatom diversity was observed at stations 5 and 6. These stations
were located on the edge of the RTI region, furthest from the open
ocean and the upwelling front.

FIGURE 4 | Ratios of (A) NO
before and during upwelling, and during relaxation.

−
3 : DIP, (B) DON:DOP, and (C) DIP:DOP

Dinoﬂagellate relative abundance was ∼53% before upwelling
occurred, but increased dramatically to up to 92% in the weeks

following upwelling in stations 1–4 (Figures 5 and 7). Like the
diatoms, the dinoﬂagellate relative abundance did not change

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 5

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

FIGURE 5 | Relative abundance (A, B) and percent ELF labeling (C,D) of dinoﬂagellates (A,C) and diatoms (B,D).

FIGURE 6 | Relative abundances of (A) dinoﬂagellate genera, and (B) diatom taxa observed at the six stations during the sampling period.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 6

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

appreciably at station 6 during the sampling period (50%;
Figure 5). The dinoﬂagellate community was taxonomically
diverse and showed a high degree of spatial heterogeneity among
genera (Figure 6). Prorocentrum was present at all stations in all
weeks of sampling and comprised between 13 and 67% of dinoﬂa-
gellate cells (Figure 6). Several species of Prorocentrum spp. were
identiﬁed, including P. micans, P. minimum, P. gracile, P. dentatum,
P. sigmoides, and P. triestinum (Figure 8). Of these, P. micans was
generally the most abundant and most ubiquitous, followed by P.
minimum. The highest relative abundances of Prorocentrum spp.
occurred in week 3 at stations 3 and 4.

A large, localized bloom of Ceratium spp. was centered in sta-
tions 4 and 5 in week 2, where Ceratium spp. cells comprised over
50% of the dinoﬂagellates counted at those stations (Figure 6).
Species included Ceratium balechii, C. furca, and rarely C. linea-
tum. C. balechii was approximately twofold more abundant than
C. furca in these bloom samples. The morphology of C. furca cells
was remarkably conserved, whereas greater variability occurred
in the size and shape of C. balechii cells (Figure 9). We identi-
ﬁed C. balechii based on its morphological similarity to previously
described specimens (Meave del Castillo et al., 2003; Hernández-
Becerril and Alonso-Rodríguez, 2004; Gomez et al., 2008; Pitcher

FIGURE 7 | Correlations between seawater nutrient (DIP, DOP, and
−
NO
3 : DIP) and phytoplankton data (diatom and dinoﬂagellate relative
abundance and ELF labeling). Each panel shows data for all six stations

on each of three sampling dates [legend as in (J) for all panels]. Each panel
shows the best ﬁt line and correlation coefﬁcient for all data points
together.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 7

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

FIGURE 9 | Micrographs of different forms of Ceratium cells
encountered from the red tide incubator region of Monterey Bay
showing (A) C. lineatum, (B) C. furca, (C–H) different morphologies of
C. balechii. Green arrows in (G,H) indicate the location of feeding vacuoles
that were observed in some individuals. Cells are shown under UV
illumination with visible light on, and ELF labeling is visible in some cells as
bright green regions.

has been observed routinely in Monterey Bay (R. Kudela, personal
communication), suggesting that it might be endemic to the region
and may represent a distinct taxonomic group.

A smaller localized bloom of Scrippsiella, Alexandrium, and
Dinophysis occurred at stations 1 and 2 during weeks 2 and 3,
where together they comprised ∼15–25% of cells (Figure 6).
While Scrippsiella and Alexandrium were also observed at all other
sites throughout the sampling period, Dinophysis spp. was rarely
observed at stations 5 and 6. Species of Dinophysis spp. included
D. acuminata and D. fortii. Other rarer types of dinoﬂagellates
included Oxyphysis, Oxytoxum, Phalachroma, and several species
of Protoperidinium.

ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE ACTIVITY
Alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity was assessed via the ELF assay.
Throughout the sampling period, diatom AP activity showed a
higher degree of spatial variability and sensitivity to DIP and
DOP availability compared to dinoﬂagellates (Figures 5 and 7).
Before upwelling occurred, an average of 22% of diatoms showed
strong ELF labeling (range, 7–34%), and the degree of label-
ing increased with distance from the outlet of Elkhorn Slough
(Figure 5). During upwelling when DIP was high, the amount of
ELF labeling decreased to between 0 and 18% for all stations except
station 1 (36%). During relaxation, the fraction of labeled diatom
cells reached its highest value of 32% (range, 26–56%), except
for station 6, where diatoms retained very low labeling (∼4%).
Interestingly, a stronger correlation existed between diatom ELF
labeling and DOP (R2 = 0.50) than between diatom ELF labeling

FIGURE 8 | Micrographs showing ELF labeled phytoplankton: (A)
Rhizosolenia, (B) Pseudo-nitzschia, (C) Prorocentrum micans (top) and
P. gracile (bottom), (D) P. rostratum, (E) Prorocentrum sp, (F) P.
minimum, (G) Ceratium furca (left) and C. balechii (right), (H)
Dinophysis fortii with attached bacteria, (I) Dinophysis fortii. Cells are
shown under UV illumination with visible light on (light background) and off
(dark background).

and Probyn, 2011). This species is characterized by considerable
diversity, is often confused with other species (e.g., C. dens, C.
divaricatum, C. tripos), and has been the subject of taxonomic
debate. The morphological form of C. balechii from the RTI region
of Monterey Bay differs from other examples in the literature in
that it has highly reduced antapical horns, giving it a rounded
appearance (Figures 9C–H). The only example of this rounded
morphotype in the literature was a single specimen reported in
the open southeast Paciﬁc Ocean (Gomez et al., 2008). In contrast,
specimens from the Mexican tropical Paciﬁc Ocean (Meave del
Castillo et al., 2003; Hernández-Becerril and Alonso-Rodríguez,
2004) and the southern Benguela upwelling region of the Atlantic
Ocean (Pitcher and Probyn, 2011) typically retain some portion
of their antapical horns. All specimens observed in our samples
had the rounded phenotype, although subtle morphological dif-
ferences were apparent. For example, some individuals retained the
pentagonal cell shape characteristic of the species (Figures 9C–E),
whereas the rounding obscured this shape in others, giving more
of a circular cell shape (Figure 9F). This morphotype of C. balechii

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 8

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

and DIP (R2 = 0.07). There was no consistent trend in labeling
within diatom species, and most groups included both labeled
and non-labeled individuals.

In contrast to diatoms, the dinoﬂagellate population had higher
proportions of ELF labeled cells (62–92%, average 79%, Figure 5)
−
and the extent of labeling was less sensitive to ambient NO
3 : DIP
ratio, or to DIP or DOP (Figure 7).

The combined ELF labeling of cells from all Prorocentrum
species was relatively uniform on the three sampling dates (aver-
age of all six stations for each date was consistently ∼80%). On
average, 82% of Prorocentrum micans cells exhibited ELF label-
ing (range, 62–100%) throughout the sampling period, showing
little temporal variability. The ELF labeling of P. minimum cells
was more responsive to DIP availability, declining from 72 to 53%
during upwelling when DIP levels were highest. By week three, the
extent of labeling in P. minimum returned to pre-upwelling levels,
reaching 78%. For P. minimum the extent of ELF labeling varied
widely by station (range, 0–100%), although this variability could
be due in part to low abundances of P. minimum in some samples.
Other Prorocentrum species, such as the less abundant P. gracile
and P. triestinum, showed strong, positive ELF labeling in nearly
all cells counted (Figure 8).

Ceratium balechii had consistently high ELF labeling of >95%
in most of the samples where it occurred. C. furca labeling was
more variable, and ranged from 47 to 100% in different samples.
On average ∼70% of Dinophysis acuminata cells were ELF labeled,
whereas <10% of D. fortii cells were labeled. However, a number
of D. fortii cells had bacterial cells on their surfaces that were ELF
labeled. In general both species were more highly labeled where
the cells were most abundant; i.e., stations 1 and 2 in weeks 2 and
3 as described above (Figure 6). On average, 89% of Scrippsiella
cells and 74% of Alexandrium cells exhibited positive ELF labeling.
Enzyme-labeled ﬂuorescence labeling was also observed in bac-
teria afﬁxed to the surfaces of intact cells, as well as associated with
lysed cell debris and aggregates of particulate organic material
(Figure 10).

NUTRIENT ADDITION BIOASSAY
An incubation experiment was conducted to gage the response of
phytoplankton from the RTI region of Monterey Bay to availability
−
of NO
3 , DIP, and DOP during non-upwelling (pre-bloom) con-
ditions. The initial Chl a concentration was 26± 6 μg L
−1, and
after 30 h, Chl a remained similar in the control (25± 3 μg L
−1).
Chlorophyll
increased signiﬁcantly relative to the control
in
(40± 0.4 μg L
−
−1), and DOP
the NO
(30± 1 μg L
−1), treatments (t -tests, p < 0.05; Figure 11).
3

−1), DIP (34± 3 μg L

DISCUSSION
P CYCLING AND PHYTOPLANKTON BLOOM DYNAMICS
Monterey Bay is a dynamic, spatially heterogeneous region that
is strongly inﬂuenced by wind-driven upwelling that varies sea-
sonally in intensity and intermittency (Pennington and Chavez,
2000; Ryan et al., 2011). In this study we sought to understand the
dynamics of P availability and cycling following an upwelling event
that spurred growth of HAB phytoplankton in the RTI region of
Monterey Bay.

Upwelling dramatically increased the concentration of DIP in
surface waters in October 2008. DIP was then quickly consumed as
upwelling relaxed and the phytoplankton bloom developed. The
response of phytoplankton to the upwelling pulse was evidently
variable over relatively small scales. In the middle to outer north-
ern bay, toxigenic diatoms dominated the response to upwelling
(Ryan et al., 2011). However, within the RTI closer to shore where
we monitored P dynamics and phytoplankton, the bloom was
characterized by a shift from a mixed diatom and dinoﬂagellate
assemblage toward one dominated by dinoﬂagellates. As the inner
shelf bloom progressed, DOP accumulated in surface waters, pos-
sibly suggesting that phytoplankton are a source of DOP through
direct excretion or grazing, as proposed for the Oregon upwelling
region (Ruttenberg and Dyhrman, 2005). The concurrent increase
in DOP along with the decline of the diatom population could
signal this effect in particular since diatom cells are more suscep-
tible to fracture during grazing. This could result in DOP release
through sloppy grazing (Dagg, 1974; Lampert, 1978) as has been
suggested for DON in Monterey Bay (Bronk and Ward, 1999).

Like many coastal upwelling regions, phytoplankton produc-
−
tivity in Monterey Bay responds strongly to NO
3 availability over
interannual cycles (Kudela and Chavez, 2000; Pennington and
−
Chavez, 2000), and phytoplankton growth is stimulated by NO
3 in
bottle incubation experiments (Kudela and Dugdale, 2000; Mackey
et al., 2010). In this study, an incubation experiment with nat-
ural seawater collected from the RTI region conducted during
non-upwelling (pre-bloom) conditions showed the strongest Chl
−
a increases following NO
3 additions, with smaller responses for
DIP and DOP (Figure 11). N limitation was also indicated by the
−
NO
3 : DIP ratios in the seawater, which were consistently below
the Redﬁeld ratio of 16:1 typically required for phytoplankton
growth (Redﬁeld et al., 1963; Figures 4 and 7).

While N availability appears to be the primary factor control-
ling phytoplankton abundance in Monterey Bay, several lines of
evidence suggest that P availability also regulates the growth and
physiological status of cells. First, the moderate increase in phyto-
plankton growth relative to the untreated control in the incubation
experiment suggests that some components of the RTI phyto-
plankton community are indeed P limited. Second, the high yet
variable amount of AP activity revealed through ELF labeling sug-
gests that different species have diverse strategies for coping with
P limitation (e.g., inducible AP activity versus high basal AP activ-
ity) and, consequently, are likely to have different physiological P
statuses despite being exposed to identical ambient concentrations
−
of DIP (Mackey et al., 2007). Finally, the molar ratio of NO
3 : DIP
−
drawdown calculated as the change in NO
3 divided by the change
in DIP during the bloom was ∼5:1 (or equivalently 16:3.2), sug-
gesting that approximately threefold more P was taken up than
needed for photosynthesis based on the Redﬁeld ratio of 16:1.
Luxury P uptake along with the capacity for high AP activity in
some species may serve to prevent P limitation when sudden pulses
of N are encountered, such as following upwelling. This may pro-
vide certain species with a competitive edge as blooms begin to
form.

It is interesting that despite the large input of NO

from
upwelling during most of the year, phytoplankton in this region
−
are still primarily limited by NO
3 , with P and other nutrients

−
3

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 9

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

FIGURE 10 | Micrographs showing ELF labeled bacteria: (A) on the
surface of an Oxyphysis cell, (B) on the surface of a Prorocentrum micans
cell; (C) on the surface of an unidentiﬁed dinoﬂagellate cell (D)
associated with lysed Ceratium furca cell debris, (E) associated with

particulate material, (F) associated with particulate material and
aggregated cells of P. micans. Cells are shown under UV illumination with
visible light on (light background) and off (dark background). Green arrows in
(A–C) indicate the location of bacterial cells.

like Fe (Hutchins and Bruland, 1998) and silica (Kudela and Dug-
dale, 2000) typically forming a second tier of limiting nutrients.
Because phytoplankton require N and P at a relatively constant
−
ratio (Redﬁeld et al., 1963), high NO
3 concentrations relative to P
concentrations would be expected to induce P limitation. We sug-
gest that highly efﬁcient recycling of P between particulate (e.g.,
cell) and dissolved fractions permits phytoplankton to satisfy their
P demands, allowing them to avoid severe growth limitation by P.
The transfer of P to the dissolved organic fraction is likely a key step

in the P cycling in this environment because it allows a portion of
the P to remain in the euphotic zone where it is accessible to phy-
toplankton for a longer period of time, rather than sinking in cell
aggregates. DOP has a longer turnover time than DIP; in addition
to requiring enzymes for hydrolysis, a portion of P in the dis-
solved organic pool consists of compounds that are more resistant
to degradation (Paytan et al., 2003). Together, these characteristics
may allow DOP to sustain phytoplankton growth, albeit at a slower
pace than DIP. This effect may have been suggested by the growth

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 10

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

mechanism depends on the phosphate uptake kinetics and phys-
iological P requirements of the cells, as well as the rate at which
DIP gets regenerated in the environment. Together these factors
can lead a cell to experience P stress under relatively high DIP
conditions if they are unable to satisfy their P requirements during
competition with other cells.

We suggest that in contrast to inducible AP activity, high
basal AP activity may have different underlying causes. The high
basal expression of AP activity, as observed in the HAB-forming
dinoﬂagellates in the RTI, may offer a competitive advantage to
−
cells when large pulses of NO
3 suddenly become available. This is
because there is no lag time in their ability to access the DOP
pool, whereas species with inducible AP (e.g., diatoms in this
study) must wait to use this source of P until AP proteins are
synthesized. Therefore, in upwelling regions where P is rapidly
transferred between different pools and high DIP concentrations
can be transient and depleted quickly, retaining high basal AP
activity may confer a competitive advantage despite the energetic
tradeoff of maintaining the enzyme. The mechanism by which
cells maintain high basal rates of AP activity could be due to
different AP encoding genes that are differentially regulated and
expressed. For example, phoX encodes an AP enzyme widely dis-
tributed in marine bacteria that is inducible only under conditions
of phosphate starvation, whereas phoA encodes an AP enzyme that
can also be expressed in response to C limitation (Sebastian and
Ammerman, 2009), leaving open the possibility that environmen-
tal factors other than DIP concentration can lead to high basal AP
rates in certain species. In addition, constitutive expression of acid
phosphatases is known to occur in bacteria (Kuenzler and Perras,
1965). Maintenance of high basal AP activity, whether through
constitutive expression or due to different classes of AP enzymes,
may also help explain why red tides are often associated with low
ratios of NO
: DIP (Hodkiss and Lo, 1997). By accessing the
DOP pool when DIP uptake becomes energetically unfavorable
(e.g., due to diffusion limitation or physiological characteristics),
−
these cells would be able to exhaust a larger portion of the NO
3
without simultaneously exhausting the DIP pool, thereby leading
to lower NO

−
3 : DIP ratios in seawater.

During our sampling, the RTI region was populated by a
number of localized, intense blooms, the largest of which was
dominated by C. balechii and C. furca (Figure 6). In addition to
expressing AP activity, some strains of Ceratium are known to alter
their morphological and metabolic traits in response to P avail-
ability. Smalley et al. (2003) investigated the affect of P starvation
in cultures of C. furca. Under P limitation (but not N limitation), a
bimodal cell size distribution emerged in which larger cells became
prominent, raising the possibility that P stress could encourage
sexual reproduction in these cells. Additionally, under either P
or N limitation (e.g., at intracellular N:P ratios >19:1 or <7:1),
cells transitioned from autotrophic to mixotrophic growth modes.
Although minor size differences were observed in C. balechii
in our samples, there was no consistent trend between cell size
and the extent ELF labeling or DIP concentration. However, we
did observe feeding vacuoles in several specimen of C. balechii
(Figures 9G,H), suggesting that mixotrophy may help Ceratium
satisfy its nutritional requirements in the RTI region of Monterey
Bay. These qualitative observations suggest that although Ceratium

−
3

FIGURE 11 | Growth of phytoplankton in response to added nutrients
−
during an incubation experiment after 30 h. NO
3 caused the strongest
growth response (Mackey et al., 2010), followed by DIP, and SRP.
Growth in all three nutrient treatments was signiﬁcantly different from the
untreated control (p < 0.05).

responses in the incubation experiment, where addition of DIP led
to slightly greater phytoplankton growth than DOP, although the
values were not statistically signiﬁcantly different from each other
at p < 0.05 (Figure 11). Therefore, whereas DIP gets consumed
rapidly during growth and luxury uptake, DOP may represent a
more sustainable, steady source of P nutrition for cells that can be
accessed as needed.

In some strains of phytoplankton phosphatase activity is
induced when ambient DIP concentrations are low, however, in
other species phosphatase activity may be constitutive or less sen-
sitive to ambient DIP levels (Kuenzler and Perras, 1965). In general
our data do not suggest that ELF labeling is strongly controlled by
−
DIP levels or the ratio of NO
3 : DIP in the RTI region of Monterey
Bay over the time scales examined in this study, although there are
exceptions for certain groups. For example, the labeling of diatoms
did decrease slightly under high ambient DIP levels (and high
DIP:DOP ratios, Figure 4) on October 14. The ELF labeling of
diatoms appeared to be more sensitive to DOP levels than to DIP
levels based on correlations within our data (Figure 7), suggesting
that DOP availability could be a factor that regulates diatoms AP
expression in addition to DIP levels. As DIP declined and DOP
accumulated during upwelling relaxation (low DIP:DOP), succes-
sion occurred within the phytoplankton community, where bloom
forming dinoﬂagellates with consistently high labeling came to
outnumber diatoms despite their inducible AP activity.

Ruttenberg and Dyhrman (2005) discuss possible explanations
for why phytoplankton might express inducible AP activity when
ambient DIP concentrations are high. They suggest that P limi-
tation in microenvironments, the nutritional history of the cell,
and the relative competitiveness of each species for DIP can all
contribute to an organism’s P status. For each species, the last

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 11

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

cells had very high AP activity, they were probably limited by N,
with P availability acting as a regulating (rather than limiting)
nutrient.

BACTERIAL AP ACTIVITY
The extensive amount of AP activity observed in bacterial cells sug-
gests three potentially important roles for bacteria in facilitating
the turnover of organic P in Monterey Bay. First, their associa-
tion with particulate material and cell debris demonstrates the
critical function they perform in aggregating and breaking down
organic materials during upwelling relaxation, and the sharp, rapid
decline in DOC observed during upwelling relaxation (Figure 3H)
could indicate heterotrophic bacterial utilization of this abun-
dant C source. Bacteria generate extracellular polysaccharides that
encourage ﬂocculation of algal cells (Passow et al., 1994), which
may facilitate the degradation of blooms as they decline. Floccula-
tion also enhances sinking rates of phytoplankton cells, providing
an important mechanism by which the non-regenerated portion
of C and P ﬁxed during a bloom are exported from surface
waters.

Second, in a decaying bloom, bacteria could support additional
primary and secondary production and re-inject P into the food
web through their AP activity. Bacteria may employ AP activity
to access P or C from organic molecules, and it is not clear if the
bacteria in our samples expressed the enzyme to satisfy their needs
for P, C, or both. In the microbial loop, bacteria take up and incor-
porate organic C into their cellular biomass, thereby returning it to
the classical grazing food web (Azam et al., 1983). If the primary
function of bacterial AP activity observed in Monterey Bay was
to support bacterial C requirements, the regenerated orthophos-
phate created as a byproduct of bacterial AP activity would be
available to support additional rounds of primary production by
phytoplankton. In this case, P would re-enter the grazing food
web at the level of primary producers. Alternately, if bacterial AP
activity resulted in bacterial assimilation of both C and P, then P
would instead be provided to higher trophic levels via direct graz-
ing on bacteria. In both cases, organic C would also be re-captured
and made available to higher trophic levels, as was evident from
the rapid consumption of DOC following the bloom (Figure 3).
More work is needed to quantify bacterial DOC uptake in this and
other upwelling systems.

The third possible role for bacteria in the P cycle of Mon-
terey Bay is based on our observation that some bacteria afﬁxed
to the surfaces of intact phytoplankton cells expressed AP activ-
ity (Figures 10A–C), suggesting that a close relationship may
exist where one or both organisms beneﬁt. Microbial consortia
between bacteria and algal cells are a well studied phenomenon,
particularly for phytoplankton species that form HABs (Doucette,
1995; Paerl and Pinckney, 1996). Many suggestions have been put
forward to explain the causes and outcomes of these close inter-
actions, including possible roles in toxin production (Kodama
et al., 2006), regulation of mating and cyst formation (Sawayama
et al., 1993), and nitrogen acquisition (Foster et al., 2011). It is
also possible that the bacteria we observed associated with intact
phytoplankton cells could have been feeding on individuals that
were physiologically unﬁt. However, if the intact phytoplank-
ton cells we observed represent healthy individuals, then their

close associations with bacteria may indicate a beneﬁcial relation-
ship that constitutes another pathway in the biological cycling
of P. As discussed above, bacterial AP activity could serve to
provide bacteria with P, C, or both. The interaction between
bacteria and phytoplankton in Monterey Bay could be mutu-
alistic if bacteria utilize organic C exuded from phytoplankton
and in turn provide phytoplankton with regenerated orthophos-
phate, or commensal if the bacteria retain P (and C) from the
exudates.

CONCLUSION
The RTI of Monterey Bay is a region with dynamic changes
in nutrient inventories and where diverse phytoplankton species
−
co-exist. Following upwelling, a pulse of DIP and NO
3 was con-
sumed rapidly as phytoplankton bloomed. DOP accumulated as
upwelling relaxed and the bloom declined, likely due to phy-
toplankton excretion and sloppy grazing as has been observed
in other upwelling regions (Ruttenberg and Dyhrman, 2005).
Although phytoplankton in this region expressed high AP activity,
the phytoplankton growth induced by DIP and DOP in a bottle
−
incubation experiment was lower than for NO
3 . Transfer of P to
the dissolved organic pool may allow P to remain in surface waters
longer and be used by phytoplankton at a steadier pace than DIP,
which is consumed quickly through luxury uptake and depleted
rapidly from the water.

Diatom and dinoﬂagellate populations were identiﬁed in sim-
ilar abundances prior to upwelling, but dinoﬂagellates became
more abundant during upwelling and relaxation. Diatom alka-
line phosphatase (AP) activity was responsive to ambient DIP
and DOP concentrations. In contrast, dinoﬂagellates showed high
basal rates of AP activity regardless of DIP (or DOP) levels,
which may have conferred a competitive advantage by helping
them avoid secondary limitation for P when N levels were high
following upwelling. Diatom species were distributed uniformly
among the stations, whereas some dinoﬂagellate species formed
spatially localized blooms within the RTI region. The largest of
these blooms comprised Ceratium cells, which expressed high AP
activity and appeared to adopt a mixotrophic growth mode as
they bloomed. A considerable amount of AP activity was observed
in bacterial cells associated with lysed cell debris and particu-
late material, suggesting an important role for bacteria in the
regeneration of P and possibly C from cell biomass following
the bloom. Bacteria associated with intact phytoplankton cells
were also observed expressing AP activity, and could indicate a
previously unrecognized algal–bacterial relationship that facili-
tates the P cycle at an intercellular level. Our results suggest
that P is a regulating, rather than limiting, nutrient for HAB-
forming phytoplankton in Monterey Bay, and that cells adopt a
number of different strategies (AP activity, luxury DIP uptake,
mixotrophy, bacterial interactions) to acquire P from this dynamic
environment.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the Bhaya and Grossman Labs (Carnegie Institution
for Science) for use of their microscope, L. Smolenska (Invit-
rogen) for technical advice pertaining to phytoplankton ELF
labeling, R. Franks for assistance with instrumentation, and E.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 12

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

Rienecker for piloting the boat and provided assistance at sea.
This manuscript beneﬁted from thoughtful review comments
from L. Moore, B. Jenkins, and J. B. Sylvan. Thanks also to
G. Pitcher (Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries,
South Africa), J. Lane (University of California, Santa Cruz), and
R. Kudela (University of California, Santa Cruz) for discussions

of Ceratium taxonomy. This research was supported by NSF-
OCE grant 0961555 to Adina Paytan, and a grant from the
Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute to Adina Paytan
and John P. Ryan. Katherine R. M. Mackey was supported by
the Department of Energy (DOE) Global Change Education
Program.

REFERENCES
Anderson, D. M., Glibert, P. M., and
Burkholder, J. M. (2002). Harm-
ful algal blooms and eutrophica-
tion: nutrient
sources, composi-
tion, and consequences. Estuaries 25,
704–726.

Azam, F., Fenchel, T., Field, J. G., Gray, J.
S., Meyer-Reil, L. A., and Thingstad,
F. (1983). The ecological role of
water-column microbes in the sea.
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 10, 257–263.

Barka, T. (1960). A simple azo-dye
method for histochemical demon-
stration of
phosphatases.
Nature 248–249.

acid

Bjorkman, K., and Karl, D. M. (1994).
Bioavailability of
inorganic and
organic phosphorus compounds to
natural assemblages of microorgan-
isms in Hawaiian coastal waters.
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 111, 265–273.

Bronk, D. A., and Ward, B. B. (1999).
Gross and net nitrogen uptake and
DON release in the euphotic zone
of Monterey Bay, California. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 44, 573–585.

Chavez, F. P. V, and Toggweiler, J. R.
(1995). “Physical estimates of global
new production: the upwelling con-
tribution,” in Upwelling
in the
Ocean: Modern Processes and Ancient
Records, eds C. P. Summerhayes, K.-
C. Emeis, M. V. Angel, R. L. Smith,
and B. Zeitzschel (New York: John
Wiley), 313–320.

Chavez, F. P., and Messie, M. (2009).
A comparison of eastern bound-
ary upwelling ecosystems. Prog.
Oceanogr. 83, 80–96.

Dagg, M.

J.

(1974). Loss of prey
body contents during feeding by
an aquatic predator. Ecology 55,
903–906.

D’Elia, C. F., Steudler, P. A., and Cor-
win, N. (1977). Determination of
total nitrogen in aqueous samples
using persulfate digestion. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 22, 760–764.

Doucette, G.

J. (1995). Interactions
between bacteria and harmful algae:
a review. Nat. Toxins 3, 65–74.

Dugdale, R. C., and Goering, J.

J.
(1967). Uptake of new and regener-
ated forms of nitrogen in primary
productivity. Limnol. Oceanogr. 12,
196–206.

Dyhrman, S. D., and Ruttenberg, K.
C. (2006). Presence and regula-
tion of alkaline phosphatase activity

in eukaryotic phytoplankton from
the coastal ocean: implications for
dissolved organic phosphorus rem-
ineralization. Limnol. Oceanogr. 51,
1381–1390.

Dyhrman, S. T., and Palenik, B. (1999).
Phosphate stress in cultures and ﬁeld
populations of
the dinoﬂagellate
prorocentrum minimum detected
by a single-cell alkaline phosphatase
assay. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65,
3205–3212.

Dyhrman, S. T., and Palenik, B. (2001).
A single-cell immunoassay for phos-
phate
in the dinoﬂagel-
late Prorocentrum minimum (Dino-
phyceae). J. Phycol. 37, 400–410.

stress

Falkowski, P. G. (1997). Evolution of the
nitrogen cycle and its inﬂuence on
the biological sequestration of CO2
in the ocean. Nature 387, 272–275.

Foster, R. A., Kuypers, M. M. M.,Vagner,
T., Paerl, R. W., Musat, N., and
Zehr, J. P. (2011). Nitrogen ﬁxation
and transfer in open ocean diatom–
cyanobacterial symbioses. ISME J. 5,
1484–1493.

Fourqurean, J. W., Jones, R. D., and Zie-
man, J. C. (1993). Process inﬂuenc-
ing water column nutrient charac-
teristics and phosphorus limitation
of phytoplankton biomass in Florida
Bay, FL, USA: inferences from spatial
distributions. Estuar. Coast Shelf Sci.
36, 295–314.

Gomez, F., Claustre, H., and Souissi, S.
(2008). Rarely reported dinoﬂagel-
lates of the genera Ceratium, Gloeo-
dinium, Histioneis, Oxytoxum and
Prorocentrum (Dinophyceae) from
the open southeast Paciﬁc Ocean.
Rev. Biol. Mar. Oceanogr. 43, 25–40.
Hansen, H. P., and Koroleff, F. (1999).
“Determination of nutrients,” in
Methods of Seawater Analysis, eds
K. Grasshoff, K. Cremling, and M.
Erhardt (Weinheim: Wiley-Vch Ver-
lag), 159–228.

Harrison, P. J., Hu, M. H., Yang, Y. P.,
and Lu, X. (1990). Phosphate limita-
tion in estuarine and coastal waters
of China. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 140,
79–87.

Hernández-Becerril, D. U., and Alonso-
Rodríguez, R.
(2004). Study of
the marine planktonic dinoﬂagel-
late Ceratium divaricatum (Dino-
phyceae), a confused and consid-
erably variable species. Phycological
Res. 52, 346–354.

Hoagland, P., and Scatasta, S. (2006)
“The economic effects of harmful
algal blooms,” in Ecology of Harmful
Algae. Ecology Studies Series, Chap.
29, eds E. Graneli and J. Turner
(Dordrecht:
Springer-Verlag),
391–401.

Hodkiss, I. J., and Lo, K. C. (1997).
Are changes in N:P ratios in coastal
waters the key to increased red
tide blooms? Hydrobiologia 352,
141–147.

Hutchins, D. A., and Bruland, K. W.
(1998). Iron-limited diatom growth
and Si:N uptake ratios in a coastal
upwelling. Nature 393, 561–564.

Jessup, D. A., Miller, M. A., Ryan, J.
P., Nevins, H. M., Kerkering, H. A.,
Mekebri, A., Crane, D. B., Johnson,
T. A., and Kudela, R. M. (2009).
Mass stranding of marine birds
caused by a surfactant-producing
red tide. PLoS ONE 4, e4550.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0004550

Kirchman, D. L., Meon, B., Cottrell,
M. T., Hutchins, D. A., Weeks,
D., and Bruland, K. W. (2000).
Carbon versus iron limitation of
bacterial growth in the California
upwelling regime. Limnol. Oceanogr.
45, 1681–1688.

Kodama, M., Doucette, G. J., and Green,
D. H. (2006). Relationships between
bacteria and harmful algae. Ecol.
Harmful Algae 189, 243–255.

Krom, M. D., Kress, N., Brenner, S.,
and Gordon, L. I. (1991). Phos-
phorus limitation of primary pro-
ductivity in the eastern Mediter-
ranean Sea. Limnol. Oceanogr. 36,
424–432.

Kudela, R. M., and Chavez, F. P. (2000).
Modeling the impact of the 1992 El
Niño on new production in Mon-
terey Bay, California. Deep Sea Res.
Part
II Top. Stud. Oceanogr. 47,
1055–1076.

Kudela, R. M., and Dugdale, R. C.
(2000). Nutrient regulation of phy-
toplankton productivity in Mon-
terey Bay, CA. Deep Sea Res. Part II
Top. Stud. Oceanogr. 47, 1023–1053.
Kudela, R. M., Lane, J. Q., and Cochlan,
W. P. (2008). The potential role of
anthropogenically derived nitrogen
in the growth of harmful algae in
California, USA. Harmful Algae 8,
103–110.

Kudela, R. M., Seeyave, S., and Cochlan,
W. P. (2010). The role of nutrients

in regulation and promotion of
harmful algal blooms in upwelling
systems.
85,
122–135.

Prog. Oceanogr.

Kuenzler, E. J., and Perras, J. P. (1965).
Phosphatases of marine algae. Biol.
Bull. 128, 271–284.

Lampert, W. (1978). Release of dis-
solved organic carbon by grazing
zooplankton. Limnol. Oceanogr. 23,
831–834.

Lomas, M. W., Swain, A., Shelton, R.,
and Ammerman, J. W. (2004). Tax-
onomic variability of phosphorus
stress in Sargasso Sea phytoplank-
ton. Limnol. Oceanogr. 49, 2303–
2310.

Mackey, K. R. M., Labiosa, R. G., Cal-
houn, M., Street, J. H., and Pay-
tan, A. (2007). Phosphorus avail-
ability, phytoplankton community
dynamics, and taxon-speciﬁc phos-
phorus status in the Gulf of Aqaba,
Red Sea. Limnol. Oceanogr. 52,
875–885.

Mackey, K. R. M., Bristow, L., Parks, D.
R., Altabet, M. A., Post, A. F., and
Paytan, A. (2011). The inﬂuence of
light on nitrogen cycling and the pri-
mary nitrite maximum in a season-
ally stratiﬁed sea. Prog. Oceanogr. 91,
545–560.

Mackey, K. R. M., Rivlin, T., Gross-
man, A. R., Post, A. F., and Pay-
tan, A. (2009). Picophytoplankton
responses to changing nutrient and
light regimes during a bloom. Mar.
Biol. 156, 1531–1546.

Mackey, K. R. M., van Djiken, G.,
Mazloom, S., Erhardt, A. M., Ryan,
J., Arrigo, K., and Paytan, A. (2010).
Inﬂuence of atmospheric nutri-
ents on primary productivity in a
coastal upwelling region. Global Bio-
geochem. Cycles 24, GB4027.

Mayahara, H., Hirano, H., Saito, T., and
Ogawa, K. (1967). The new lead
citrate method for the ultracyto-
chemical demonstration of activity
of non-speciﬁc alkaline phosphatase
(orthophosphoric monoester phos-
phohydrolase). Histochem. Cell Biol.
11, 88–96.

Meave del Castillo, M. E., Zamudio
Resendiz, M. E., Okolodkov, Y. B.,
and Salgado Ugarte, I. H. (2003).
Ceratium balechii sp. nov. (Dino-
phyceae: Gonyaulacales) from the
Mexican Paciﬁc. Hidrobiolo´ gica 13,
75–91.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 13

Mackey et al.

Upwelled phosphorus and red tides

Monaghan, E. J., and Ruttenberg, K. C.
(1999). Dissolved organic phospho-
rus in the coastal ocean: reassess-
ment of available methods and sea-
sonal phosphorus proﬁles from the
Eel River Shelf. Limnol. Oceanogr. 44,
1702–1714.

Nicholson, D., Dyhrman, S., Chavez,
F., and Paytan, A. (2006). Alkaline
phosphatase activity in the phyto-
plankton communities of Monterey
Bay and San Francisco Bay. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 51, 874–883.

Paerl, H. W., and Pinckney, J. L. (1996).
A mini-review of microbial consor-
tia: their role in aquatic production
and biogeochemical cycling. Microb.
Ecol. 31, 225–247.

Passow, U., Alldredge, A. L., and Logan,
B. E. (1994). The role of particulate
carbohydrate exudates in the ﬂoccu-
lation of diatom blooms. Deep Sea
Res. Part I Oceanogr. Res. Pap. 41,
335–357.

Paytan, A., Cade-Menun, B, McLaugh-
lin, K., and Faul, K. L. (2003).
Selective phosphorus regeneration
of sinking marine particles: evidence
from 31P-NMR. Mar. Chem. 82,
55–70.

Pennington, J. T., and Chavez, F. (2000).
Seasonal ﬂuctuations of tempera-
ture, salinity, nitrate, chlorophyll,
and primary production at
sta-
tion H3/M1 over 1989–1996 in
Monterey Bay, CA, Deep Sea Res.
Part
II Top. Stud. Oceanogr. 47,
947–973.

Pitcher, G., and Probyn, T. A. (2011).
Anoxia in southern Benguela during
the autumn of 2009 and its linkage

to a bloom of the dinoﬂagellate Cer-
atium balechii. Harmful Algae 11,
23–32.

Redﬁeld, A., Ketchum, B. H., and
Richards, F. A. (1963). “The inﬂu-
ence of organisms on the compo-
sition of seawater,” in The sea, Vol.
2, ed. M. N. Hill (New York: Wiley
Interscience), 26–77.

Ruttenberg, K. C., and Dyhrman, S.
T. (2005). Temporal and spatial
variability of dissolved organic and
inorganic phosphorus, and met-
rics of phosphorus bioavailability
in an upwelling-dominated coastal
system. J. Geophys. Res. 110, C10S13.
Ryan, J. P., Fischer, A. M., Kudela, R. M.,
Gower, J. F. R., King, S. A., Marin, R.
III, and Chavez, F. P. (2009). Inﬂu-
ences of upwelling and downwelling
winds on red tide bloom dynamics in
Monterey Bay, California. Cont. Shelf
Res. 29, 785–795.

Ryan, J. P., Gower, J. F. R., King, S.
A., Bissett, W. P., Fischer, A. M.,
Kudela, R. M., Kolber, Z., Mazzillo,
F., Rienecker, E. V., and Chavez, F.
P. (2008). A coastal ocean extreme
bloom incubator. Geophys. Res. Lett.
35, L12602.

Ryan, J. P., Greenﬁeld, D., Marin, R.,
Preston, C., Roman, B., Jensen, S.,
Pargett, D., Birch, J., Mikulski, C.,
Doucette, G., and Scholin, C. (2011).
Harmful phytoplankton ecology
studies using an autonomous mol-
ecular analytical and ocean observ-
ing network. Limnol. Oceanogr. 56,
1255–1272.

Sawayama, S., Sako, Y., and lshida,
Y. (1993). “Bacterial inhibitors for

the mating reaction of Alexandrium
catenella (Dinophyceae),” in Toxic
Phytoplankton Blooms in the Sea,
eds T. J. Smayda and Y. Shimizu
(Amsterdam: Elsevier Sci Pub1 BV),
177–181.

Sebastian, M., and Ammerman, J. W.
(2009). The alkaline phosphatase
PhoX is more widely distributed in
marine bacteria than the classical
PhoA. ISME J. 3, 563–572.

Smalley, G. W., Coats, D. W., and
Stoecker, D. K. (2003). Feeding in the
mixotrophic dinoﬂagellate Ceratium
furca is inﬂuenced by intracellular
nutrient concentrations. Mar. Ecol.
Prog. Ser. 262, 137–151.

Sundareshwar, P. V., Morris,

J. T.,
Koepﬂer, E. K., and Fornwalt, B.
(2003). Phosphorus limitation of
coastal ecosystem processes. Science
299, 563–565.

Sylvan, J. B., Dortch, Q., Nelson, D.
M., Maier Brown, A. F., Morri-
son, W., and Ammerman, J. W.
(2006). Phosphorus limits phyto-
plankton growth on the Louisiana
Shelf during the period of hypoxia
formation. Environ. Sci. Technol. 40,
7548–7553.

Toledo, G., and Palenik, B. (1997). Syne-
chococcus diversity in the California
current as seen by RNA polymerase
(rpoC1) gene sequences of isolated
strains. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63,
4298–4303.

Tomas, C. R. (1997). Identifying Marine
Phytoplankton. New York, NY: Acad-
emic Press.

Valderrama, J. C. (1981). The simulta-
neous analysis of total nitrogen and

total phosphorus in natural waters.
Mar. Chem. 10, 109–122.

Wollast, R. (1991). “The coastal organic
carbon cycle: ﬂuxes, sources and
sinks,” in Ocean Margin Processes
in Global Change,
eds R. C.
F. Mantoura, J. M. Martin, and
R. Wollast
(Chichester: Wiley),
365–382.

Worden, A. P. (2006). Picoeukaryote
diversity in coastal waters of the
Paciﬁc Ocean. Aquat. Microb. Ecol.
43, 165–175.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 02 November 2011; accepted:
18 January 2012; published online: 07
February 2012.
Citation: Mackey KRM, Mioni CE,
Ryan JP and Paytan A (2012) Phos-
phorus cycling in the red tide incuba-
tor region of Monterey Bay in response
to upwelling. Front. Microbio. 3:33. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00033
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Aquatic Microbiology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Mackey, Mioni, Ryan
and Paytan. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution Non Com-
mercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 33 | 14

