ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 26 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00129

Agent-based modeling approach of immune defense
against spores of opportunistic human pathogenic fungi

Christian Tokarski 1*, Sabine Hummert 1,2, Franziska Mech2, Marc Thilo Figge 2, Sebastian Germerodt 1,
Anja Schroeter 1 and Stefan Schuster 1

1 Department of Bioinformatics, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Germany
2 Research Group Applied Systems Biology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology–Hans-Knoell-Institute, Jena, Germany

Edited by:
Jörg Linde, Leibniz-Institute for
Natural Product Research and
Infection
Biology–Hans-Knoell-Institute,
Germany
Reviewed by:
Hubertus Haas, Innsbruck Medical
University, Austria
Dirk Dittmer, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA
Guoku Hu, Creighton University, USA
*Correspondence:
Christian Tokarski, Department of
Bioinformatics, Friedrich Schiller
University, Ernst – Abbe – Platz 2,
07743 Jena, Germany.
e-mail: christian.tokarski@uni-jena.de

Opportunistic human pathogenic fungi like the ubiquitous fungus Aspergillus fumigatus
are a major threat to immunocompromised patients. An impaired immune system renders
the body vulnerable to invasive mycoses that often lead to the death of the patient. While
the number of immunocompromised patients is rising with medical progress, the process,
and dynamics of defense against invaded and ready to germinate fungal conidia are still
insufﬁciently understood. Besides macrophages, neutrophil granulocytes form an impor-
tant line of defense in that they clear conidia. Live imaging shows the interaction of those
phagocytes and conidia as a dynamic process of touching, dragging, and phagocytosis. To
unravel strategies of phagocytes on the hunt for conidia an agent-based modeling approach
is used, implemented in NetLogo. Different modes of movement of phagocytes are tested
regarding their clearing efﬁciency: random walk, short-term persistence in their recent
direction, chemotaxis of chemokines excreted by conidia, and communication between
phagocytes. While the short-term persistence hunting strategy turned out to be superior
to the simple random walk, following a gradient of chemokines released by conidial agents
is even better. The advantage of communication between neutrophilic agents showed a
strong dependency on the spatial scale of the focused area and the distribution of the
pathogens.

Keywords: agent-based modeling, individual-based modeling, host-pathogen interaction, immune defense, oppor-
tunistic pathogenic fungi, chemotaxis, video analysis of life cell imaging

INTRODUCTION

1.
The immune system of healthy humans successfully defends them
against ubiquitous fungi like Aspergillus fumigatus, Candida albi-
cans, and Cryptococcus neoformans. A weakened immune defense,
due to diseases like infection with human immunodeﬁciency virus
(HIV) or in the course of medical treatment, is compromised in
the ability to repel those opportunistic fungal pathogens (Richard-
son, 2005; Karkowska-Kuleta et al., 2009). The recent medical
progress especially in immune therapy, transplantation therapy,
and life-prolonging measures leads to a growing number of suscep-
tible patients (Richardson, 2005; Karkowska-Kuleta et al., 2009).
Invasive mycoses caused by A. fumigatus lead to mortality rates
of 60–90% (Karkowska-Kuleta et al., 2009). Thus, understand-
ing infection dynamics and the response of the immune system
to invading fungi is an essential step on the way to stop the
opportunistic pathogens from taking over.

Inhaled conidia of A. fumigatus that are not repelled by respi-
ratory tract mucociliary defenses lead to a complex response of
the immune system (Shoham and Levitz, 2005). Here, we focus on
the role of neutrophil granulocytes (neutrophils). These phago-
cytes are recruited by chemokines like IL-8 to the site of infection
(Shoham and Levitz, 2005). In case of getting in contact with
fungal conidia, phagocytes can engulf, and degrade them. The
recruitment of neutrophils occurs within 4–8 h of intratracheal
conidial infection, the same time A. fumigatus needs for conidial

germination and hyphal formation (Hohl, 2009). Hyphae can
invade pulmonary tissues, enter the bloodstream, and disseminate
to remote tissues, leading to life-threatening systemic infections.
Thus, clearance of fungal conidia should occur rapidly. To eluci-
date the dynamics of the interaction of A. fumigatus conidia and
neutrophils live imaging data have been recorded and analyzed
(Behnsen et al., 2007).

The goal of the present paper is to make a ﬁrst step in analyzing
these data by computer simulations. Computational immunology
as a method to complement wet lab immunology comprises sev-
eral mathematical methods (for a review see reference Forrest and
Beauchemin, 2007). While game-theoretic models of immuno-
logical aspects are focused on states of equilibrium (Hummert
et al., 2010), agent-based models (ABMs) are well-suited to model
spatially heterogeneous, dynamic processes like interactions of
immune cells with conidia. The main feature of ABMs is that a
complex system’s behavior is modeled by actions and interactions
of entities called agents which themselves behave according to
rules.

In theoretical immunology, models are composed of agents
belonging to immune defense, e.g., phagocytes, as well as agents
representing evading pathogens, e.g., fungal or bacterial cells.
Behavioral rules of agents are based on experimental ﬁndings
complemented by hypothetical properties. Thus, the impact of
hypothetical properties on the system’s behavior can be tested,

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 1

Tokarski et al.

ABM: immune defense against spores

predictions can be made and for validation, the system’s behavior
in silico can be compared with the experimentally observed one.
For reviews on ABMs in theoretical immunology see references
Bauer et al. (2009), Chavali et al. (2008).

We implemented an ABM in NetLogo (Wilensky, 1999) to test
the impact of different hunting strategies of neutrophils on their
phagocytosis efﬁciency. A central question tackled in this work is
whether chemical communication and chemotaxis of neutrophils
improve the clearing efﬁciency. Germinating conidia of A. fumiga-
tus activate the complement system and induce neutrophil chemo-
taxis (Waldorf and Diamond, 1985). Further, it is known that
neutrophils have the ability to recruit other neutrophils (Scapini
et al., 2000).

2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1. VIDEO ANALYSIS OF LIFE CELL IMAGING
There exist well established techniques to visualize fungal infec-
tions in hosts, such as confocal laser scanning microscopy (Pad-
dock, 1999) and bright-ﬁeld microscopy (Pluta, 1988). The latter
was used in this approach. The majority of produced data are
images with immune cells and conidia, either as bright-ﬁeld or
ﬂuorescence images. Important quantities that characterize the
dynamic cellular behavior are the cell classiﬁcation, cell count-
ing, shape and extent measurements, cell-cell interactions, and,
for time-lapse data, cell motility, and velocity. However, the image
analysis forms the bottleneck in these studies. Automation of this
process is the goal of biological image analysis. This was already
realized for the two-dimensional case of phagocytosis assays (Mech
et al., 2011). However, a speciﬁc application to temporally resolved
phagocytosis assays of A. fumigatus conidia and phagocytes in a
fully automated fashion is not available, today.

We analyzed video material (15 sequences) of the ﬁrst 90 min
of an in vitro interaction of neutrophils and conidia of A. fumiga-
tus (videos have been provided by the research group of Matthias
Gunzer). Every 30 s a frame was recorded which corresponds to
180 frames for sequences of 90 min length.

The analysis comprises three steps: segmentation, classiﬁcation,
and tracking. The segmentation of frames was done for each frame
separately similar to the approach used in (Mech et al., 2011).
Erroneous segmentation results due to highly heterogeneous cell
morphologies and uneven illumination artifacts were corrected
manually. With that, each cell was recognized as an object. After-
wards, neutrophilic objects were semi-automatically tracked. Each
neutrophilic object was tracked from frame to frame using overlap
in two consecutive frames or, if no overlap existed, by searching for
the nearest neutrophilic object in the subsequent frame. During
the tracking an unique identiﬁer was assigned to each neutrophilic
object as well as the changes in positions as velocities. Then, the
number of conidia which are freely moving, ingested, or dragged
were counted manually for each time step. The numbers of dragged
and ingested conidia were assigned to the respective neutrophils.
Thus, the phagocytosis rate of a neutrophil is the number of coni-
dia which a neutrophil ingested over time. Furthermore, adherence
of conidia may lead over time to ingestion by or dissociation from
neutrophils. In the former case respecting conidia were catego-
rized as dragged. Hence, the dragging rate depicts the number of
adherent conidia which did not dissociate from a neutrophil.

After the time-lapse data analysis the number of neutrophils,
the velocities, and number of associated and ingested conidia per
neutrophil as well as the number of conidia categorized as free,
ingested, or dragged, were available.

2.2. THE MODEL
The “hunt” of neutrophils for conidia is modeled by an ABM. The
behavior of neutrophilic agents as well as conidial agents is deﬁned
by rules which is a key element of ABMs. Here, the rules are based
on properties extracted from the given video material of life cell
imaging (see subsection 2.1.) as described in subsequent sections.
We follow the ODD-protocol for describing ABMs (Grimm et al.,
2006, 2010).

2.3. PURPOSE OF THE ABM
Clearing conidia before they germinate can be seen as an action
enhancing the ﬁtness of the organism. Different strategies of neu-
trophils in tracking and disposing conidia vary in their efﬁciency.
In this ABM approach we tested the impact of different tracking
modes of neutrophilic agents on their efﬁciency in reducing the
amount of free conidial agents. Simple random walk as well as a
short-term persistence in keeping direction, both without sensing
of chemotactic molecules were tested. Then, perception of excreted
metabolites of germinating conidia or signal-molecules from com-
plement system, thus all chemokines, was considered as well as
positive feedback activation via chemical communication between
neutrophilic agents. In a large-scale modeling approach repre-
senting a part of lung tissue we additionally tested the efﬁciency
of chemotactic communication between neutrophilic agents for
clustered distributions of conidial agents simulating an infection
scenario.

2.4. ENTITIES, STATE VARIABLES, AND SCALES
The ABM was initialized on a grid of 41× 35 (=1,435) discrete
cells. The width of a grid cell ﬁts the size of a conidium which
is about 3 μm in diameter. The evaluation of the life imaging
videos showed immigration and emigration of the motile cells
out of the scope. For the model we assumed an equal rate of
this events and therefore implemented periodical boundary con-
ditions. One time-step in the simulation refers to a 30 s interval and
matches the 2 frames per min pattern of the evaluated life imaging
videos. Simulations run over the ﬁrst 90 min of neutrophil-conidia
interactions.
For a large-scale simulation a grid of 401× 341 (=136,741) cells
was built. Thus, an area of more than 1 mm2 was covered. The
simulation was evaluated for 2,880 simulated time-steps, which
corresponds to 24 h after the initial infection. The model comprises
three types of entities: grid cells, conidial agents, and motile neu-
trophilic agents. See Tables A1–A3 in Appendix for state variables
and parameters.

2.5. DESIGN CONCEPTS
We tested and combined several modes of neutrophilic movement
to explain the in vitro efﬁciency of a population of neutrophils in
reducing the amount of free conidia. In the model approach that
incorporates diffusion of chemokines, excreted by the conidial
agents, neutrophilic agents adapt their movement to this signal.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 2

Tokarski et al.

ABM: immune defense against spores

This assumption is supported by the observation of Waldorf and
Diamond (1985) that germinating conidia of A. fumigatus activate
the complement system and induce neutrophil chemotaxis. Scap-
ini et al. (2000) report the ability of neutrophils to recruit other
neutrophils. Thus, as a further hunting strategy communication
between neutrophilic agents that orientate on gradients of signals
was tested.

In our model we do not focus on the ﬁtness functions of single
agents, but on the immune system as a whole, where the popula-
tion of neutrophils form a ﬁrst line defense of a multi-cellular
organism. Here, the efﬁcient reduction of free conidia, which
potentially germinate, infect the organism, and may decrease its
overall ﬁtness, can be seen as the ﬁtness function. Costs of differ-
ent hunting strategies have not been taken into account. None of
the agents did change their behavior due to any kind of increas-
ing experience or learning effects. In the model approaches with
diffusion of chemokines excreted by conidial agents and chemi-
cal communication between neutrophilic agents, latter were able to
sense and follow the gradients of these substances. Prediction: neu-
trophilic agents adjusted their movement in direction of the high-
est amount of these substances on the eight neighboring grid cells
(Moore neighborhood) which indirectly increased the probability
to encounter either a conidial agent (see sub-model diffusion of
chemokines in section 2.8.1.) or another neutrophilic agent, which
was activated by at least one dragged conidial agent (see sub-model
communication between neutrophils in section 2.8.1.) – which can
be seen as a positive feedback loop. The interaction of neutrophilic
and conidial agents was separated into two major types: dragging
of conidial agents and intake of them, corresponding to the video
material (see sub-model interaction of agents in section 2.8.2. and
Figure A1 in Appendix). Stochasticity: Each simulation started
with a random distribution of neutrophilic and conidial agents on
the grid. The direction of movement of neutrophilic agents was
chosen randomly for the random walk model. The velocities of
neutrophilic agents were chosen either to form a normal distrib-
ution or a log-normal distribution, which was derived from life
cell imaging data. We stored the fraction of free conidial agents,
neither dragged or phagocytized by neutrophilic agents, for a ﬁxed

set of simulated time-steps, which correspond to the evaluated
timeframes of the video material.

INITIALIZATION

2.6.
Small-scale simulation: Each simulation was initialized with a
random distribution and orientation of conidial agents and neu-
trophilic agents. Starting numbers of both agents (110 conidial
agents, 25 neutrophilic agents) were taken from one of 15 given
in vitro life cell imaging sequences (videos have been provided by
the research group of Matthias Gunzer). All experimental samples
contained between 68 and 127 conidia (mean: 100).

Large-scale simulation: 600 conidial agents were clustered in 4
randomly located spots on the grid. Cluster-size and number of
conidial agents per cluster were equal for all clusters at initializa-
tion. 100 neutrophilic agents were randomly placed onto the grid.

INPUT DATA

2.7.
From one of the videos we derived a density-distribution of
the neutrophils’ velocity. A histogram and the ﬁtted log-normal
density-distribution of the velocities is shown in Figure 1.

2.8. SUB-MODELS
2.8.1. Diffusion of chemokines by conidial agents and positive

feedback activation of neutrophilic agents

Two types of chemical signaling determining the movement
behavior of neutrophilic agents were considered in our model-
ing approach. We tested the impact of chemokines emitted by
conidial agents which could be recognized by neutrophilic agents
(Figure 2). Further, we allowed chemical communication between
neutrophilic agents, assuming that the contact with a conidium
can activate and recruit other immune cells (positive feedback;
Figure 2). In our ABM the process of diffusion was expressed
by two distinct parameters: chemokine-diffusion-rate and num-
ber of diffusion steps per time-step (repetition-of-chemokine-
diffusion). Chemokine-diffusion-rate gives the fraction of mole-
cules in the source grid cell that is equally divided and transferred
to the eight neighboring cells (Moore neighborhood) in a single
diffusion step. Both parameters determine the chemical gradient
(see Figure 3).

FIGURE 1 | Plots of (left) histogram and ﬁtted density-distribution of neutrophils’ velocity derived from life cell imaging (right) ﬁtted continuous
log-normal density-distribution function.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 3

Tokarski et al.

ABM: immune defense against spores

FIGURE 2 | ABM with (left) random walk of neutrophilic agents (middle)
diffusion of chemokines excreted by conidial agents, and (right) with
communication between neutrophilic agents, which causes a positive

feedback loop in activating the immune defense and an aggregation of
neutrophilic agents (see Appendix for sample videos of each movement
type).

3. RESULTS
For the interpretation of interactions of neutrophils with conidia
of A. fumigatus recorded by in vitro life cell imaging we tested in
an ABM several modes of movement of the neutrophilic agents
in their hunt for conidial agents. The remaining amount of free
conidial agents after a deﬁned timespan was taken as a measure
for the efﬁciency of the applied hunting strategy of neutrophilic
agents. Different strategies were tested in a small-scale model cov-
ering about 10,000 μm2 as well as on a larger scale representing
about 1 mm2 of lung tissue.

3.1. SMALL-SCALE SIMULATION
The simulation was conducted over the ﬁrst 90 min of interac-
tions, identical to the timespan of observation in life cell imaging
experiments, and was repeated 250 times for each parameter
combination.

3.1.1. Random walk, normally distributed velocity of neutrophilic

agents

The simplest way for neutrophilic agents to search conidial agents
while having no clue of their whereabouts is by searching ran-
domly, i.e., random walk. The velocity of neutrophilic agents was
assumed to be normally distributed. An increasing mean resulted
in a signiﬁcantly decreased amount of free conidial agents at the
end of the simulations, while the impact of the SD was low (see
Figure 6).

3.1.2. Neutrophilic agents keep direction for a short timespan

(short-term persistence in direction)

Is it better to keep direction on the search and thus, to reduce
the probability of moving back where the area is already cleared?
Indeed, the efﬁciency of neutrophilic agents to phagocytize coni-
dial agents increased signiﬁcantly with a higher probability to
hold the recent direction in the next time-step, which is called
short-term persistence (STP; see Figure 7). The gain in clearing
efﬁciency increases with the passing of time. The STP strategy pays
off especially at low amounts of remaining free conidial agents.

3.1.3. Diffusion of chemokines
Does following traces of the presence of conidia lead to a higher clear-
ing efﬁciency? Metabolic activities of germinating conidia as well

FIGURE 3 | Effects of the parameters “repetition-of-chemokine-
diffusion” and “chemokine-diffusion-rate” on the process of diffusion
of chemokines excreted by conidial agents on the grid cells for a ﬁxed
number of simulation-steps. A high value “repetition-of-chemokine-
diffusion” leads to ﬂat gradient of chemokines, while a high
“chemokine-diffusion-rate” leads to a wider and faster diffusion of the
chemical signal.

Interaction of agents

2.8.2.
From life cell imaging we derived four main states of a coni-
dial agent: it can either be free, dragged, phagocytized, or lysed
by a neutrophilic agent (see Figure A1 in Appendix). Free coni-
dial agents can be dragged by neutrophilic agents with a cer-
tain probability. This linkage can vanish with a certain prob-
ability. Then, the conidial agent is free again, or the dragged
conidial agent can be phagocytized with a certain probabil-
ity. Once a conidial agent is ingested it gets digested by the
neutrophilic agent after a ﬁxed amount of
time-steps (see
Figure 4). The progress of a typical simulation run is shown in
Figure 5.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 4

Tokarski et al.

ABM: immune defense against spores

FIGURE 4 | Two main procedures of the ABM. The setup-procedure
initializes the environment, the agents and the lists for storing the output-data.

The go-procedure is a for-loop over 180 time-steps, which corresponds to the
ﬁrst 90 min of neutrophil-conidia interaction observed by live cell imaging.

FIGURE 5 | Progress of a typical simulation run. Neutrophilic agents (black) move on the grid randomly or search for free conidial agents (orange), which they
may drag (yellow), or phagocytize (red). Conidial agents, which have been phagocytized already (gray), remain in the neutrophilic agent for reasons of
visualization and do not further contribute to the simulation run.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 5

Tokarski et al.

ABM: immune defense against spores

as recognition by the complement system result in certain mol-
ecules diffusing away from a conidium. Acting as a chemokine
they could be sensed by a neutrophilic agent that follows the
gradient. In Figure 8 the clearing efﬁciency is shown in depen-
dence on the diffusion parameters. If there is only one diffu-
sion step per time-step the chemokine-diffusion-rate does not
matter since the chemokines have only diffused to the next
neighboring grid cells. The chemokines have not reached far
and thus, the clearing efﬁciency is relatively low. For a high
repetition-of-chemokine-diffusion the gradient is too ﬂat if the
chemokine-diffusion-rate is not very small. Optimal sets of para-
meters are a low repetition-of-chemokine-diffusion (but higher

than one) with an arbitrary chemokine-diffusion-rate and a higher
repetition-of-chemokine-diffusion in combination with a low
chemokine-diffusion-rate.

3.1.4. Communication between neutrophils
Is it useful to call other neutrophils if a neutrophil was successful
in its hunt? In this model neutrophilic agents secrete communi-
cation molecules if they ingested a conidial agent. Other neu-
trophilic agents follow the gradient and help clearing conidial
agents. Surprisingly, at ﬁrst glance, nearly any communication dis-
turbed the search for conidial agents (see Figure 9). At a closer
look on the initialization setup it becomes clear that the coni-
dial agents are distributed randomly. Thus, a found conidial agent

FIGURE 6 | Inﬂuence of mean and SD of neutrophilic agents’ velocity
on clearing efﬁciency (SD as function of mean).

FIGURE 8 | Inﬂuence of diffusion parameters on clearing efﬁciency.

i

i

a
d
n
o
c

e
e
r
f

0
1
1

0
0
1

0
9

0
8

0
7

0
6

probality of holding direction [%]

0
30
60
90

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

time [min]

FIGURE 7 | Mean amount of free conidial agents during simulation-time which corresponds to 90 min of in vivo interaction. The simulation was
repeated for each STP strategy 250 times.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 6

Tokarski et al.

ABM: immune defense against spores

does not imply that other conidial agents are located nearby.
Communication between neutrophils leads to an accumulation
of neutrophilic agents on locations where conidial agents already
have been cleared. Hence, it is a better strategy to search at places
where no other neutrophilic agents are and thus, to retain the
initial random distribution.

FIGURE 9 | Inﬂuence of intra-neutrophilic communication on clearing
efﬁciency of randomly distributed conidial agents.

3.2. SIMULATION OF THE INTERACTION OF NEUTROPHILS AND

CLUSTERS OF CONIDIA ON A LARGER SCALE

In a large-scale simulation-approach we tested whether commu-
nication between neutrophilic agents increases their efﬁciency to
phagocytize conidial agents. In this setup the distribution of coni-
dial agents was clustered in several randomly located spots on the
grid. We evaluated the ﬁrst 24 h after infection and documented the
number of conidial agents which were not yet dragged or phago-
cytized by neutrophilic agents. In this approach we focused on the
major parameters of a possible positive feedback stimulation of
neutrophils by other neutrophils, which were already in contact
with infectious conidia. Simulation results show that communi-
cation between neutrophilic agents signiﬁcantly increases the efﬁ-
ciency compared to the random walk model (Figures 10 and 11).
A high repetition-of-communication-signal-diffusion had a pos-
itive effect on the clearing efﬁciency. Here, the chemokines have
reached areas far away from the source and thus, could activate
neutrophilic agents that are far away from cluster of conidial
agents.

A repetition-of-communication-signal-diffusion of 3 seems to
produce as good results as higher repetition-of-communication-
signal-diffusion (see Figure 10) while computation time is shorter.
Hence, this parameter remained ﬁxed for the next study while
upper-communication-threshold was varied. At the beginning of
the clearance process neutrophilic agents with a higher upper
threshold of communication signal perception were more suc-
cessful. Later on, the inverse situation occurred.

FIGURE 10 | Inﬂuence of the diffusion parameter “repetition-of-communication-signal-diffusion” on the clearing efﬁciency dynamics. For comparison
simulation results based on random movement of neutrophilic agents (black) and STP with a 75% probability of holding direction (gray) are shown.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 7

Tokarski et al.

ABM: immune defense against spores

FIGURE 11 | Inﬂuence of the signal perception parameter “upper-
communication-threshold” on the clearing efﬁciency dynamics. For
comparison, simulation results based on random movement of neutrophilic
agents (black) and STP with a 75% probability of holding direction (gray) are

shown. The inset shows a zoom into the graph where a crossover of the
clearing efﬁciency for the highest (pink) and lowest (orange) “upper-
communication-threshold” occurs which can be interpreted as two opposing
clearing strategies. SE are indicated.

A high upper threshold of communication signal perception is
useful during the ﬁrst hours where still many conidial agents are
present near to calling neutrophilic agents. At a later time, when
only few conidial agents remain in a cluster, a better strategy is
to move to the vicinity of successful neutrophilic agents, but not
nearby where the area is already cleared. This is realized by a small
upper threshold of communication signal perception.

4. DISCUSSION
Neutrophils play an essential role in the elimination of A. fumigatus
(Balloy and Chignard, 2009; Mircescu et al., 2009). Nevertheless,
the detailed mechanisms how these immune effector cells protect
the human host are still a matter of debate (Bruns et al., 2010).
One effector mechanism is phagocytosis of conidia (Behnsen et al.,
2007).

Different potential movement strategies of neutrophils in
tracking infectious conidia have been tested in an ABM to explain
the in vitro efﬁciency of a population of neutrophils in reduc-
ing the amount of free conidia. Simple random walk, random
walk with a tendency to keep the former direction (short-term
persistence) and chemotactic movement triggered by chemokines
excreted by conidia or communication signals sent out by other
neutrophils that already have found conidia have been considered.
The short-term persistence hunting strategy turned out to be supe-
rior to the simple random walk. A similar result has been found
in computer simulations on the effectiveness of various search

strategies at ﬁnding habitat patches (Zollner and Lima, 1999). Fol-
lowing a gradient of chemokines released by conidia is even better.
Then, the success in clearing conidia depends on the diffusion
parameters of the sensed molecules.

Neutrophils comprise both tracking strategies, short-term per-
sistence to direction and chemotaxis (Tranquillo et al., 1988). In
the absence of a gradient of a chemoattractant, they keep direction
over the scale of minutes.

A central question tackled in this work is whether chem-
ical communication and chemotaxis of neutrophils improve
the clearing efﬁciency. We found that the answer depends on
the spatial distribution of conidia, so that two cases can be
distinguished: (a) If conidia are distributed randomly, com-
munication does not pay off because it leads to an aggrega-
tion of neutrophils, so that many conidia are unaffected from
neutrophilic attacks. (b) If conidia are clustered, communica-
tion of neutrophils results in a higher clearing efﬁciency, since
attracting other neutrophils for a faster cooperative clearing
pays off.

Calenbuhr and Deneubourg (1992) achieved similar results
with a chemotaxis-diffusion model that describes collective hunt-
ing strategies using chemical communication in animals. It is
found that collective hunting is more efﬁcient at low prey den-
sities whereas individual strategies are more efﬁcient at high prey
densities. Clustering of conidia can be seen as decreasing the
density of the searched-for objects.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 8

Tokarski et al.

ABM: immune defense against spores

The communication model

includes two parameters for
cytokine recognition. A lower threshold of perception, and an
upper threshold for sensing communication signals between
immune cells. The large-scale simulation results showed a non-
linear effect of this upper threshold of cytokine recognition on the
efﬁciency of neutrophilic agents in clearing the tissue from infec-
tious conidia. If the upper-communication-threshold was high,
neutrophilic agents, activated by another “calling” neutrophilic
agent, directly followed the gradient of cytokines until they reached
the position of the calling agent. With lower values for the upper-
communication-threshold activated neutrophilic agents mainly
headed to the whole cluster of conidial agents, which signiﬁcantly
increased their overall efﬁciency. Scanning through possible values
for this upper-communication-threshold revealed two opposing
strategies. For a high threshold of cytokine recognition the overall
efﬁciency of neutrophilic agents to clear the tissue was fast, but
after a simulated time of 24 h after infection this strategy was not
that efﬁcient as simulation runs with a low threshold. We con-
cluded that the overall efﬁciency of a population of neutrophilic
agents can be either “fast but sloppy” possessing a high threshold
for communication signal perception or, “slow but thoroughly”
having a low threshold.

In an evolutionary context, we assume that selection would
favor hosts with a “fast but sloppy” immune-response by neu-
trophils against pathogens, like A. fumigatus. An infection is a

race against time and we expect that the immune system of hosts
are selected for a fast clearance to prevent conidial germination,
even if this might not be the most thorough strategy in the
long-run.

However, the possibility remains that neutrophils vary their
threshold in signal perception according to the current situation
comprising both strategies like they control chemotaxis via dif-
ferent concentrations of chemoattractants by G-protein signaling
(Zhang et al., 2009).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are thankful to Matthias Gunzer for providing exper-
imental data on Aspergillus fumigatus and murine neutrophils.

The work was

supported by the “Pakt

für Forschung
the BMBF (http://www.bmbf.de/) and
und Innovation” of
TMBWK (http://www.thueringen.de/de/tmbwk/) to Sabine Hum-
mert, Franziska Mech, and Marc Thilo Figge, BMBF“Virtual Liver”
to Christian Tokarski, and DFG (Germany) within the excellence
program “Jena School for Microbial Communication” to Anja
Schroeter and Stefan Schuster.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbial_Immunology/10.3389/
fmicb.2012.00129/abstract

REFERENCES
Balloy, V., and Chignard, M. (2009).
The innate immune response to
Aspergillus
fumigatus. Microbes
Infect. 11, 919–927.

Bauer, A. L., Beauchemin, C. A. A., and
Perelson, A. S. (2009). Agent-based
modeling of host-pathogen systems:
the successes and challenges. Inf. Sci.
(Ny) 179, 1379–1389.

Behnsen, J., Narang, P., Hasenberg, M.,
Gunzer, F., Bilitewski, U., Klippel, N.,
Rohde, M., Brock, M., Brakhage, A.
A., and Gunzer, M. (2007). Environ-
mental dimensionality controls the
interaction of phagocytes with the
pathogenic fungi Aspergillus fumi-
gatus and Candida albicans. PLoS
Pathog. 3, e13. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.ppat.0030013

Bruns, S., Kniemeyer, O., Hasenberg,
M., Aimanianda, V., Nietzsche, S.,
Thywissen, A., Jeron, A., Latgé, J.-
P., Brakhage, A. A., and Gunzer, M.
(2010). Production of extracellular
traps against Aspergillus fumigatus
in vitro and in infected lung tissue is
dependent on invading neutrophils
and inﬂuenced by hydrophobin
roda. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000873.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000873
Calenbuhr, V., and Deneubourg,

J.
Evolution
Insects, Chapter Pat-
Formation Via Chemical

(1992). Biology
of
tern

Social

and

Communication: Collective and Indi-
vidual Strategies. Leuven: Leuven
University Press, 343–349.

Chavali, A. K., Gianchandani, E. P.,
Tung, K. S., Lawrence, M. B., Peirce,
S. M., and Papin, J. A. (2008).
Characterizing emergent proper-
ties of immunological systems with
multi-cellular rule-based computa-
tional modeling. Trends Immunol.
29, 589–599.

Forrest, S., and Beauchemin, C. (2007).
Computer immunology. Immunol.
Rev. 216, 176–197.

Grimm, V., Berger, U., Bastiansen, F.,
Eliassen, S., Ginot, V., Giskec, J.,
Goss-Custard, J., Grand, T., Heinz,
S., Huse, G., Huth, A., Jepsen, J.,
Jørgensen, C., Mooij, W., Müller,
B., Pe’er, G., Piou, C., Railsback,
S., Robbins, A., Robbins, M., Ross-
manith, E., Rüger, N., Strand, E.,
Souiss, S., Stillman, R., Vabø, R.,
Visser, U., and DeAngelis, D. (2006).
A standard protocol
for describ-
ing individual-based and agent-
based models. Ecol. Modell. 198,
115–126.

Grimm, V., Berger, U., DeAngelis, D.,
Polhill, J., Giske, J., and Railsback, S.
(2010). The ODD protocol: a review
and ﬁrst update. Ecol. Modell. 221,
2760–2768.
Hohl, T. M.

(2009). Stage-speciﬁc
recognition of

immune

innate

Aspergillus fumigatus and modula-
tion by echinocandin drugs. Med.
Mycol. 47, 192–198.

B.,

and

(2010). Game

Hummert, S., Hummert, C., Schroeter,
Schuster,
A., Hube,
theoretical
S.
strate-
modelling
gies of Candida albicans
inside
macrophages. J. Theor. Biol. 264,
312–318.

survival

of

Karkowska-Kuleta, J., Rapala-Kozik, M.,
and Kozik, A. (2009). Fungi patho-
genic to humans: molecular bases of
virulence of Candida albicans, Cryp-
tococcus neoformans and Aspergillus
fumigatus. Acta Biochim. Pol. 56,
211–224.

Mech, F., Thywissen, A., Guthke, R.,
Brakhage, A. A., and Figge, M. T.
(2011). Automated image analysis
of
the host-pathogen interaction
between phagocytes and Aspergillus
fumigatus. PLoS ONE 6, e19591.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0019591

Mircescu, M. M., Lipuma, L., van
Rooijen, N., Pamer, E. G., and
Hohl, T. M. (2009). Essential role
for neutrophils but not alveo-
lar macrophages
time
points following Aspergillus fumi-
gatus infection. J. Infect. Dis. 200,
647–656.

early

at

Paddock, S. W. (1999). Confocal laser
scanning microscopy. BioTechniques
27, 992–996, 998–1002, 1004.

Pluta, M.

Richardson, M. D.

(1988). Advanced Light
Microscopy: Principles and Basic
Properties, Vol. 1. New York: Elsevier.
(2005). Chang-
ing patterns and trends in sys-
temic fungal infections. J. Antimi-
crob. Chemother. 56(Suppl. 1), i5–
i11.
Scapini,

J. A.,
Gasperini, S., Calzetti, F., Baz-
zoni, F., and Cassatella, M. A.
(2000). The neutrophil as a cellular
source of chemokines.
Immunol.
Rev. 177, 195–203.

Lapinet-Vera,

P.,

Shoham, S., and Levitz, S. M. (2005).
The immune response to fungal
infections. Br.
J. Haematol. 129,
569–582.

Tranquillo, R. T., Zigmond, S. H.,
and Lauffenburger, D. A. (1988).
Measurement of
the chemotaxis
coefﬁcient for human neutrophils
in the under-agarose migration
assay. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 11,
1–15.

Waldorf, A. R., and Diamond, R.
D. (1985). Neutrophil chemotac-
tic responses induced by fresh and
swollen Rhizopus oryzae spores and
Aspergillus fumigatus conidia. Infect.
Immun. 48, 458–463.

Wilensky, U. (1999). NetLogo. Center for
Connected Learning and Computer-
Based Modeling. Evanston,
IL:
Northwestern University.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 9

Tokarski et al.

ABM: immune defense against spores

Zhang, H., Sun, C., Glogauer, M., and
Bokoch, G. M.
(2009). Human
neutrophils
chemo-
taxis by differential activation of
Rac1 and Rac2. J. Immunol. 183,
2718–2728.

coordinate

Zollner, P. A., and Lima, S. L. (1999).
Search strategies for landscape-level
interpatch movements. Ecology 80,
1019–1030.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 23 December 2011; accepted: 19
March 2012; published online: 26 April
2012.

Citation: Tokarski C, Hummert S, Mech
F, Figge MT, Germerodt S, Schroeter A
and Schuster S (2012) Agent-based mod-
eling approach of immune defense against
spores of opportunistic human patho-
genic fungi. Front. Microbio. 3:129. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00129
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Microbial Immunology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.

Copyright  2012 Tokarski, Hum-
mert, Mech, Figge, Germerodt, Schroeter
and Schuster. This is an open-access
article distributed under
terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

the

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 10

Tokarski et al.

APPENDIX

Table A1 | List of agents.

State variables

Brief description

ABM: immune defense against spores

GRID CELLS
Size
Radius of neutrophil
Conidia-chemokines
Neutrophil chemokines
CONIDIAL AGENTS
Size
In-zone
Dragged
Caught
Phagocytosis-counter
NEUTROPHILIC AGENTS
Identity number
Size
Velocity
Direction
Catching
Dragging
Phagocytized

Corresponds to the mean conidium size of A. fumigatus of 2.5 μm
2.5 grid cells
Amount of chemokines segregated by conidial agents
Amount of chemokines segregated by neutrophilic agents

Same size as a grid cell
Stores the identity number of the neutrophilic agent in whose radius a conidial agent ﬁnds itself
– By which it is dragged
– By which it is caught
Counts the time until a caught conidial agent is digested

Unique number for each neutrophilic agent
Size-ratio of neutrophilic and conidial agents is 2.5
Depends on movement mode
Depends on direction mode
Number of caught conidial agents
Number of dragged conidial agents
Number of phagocytized conidial agents

Table A2 | List of global parameters.

Parameter

Brief description

SETUP
Initial-number-of-conidia
Initial-number-of-neutrophils
Velocities-mode-of-neutrophils
Direction-mode-of-neutrophils
Move-conidia
INTERACTION
Catch%
Drag%
Drag-to-release%
Drag-to-catch%
Phagocytosis-capacity
Phagocytosis-time

Initial population size of conidial agents
Initial population size of neutrophilic agents
Setup of neutrophilic agents’ movement options
Setup of neutrophilic agents’ direction options
Conidial agents are moved randomly around their initial position

Neutrophilic agents’ probability to: catch a free conidial agent
– Drag a free conidial agent
– Release a dragged conidial agent
– Phagocytize a dragged conidial agent
Maximum number of conidial agents which can be phagocytized by a neutrophilic agent
Duration of phagocytosis

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 11

Tokarski et al.

ABM: immune defense against spores

Table A3 | Neutrophilic agents’ movement modes.

Parameter

Brief description

Random walk
Mean-neutros
Mean-normal dist
SD-normal dist
Short-term persistence (STP)
Hold-direction
Diffusion of conidia-chemokines

Amount-of-chemokines
Chemokine-perception-threshold
Chemokine-diffusion-rate
Repetition-of-chemokine-diffusion
Communication between neutrophils

Activated neutrophil
Communication-signal
Decrease-of-communication-signal
Lower-communication-threshold
Communication-over-chemotaxis

Random walk of neutrophilic agents
Option for normally-distributed mean of neutrophilic agents’ velocity (with ﬁxed standard deviation)
Option for normally-distributed mean of neutrophilic agents’ velocity
Option for normally-distributed standard deviation of neutrophilic agents’ velocity
Neutrophilic agents hold their actual direction with a certain probability
Probability to hold given direction at the next step
Activation of neutrophilic agents through conidia-chemokines, neutrophilic agents follow chemokine
gradients
Amount of chemokines spread by the free conidial agents per time-step
Neutrophilic agents’ lower threshold of chemokine perception
Degree of diffusion
Velocity of diffusion
Neutrophilic agents follow chemokine gradients segregated by activated neutrophilic agents (positive
feedback-activation)
Attracts other neutrophilic agents (positive feedback-activation)
Signal strength of chemical communication spread by an activated neutrophilic agent
Option for reducing the strength of communication signal
Neutrophilic agents’ lower threshold of communication signal perception
Option to rank priority of chemokine perception and communication signal perception of neutrophilic
agents
Degree of diffusion
Velocity of diffusion

Communication-signal-diffusion-rate
Repetition-of-communication-signal-diffusion
LARGE-SCALE GRID WITH CLUSTERS OF CONIDIA
Number-of-conidia-clusters
Size-of-clusters
Density-of-clusters
Upper-communication-threshold

Initial number of spots of infection
Size of spot of infection
Number of conidial agents per spot of infection
Neutrophilic agents’ upper threshold of communication signal perception

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 12

Tokarski et al.

ABM: immune defense against spores

FIGURE A1 | Interaction of conidial and neutrophilic agents.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 129 | 13

