ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 12 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00136

In situ spectroscopy on intact Leptospirillum ferrooxidans
reveals that reduced cytochrome 579 is an obligatory
intermediate in the aerobic iron respiratory chain

Robert C. Blake II * and Megan N. Griff

College of Pharmacy, Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, LA, USA

Edited by:
David Emerson, Bigelow Laboratory
for Ocean Sciences, USA
Reviewed by:
James Hemp, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, USA
David Emerson, Bigelow Laboratory
for Ocean Sciences, USA
*Correspondence:
Robert C. Blake II, College of
Pharmacy, Xavier University of
Louisiana, 1 Drexel Drive, New
Orleans, LA 70125, USA.
e-mail: rblake@xula.edu

Electron transfer reactions among colored cytochromes in intact bacterial cells were moni-
tored using an integrating cavity absorption meter that permitted the acquisition of accurate
absorbance data in suspensions of cells that scatter light.The aerobic iron respiratory chain
of Leptospirillum ferrooxidans was dominated by the redox status of an abundant cellu-
lar cytochrome that had an absorbance peak at 579 nm in the reduced state. Intracellular
cytochrome 579 was reduced within the time that it took to mix a suspension of the bacte-
ria with soluble ferrous iron at pH 1.7. Steady state turnover experiments were conducted
where the initial concentrations of ferrous iron were less than or equal to that of the oxygen
concentration. Under these conditions, the initial absorbance spectrum of the bacterium
observed under air-oxidized conditions was always regenerated from that of the bacterium
observed in the presence of Fe(II). The kinetics of aerobic respiration on soluble iron by
intact L. ferrooxidans conformed to the Michaelis–Menten formalism, where the reduced
intracellular cytochrome 579 represented the Michaelis complex whose subsequent oxi-
dation appeared to be the rate-limiting step in the overall aerobic respiratory process. The
velocity of formation of ferric iron at any time point was directly proportional to the concen-
tration of the reduced cytochrome 579. Further, the integral over time of the concentration
of the reduced cytochrome was directly proportional to the total concentration of ferrous
iron in each reaction mixture.These kinetic data obtained using whole cells were consistent
with the hypothesis that reduced cytochrome 579 is an obligatory steady state interme-
diate in the iron respiratory chain of this bacterium. The capability of conducting visible
spectroscopy in suspensions of intact cells comprises a powerful post-reductionist means
to study cellular respiration in situ under physiological conditions for the organism.

Keywords: Leptospirillum ferrooxidans, electron transfer, aerobic respiration, chemolithotroph, acidophile,
cytochrome 579, in situ spectroscopy, integrating sphere

INTRODUCTION
Certain chemolithotrophic bacteria inhabit ore-bearing geolog-
ical formations exposed to the atmosphere and obtain all of
their energy for growth from the oxidation and dissolution of
minerals within the ore. Energy is derived from oxidative phos-
phorylation coupled to respiratory electron transfer. The ability to
respire aerobically on soluble ferrous ions under strongly acidic
conditions is currently known to be expressed by at least 34
species in 14 genera distributed throughout the Gram-negative
(Markosyan, 1972; Huber and Stetter, 1989; Kelly and Wood,
2000; Hallberg et al., 2010), Gram-positive (Clark and Norris,
1996; Norris et al., 1996; Johnson et al., 2008, 2009; Guo et al.,
2009; Jiang et al., 2009), and Archaea bacteria (Segerer et al.,
1986; Huber et al., 1989; Huber and Stetter, 1991; Karavaiko
et al., 1994; Golyshina et al., 2000, 2009). Given the genetic
diversity within this collection of phenotypically related bacte-
ria, it would not be surprising to learn that phylogenetically
distinct groups of bacteria express different electron transfer bio-
molecules and pathways to accomplish aerobic respiration on
soluble iron.

Classic reductionist studies that involve the structural and
functional characterization of highly puriﬁed proteins in dilute
solution have described a bewildering variety of different redox-
active electron transport proteins in cell-free extracts derived from
iron-grown Gram-negative (Cox and Boxer, 1978; Hart et al.,
1991; Blake et al., 1992; Yarzábal et al., 2002, 2004), Gram-positive
(Blake et al., 1993; Takai et al., 2001; Dinarieva et al., 2010), and
Archaea (Hettmann et al., 1998; Dopson et al., 2005; Auernik and
Kelly, 2008) bacteria. The most promising efforts to date have
focused on the iron respiratory chain of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxi-
dans, where an iron “respirasome” super complex has been deﬁned
that is comprised of 2 c-type cytochromes, a blue copper pro-
tein called rusticyanin, and an aa3-type terminal oxidase (Castelle
et al., 2008). The proteins in the aerobic iron respiratory pathway
of At. ferrooxidans do not appear to be expressed in many of the
phylogenetically distinct bacteria that also respire on iron. Simi-
larly, redox-active proteins expressed in other iron-grown bacteria
do not appear to be expressed in iron-grown At. ferrooxidans.
Comparative analyses conducted using those relevant bacterial
genomes where partial or complete DNA sequence data is available

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 136 | 1

Blake II and Griff

Respiratory cytochromes in Leptospirillum ferrooxidans

(Chen et al., 2005; Ram et al., 2005; Valdes et al., 2008; Clum et al.,
2009; Siezen and Wilson, 2009) have not yet provided signiﬁcant
insight into other iron respiratory proteins or pathways. There is
little information in the DNA databases to compare with because
the proteins in the aerobic iron respiratory pathway of At. ferroox-
idans do not appear to be universal among those bacteria that
respire on iron. In either case, actual respiratory electron transfer
in the intact organism is not directly observed. Rather, the func-
tional properties of the intact electron transfer chain are inferred
from observations on isolated molecules.

This paper introduces a new means to study respiratory elec-
tron transfer reactions in situ in intact bacteria under physiological
conditions. The premise is that accurate UV-visible spectroscopy
of electron transfer reactions among colored cytochromes can be
conducted in highly turbid suspensions if the live bacteria are
irradiated in an isotropic homogeneous ﬁeld of incident measur-
ing light. Under those conditions, the absorbed radiant power is
independent of scattering effects (Elterman, 1970; Fry et al., 1992;
Javorﬁ et al., 2006; Hodgkinson et al., 2009). We conducted equi-
librium and kinetic studies on the Fe(II)-dependent reduction
and O2-dependent oxidation of cytochromes in intact Leptospir-
illum ferrooxidans at pH 1.7. We used a commercial integrating
cavity absorption meter (ICAM) where the cuvette comprised a
reﬂecting cavity completely ﬁlled with the absorbing suspension.
L. ferrooxidans was selected because it is only known to respire
on one substrate, reduced iron (Harrison, 1984). We observed
that a cytochrome with a reduced spectral peak at 579 nm is an
obligatory intermediate in the aerobic iron respiratory chain of L.
ferrooxidans.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
CELL CULTURE
Leptospirillum ferrooxidans DSMZ 2705 was cultured autotroph-
ically on soluble ferrous ions at 30˚C in the medium described
elsewhere (Tuovinen and Kelly, 1973), adjusted to pH 1.5 and

amended with 44 g/l of FeSO4·7H2O. Cells grown to station-

ary phase were harvested by centrifugation, washed three times
with 0.02 M H2SO4, pH 1.7, and resuspended in sufﬁcient 0.02 M
H2SO4 to achieve a stock suspension of 1.5× 1010 cells/ml. The

stock suspension was stored at 4˚C for up to 2 weeks while spec-
troscopic experiments were conducted on aliquots of the cells.
Previous stock suspensions of this organism have been stored in
dilute sulfuric acid at 4˚C for over 6 weeks before changes in the
bacterium’s energy metabolism could be detected.

QUANTIFICATION OF BACTERIA
Absolute numbers of L. ferrooxidans cells were determined by elec-
trical impedance measurements in a Multisizer 4 particle counter
(Beckman Coulter, Inc., Brea, CA, USA) ﬁtted with a 30-μm aper-
ture. The instrument was programmed to siphon 50 μl of sample
that contained Isoton II as the electrolyte. The current applied
across the aperture was 600 μA. Voltage pulses attendant with
impedance changes as particles passed through the aperture were
monitored with an instrument gain of four.

Relative numbers of L. ferrooxidans cells were determined by
photon correlation scattering spectroscopy with a DelsaNano
C particle size analyzer, also from Beckman Coulter, Inc. Cell

densities were adjusted to 8.3× 106 cells/ml in 0.02 M sulfuric acid
to give an attenuator obscuration of 47%. Determination of the
relative numbers of light scattering species as a function of parti-
cle diameter was accomplished by the time domain method with
operating and analysis software provided by Beckman Coulter, Inc.

ABSORBANCE MEASUREMENTS WITH CELL SUSPENSIONS
Absorbance measurements on intact cells in suspension were con-
ducted in an Olis CLARiTY 1000 A spectrophotometer (On Line
Instrument Systems, Inc., Bogart, GA, USA) that employed a novel
ICAM. In a typical experiment, identical 4.2 ml solutions that
contained ferrous sulfate in 0.02 M sulfuric acid, pH 1.7, were
added to both the sample and reference observation cavities of
the spectrophotometer. After recording a stable baseline from 350
to 650 nm, 140 μl were withdrawn from the sample cavity and
replaced with 140 μl of the stock cell suspension of L. ferrooxi-
−1) were then
dans. Apparent absorbance spectra (typically 6.2 s
collected until any visible absorbance changes had ceased. Raw
apparent absorbance values were converted to absorbance values
per cm using Fry’s method (Fry et al., 2010) as described in the text.

RESULTS
THE REDOX STATE OF ELECTRON TRANSFER PROTEINS CAN BE
MONITORED IN SITU IN INTACT BACTERIA UNDER PHYSIOLOGICAL
CONDITIONS
The principal features of the novel CLARiTY spectrophotometer
used to conduct absorbance measurements in turbid solutions are
included in the schematic diagram shown in Figure 1. The sample
and reference observation cells of this dual beam spectropho-
tometer were each comprised of a 4.2-ml spherical quartz cuvette
fused with a 6-mm ID quartz tube. Each quartz chamber was sur-
rounded by a tightly packed proprietary white powder that served
to maximize diffuse reﬂectance of light on the exterior walls of
the spherical ﬂask. The apertures in the reﬂecting sphere through
which the measuring light entered and the transmitted/scattered
light exited to the photomultiplier tube were positioned at a 90˚
angle such that the light had to undergo many reﬂections and
cell transversals before it was quantiﬁed using the photomultiplier
tube. A white Teﬂon plug with a 6-mm OD was inserted into the
quartz tube to minimize the loss of light out of the neck. A 1.0-
cm white stir bar was included in the sample chamber to facilitate
sample mixing and suspension of any particulate matter.

The data shown in Figure 2 illustrate how the intact cells of L.
ferrooxidans were quantiﬁed. The solid line in Figure 2 shows the
absolute counts as a function of particle size as determined with
a suspension of L. ferrooxidans in the Multisizer 4. The Multi-
sizer determined the number and size of intact bacteria suspended
in an electrically conductive liquid by forcing a measured vol-
ume of the suspension to ﬂow through a small aperture with an
immersed electrode on either side. A current passing through the
aperture between the two electrodes enabled the bacteria to be
detected by the momentary changes in the electrical impedance
as they passed through the aperture, since each bacterium dis-
placed its own volume of electrolyte solution within the aperture
itself. These changes in impedance were detected as a series of
voltage pulses, for which the height and duration of each pulse
were proportional to the volume of the bacterium that produced

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 136 | 2

Blake II and Griff

Respiratory cytochromes in Leptospirillum ferrooxidans

it. Each pulse was counted and allocated to 1 of 400 arbitrary size
categories, or channels. Each channel encompassed a narrow range
of volumes that were converted to spherical equivalents and rep-
resented by the corresponding spherical diameters on the abscissa
of Figure 2. The solid line in Figure 2 shows the number of counts
in each size range for spherical equivalents with diameters from
0.6 to 2.0 μm.

The dashed line in Figure 2 shows the relative number of L.
ferrooxidans cells as a function of particle size as determined by
laser light diffraction. Light scattered by the bacterial suspension
produced a diffraction pattern from which the relative numbers of
the scattering species at each particle size were calculated. Like the
Multisizer, the particle sizes determined by laser light diffraction
are expressed as spherical equivalents and are also represented by
the corresponding spherical diameters on the abscissa of Figure 2.

FIGURE 1 | Simpliﬁed model of an integrating cavity absorption meter
designed to permit accurate absorbance measurements in media that
scatter light.

Close correspondence between the electrical impedance and the
light diffraction curves was observed down to 0.6 μm, indicating
that the two instruments were monitoring the same population
of particles. Bacteria with effective diameters less than 0.6 μm
were underrepresented by the electrical impedance method, by
which observations were limited to particles with effective diam-
eters between 2 and 60% of the 30-μm aperture employed, while
the light diffraction method was capable of resolving particles with
effective diameters smaller than 0.1 μm. On the basis of compar-
isons such as that illustrated in Figure 2, it was determined that
19.8% of the bacterial cell counts were below the limit of resolu-
tion of the electrical impedance method with the 30-μm aperture.
Accordingly, absolute counts of L. ferrooxidans cells obtained by
the electrical impedance method were multiplied by 1.23 to cor-
rect for the percentage of bacterial counts that were below the limit
of resolution of the instrument.

Cell pellets of L. ferrooxidans, which were a pinkish tan color,
were obtained by centrifugation of batch cultures grown to sta-
tionary phase on soluble ferrous iron. Curve a in Figure 3 shows
the absorbance spectrum of oxidized L. ferrooxidans that was
obtained in the CLARiTY spectrophotometer in sulfuric acid, pH
1.7. Even though the cell suspension contained 5× 108 cells/ml
and was roughly as turbid as non-fat milk, the resulting absorbance
spectrum contained no evidence of the light scattering artifacts
that one would observe by conducting the same absorbance mea-
surements using a conventional linear spectrophotometer. The
spectrum in curve a showed a clearly deﬁned Soret peak at 422 nm
and a broad α,β band at around 520 nm.

The goal of the initial spectroscopic experiments was simply
to determine whether the pink protein(s) in the cells changed
color when the cells were suspended in sulfuric acid and subse-
quently exposed to excess concentrations of soluble ferrous ions
under physiological conditions. Curve b in Figure 3 shows the
absorbance spectrum that was obtained when the cells of oxidized
L. ferrooxidans were exposed to 100 mM ferrous sulfate in sulfuric
acid, pH 1.7. Exposure to excess soluble iron caused the apparent

FIGURE 2 | Comparison of L. ferrooxidans cell populations by
electrical impedance (solid line) and static light diffraction methods
(dashed line). Electrical impedance measurements yielded absolute
numbers of cells (left ordinate) as a function of size; light diffraction
measurements yielded relative numbers of cells (right ordinate) as a
function of size. The scale of each ordinate was chosen to facilitate
comparison of the curves. The area under the electrical impedance
curve was 81.2% of that under the light diffraction curve.

FIGURE 3 | Apparent absorbance spectra of intact L. ferrooxidans
collected in the CLARiTY in the absence (a) and presence (b) of
100 mM ferrous sulfate in aerobic sulfuric acid, pH 1.7. The ﬁnal bacterial
suspension contained 2.1× 109 cells of L. ferrooxidans in 4.2 ml. Curve c
shows the apparent absorbance spectrum of 50 μM ferric ions under the
same solution conditions in the absence of bacteria.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 136 | 3

Blake II and Griff

Respiratory cytochromes in Leptospirillum ferrooxidans

Soret peak to split into two peaks with maxima at 418 and 439 nm.
In addition, a new absorbance peak appeared with a maximum
absorbance at 579 nm. The absorbance spectrum represented by
curve b appeared immediately after mixing the bacterial suspen-
sion in the observation cell that contained the 100-mM soluble
iron (≤0.5 s). This observation indicated that the iron-dependent
reduction of the cytochrome(s) in intact L. ferrooxidans was essen-
tially complete within the 0.5-s mixing time in the observation cell
of the spectrophotometer. The resulting spectrum was very stable
and did not vary for at least an hour after mixing. Although the
live cells could respire aerobically on the soluble iron, the great
molar excess of iron over molecular oxygen in the observation
cell dictated that the cytochromes in the cells would remain pre-
dominantly reduced as the oxygen in the chamber was consumed.
Evidence for aerobic respiration was taken from the increase in
absorbance at wavelengths below 400 nm in curve b. Curve c in
Figure 3 shows the absorbance spectrum of 50 μM ferric sulfate
in sulfuric acid, pH 1.7. The increase in the absorbance observed
at low wavelengths in curve b was assumed to be due to ferric ions
produced as a consequence of aerobic respiration on iron by the
bacteria.

The goal of subsequent spectroscopic experiments was to
lower the concentration of soluble iron and determine whether
time-dependent changes in the cellular absorbance could be

detected. Fe(II) concentrations were chosen such that the total
number of electrons available for aerobic respiration was lower
than the electron-accepting capacity of the >200 μM O2 in the
air-saturated suspension. The data in Figure 4A show selected
absorbance spectra that were obtained when cells of L. ferrooxi-
dans were exposed to 100 μM ferrous sulfate in sulfuric acid, pH
1.7. The seven absorbance spectra shown in the ﬁgure were selected
from a data set where 6.2 complete scans from 350 to 650 nm were
collected every second for 400 s. Once again, the spectrum of the
bacteria produced in the presence of Fe(II) was generated within
the operational dead time of mixing, roughly 0.5 s. In this case,
however, subsequent aerobic respiration under the conditions of
excess molecular oxygen produced time-dependent changes in the
observed spectra of whole cells. The reduced peaks at 439 and
579 nm disappeared over a period of 400 s, while the oxidized
Soret peak at 422 nm gradually reappeared. In addition, there was a
concomitant increase in absorbance at wavelengths below 400 nm.
These spectral changes were consistent with the hypothesis that the
cells respired aerobically on the soluble iron until the ferrous iron
was completely oxidized.

The primary absorbance spectra shown in Figures 3 and 4A are
presented as “apparent absorbance” because of prior reports that
spectra obtained using integrated cavity absorption meters appear
distorted when compared with corresponding spectra of the same

FIGURE 4 | Absorbance spectra obtained at different time points after
2.1× 109 cells of intact L. ferrooxidans were introduced into 4.2 ml of
100 μM ferrous sulfate in sulfuric acid, pH 1.7. (A) Apparent absorbance
spectra collected in the CLARiTY at seven time points after mixing,
ranging from 1.0 to 400 s. Each arrow indicates whether the apparent
absorbance at that wavelength increased or decreased with time. (B)
Absorbance spectra obtained when the apparent absorbance values in (A)

were converted to equivalent absorbance values per cm using the Fry
equation (see text) to adjust for mean path length differences at different
wavelengths. The absorbances at the longer wavelengths correspond to
the more sensitive scale shown on the right ordinate. (C) Difference
spectra, representing the absolute spectrum of the iron-reduced L.
ferrooxidans minus those obtained at selected time points following the
initial reduction of the bacteria.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 136 | 4

Blake II and Griff

Respiratory cytochromes in Leptospirillum ferrooxidans

materials obtained using a conventional linear spectrophotometer
(Elterman, 1970; Fry et al., 1992; Javorﬁ et al., 2006; Hodgkinson
et al., 2009). Unlike single path length spectrophotometers where
the Beer–Lambert law governs non-linearity in the measured light
intensity as a function of analyte concentration, the measuring
light in an integrating sphere makes multiple random passes with
different path lengths that exacerbate the apparent non-linearity
with analyte concentration. While others have used semi-empirical
methods to provide distortion-free spectra (Javorﬁ et al., 2006),
we utilized the approach suggested by Fry because it is based on
derivations from ﬁrst principles (Fry et al., 1992, 2010). Fry arrived
at the following exact expression for fractional absorption in an
ICAM:

1 − T =

1 − exp [−α(ν)LG]

1 − ρ(1 − h) exp [−α(ν)LG]

(1)

where T equals the observed transmittance in the ICAM, α(ν)
equals the corresponding absorbance that would be observed in
a single path length spectrophotometer, LG represents the mean
geometric path length which for a sphere equals 2/3 of the sphere’s
diameter, ρ represents the reﬂectance at the walls of the cavity and
is a number between 0 and 1, and h is the fraction of the cavity
wall that is open for ports. Equation 1 was rearranged to

(cid:2)

α(v) = − ln

(cid:3)
−A
10
1 − ρ (1 − h)
1 − 10

−A

(cid:4)

(cid:5)(cid:6)

LG

(2)

where A is the absorbance value observed in the CLARiTY and
ρ(1− h) was determined in separate experiments to be equal to
0.92 (data not shown).

The spectra shown in Figure 4B were obtained when the
absorbance values in Figure 4A were converted to equivalent
absorbance values per cm using Eq. 2. The converted absorbance
values in Figure 4B illustrate the enhanced sensitivity achieved
in the CLARiTY where the mean path length of the measuring
light is increased by multiple reﬂections around the interior of
the cavity. The conversion also eliminated the apparent distortion
in the raw absorbance values wherein the Soret peak appeared
to be attenuated compared to the heme absorbance at longer
wavelengths. Thus those wavelengths where greater absorption
occurred received relatively higher values in the converted data
than did those wavelengths where lower absorption occurred.

Figure 4C shows difference spectra representing the absolute
absorbance spectrum of the iron-reduced L. ferrooxidans minus
those obtained at various time points following the rapid reduc-
tion of the bacteria. The two prominent peaks of the difference
spectrum occur at 443 and 579 nm. The observation of at least four
relatively well-deﬁned isosbestic points is extraordinary consider-
ing that the spectra were acquired in a highly turbid suspension
of bacteria. An isosbestic point is a speciﬁc wavelength at which
two or more absorbing species have the same molar absorptivity.
The existence of those four well-deﬁned isosbestic points suggests
that there is only one principal iron-responsive cytochrome that
is visible in the aerobic iron respiratory chain of L. ferrooxidans.

REDUCED CYTOCHROME 579 IS AN OBLIGATORY INTERMEDIATE
DURING AEROBIC RESPIRATION ON SOLUBLE IRON BY INTACT
L. FERROOXIDANS
The next goal was to determine whether the time-dependent
absorbance changes observed when intact L. ferrooxidans was
exposed to soluble ferrous ions could be correlated with the
appearance of product ferric ions as the bacterium respired aero-
bically on reduced iron. The kinetic data shown in Figure 5A were
extracted from the data set that yielded the selected spectra shown
in Figure 4A. The change in absorbance at 355 nm, which repre-
sented predominantly the absorbance due to the time-dependent
accumulation of ferric ions, increased in a roughly linear fashion
until the limiting concentration of ferrous ions was completely
depleted at around 320 s after the start of the bacterial-catalyzed
reaction. The changes in absorbance at 443 nm, which represented
the peak of the difference spectrum in the Soret region shown
in Figure 4C, slowly decreased over the time course of the reac-
tion until about 300 s, when the absorbance then decreased rapidly
back to the initial absorbance observed in the bacterium under air-
oxidized conditions. It was evident that the cellular cytochrome
returned to the oxidized state at about the same time that the
product formation ceased.

The close correspondence between the change in product for-
mation and the transient changes in the redox state of cytochrome
579 in intact L.
ferrooxidans was consistent with the mini-
mal kinetic mechanism shown in Figure 5B. Brieﬂy, the iron-
dependent reduction of cytochrome 579 in the intact bacterium
is depicted as a relatively rapid reaction, which is consistent with
the observation that it is complete within the 0.5-s dead time of
the mixing even when the concentration of soluble ferrous ions is
only 100 μM. The bacterium with its reduced cellular cytochrome
is then shown as reacting with molecular oxygen to regenerate oxi-
dized cytochrome/bacterium in a slower reaction that constitutes
the rate-limiting catalytic step. The exchange of electrons between
the bacterium and soluble iron is depicted as a reversible reaction
until or if experimental observations indicate otherwise.

The kinetic mechanism shown in Figure 5B is readily modeled
by the Michaelis–Menten formalism where the intact bacterium
that contains the reduced cytochrome 579 represents the Michaelis
complex. It follows that the velocity of product formation should
be a hyperbolic function of the concentration of the substrate
ferrous ions, as shown below:

− d [Fe(II)]

dt

= d [Fe(III)]

dt

= Vmax [Fe(II)]
KM + [Fe(II)]

(3)

where V max is the maximum velocity of the bacterial-catalyzed
aerobic oxidation of ferrous ions and K M is the Michaelis constant
for soluble iron. Figure 5C shows the dependence of the velocity
of the absorbance changes at 355 nm on the concentration of fer-
rous ions that remained in solution when intact cells were mixed
with 100 μM ferrous ions. The data points in Figure 5C represent
the tangents to the 355-nm curve in Figure 5A that correspond
to the same time points as those at the different concentrations of
ferrous ion shown on the abscissa of Figure 5C. The values for the
rectangular hyperbola drawn through the data points in Figure 5C

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 136 | 5

Blake II and Griff

Respiratory cytochromes in Leptospirillum ferrooxidans

FIGURE 5 | The absorbance of the reduced cytochrome in intact L.
ferrooxidans correlates with the absorbance of ferric ions produced
during aerobic respiration on soluble iron. (A) Time courses of the
absorbance changes at 355 and 443 nm obtained when 2.1× 109 cells
of L. ferrooxidans were mixed with 100 μM ferrous sulfate in sulfuric
acid, pH 1.7. (B) Schematic representation of the kinetic mechanism for
aerobic respiration on soluble iron as catalyzed by intact L. ferrooxidans.

The cross-hatched and solid rods represent bacteria that contain
oxidized and iron-reduced cytochromes, respectively. (C) Dependence
of the velocity of the absorbance change at 355 nm on the
concentration of ferrous ions that remain in solution. (D) Dependence of
the velocity of the absorbance changes at 355 nm on the difference in
absorbance values at 443 nm, representing the value at 1.0 s minus the
value at time t.

−7 Ms

with an apparent V max of 3.6× 10

were derived from a non-linear least-squares ﬁt of Eq. 3 to the data
−1 and a K M of 8.7 μM.
Another prediction that follows from the application of the
Michaelis–Menten formalism to the kinetic mechanism shown in
Figure 5B is that the rate of appearance of ferric ions should
be directly proportional to the concentration of the reduced
cytochrome 579 as shown in Eq. 4:
− d [Fe(II)]

= d [Fe(III)]

reduced cytochrome 579

= kcat

(4)

(cid:7)

(cid:8)

dt

dt

Figure 5D shows the dependence of the velocity of the absorbance
changes at 355 nm on the concentration of reduced cytochrome
579. The velocities, or tangents to the 355-nm curve in Figure 5A,
are the same values as those used in Figure 5C. In Figure 5D, the
relative concentrations of reduced cytochrome 579 are represented
on the abscissa by the differences in absorbance between those
observed at 443 nm at corresponding time points in Figure 5A
minus the stable absorbance observed at 443 nm at the end of the
reaction. The direct proportionality predicted by Eq. 4 is evident,
and the slope of the least-squares line in Figure 5D yielded a value
for kcat of 1.4 s

−1.

A third prediction that follows from the application of the
Michaelis–Menten formalism to the kinetic mechanism shown in
Figure 5B is shown in Figure 6. Equation 4 may be integrated to

yield the following:

[Fe(II)]Total

= kcat

(cid:9) (cid:7)

(cid:8)

reduced cytochrome 579

dt

(5)

where the integral on the right side of the equality represents the
total area swept out by the absorbance of the reduced cytochrome
over time as illustrated by the 443-nm time course shown in
Figure 5A. The kinetic curves in Figure 6A show the time courses
of the absorbance changes at 443 nm that were obtained when con-
stant concentrations of L. ferrooxidans were mixed with different
total concentrations of ferrous ions from 25 to 125 μM. Although
the duplicate curves in Figure 6A appeared to differ slightly, the
total areas under each pair of curves were remarkably similar, as
shown by the ﬁve pairs of closely matched data points in Figure 6B.
The direct proportionality predicted by Eq. 5 is evident, and the
slope of the least-squares line in Figure 6B yielded a value for kcat
of 1.3 s

−1.

DISCUSSION
Three things can happen to the measuring light in a conventional
linear spectrophotometer equipped with a standard 1-cm cuvette:
it can be transmitted; it can be absorbed; or it can be scattered
without absorption. When the sample is not optically clear, the
apparent attenuation of the measuring light reﬂects losses due

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 136 | 6

Blake II and Griff

Respiratory cytochromes in Leptospirillum ferrooxidans

FIGURE 6 | The time integral of the absorbance of the reduced
cytochrome in intact L. ferrooxidans correlates with the initial
concentration of ferrous ions in the solution. (A) Time courses of the
differences in the absorbance changes at 443 nm on the initial
concentration of ferrous ions. Cells of L. ferrooxidans (2.1× 109) were

introduced into sulfuric acid, pH 1.7, that contained 25, 50, 75, 100, and
125 μM ferrous sulfate in curves a through e, respectively; each curve was
obtained in duplicate. (B) Dependence of the area swept out under the
absorbance versus time curves in (A) on the initial concentrations of
ferrous ions.

both to true molecular absorption and light lost to scattering by the
particulate matter in the turbid suspension (Shibata et al., 1954;
Merzlyak and Naqvi, 2000). Efforts to recover and quantify the
scattered light have included placing the cuvette inside an integrat-
ing sphere with a reﬂective surface (Nelson and Prezelin, 1993) and
positioning the cuvette outside the sphere (Merzlyak and Naqvi,
2000). In either case data interpretation required cumbersome and
arcane methods to identify and separate the scattered light from
the truly absorbed light. Other investigators have described ICAMs
where a spherical cavity created and bounded by a reﬂective sur-
face was completely ﬁlled with the absorbing material (Elterman,
1970; Fry et al., 1992; Javorﬁ et al., 2006; Hodgkinson et al., 2009).
The principle behind the ICAM is that the apparent absorbance
recorded by the photodetector will be independent of scattering
effects if the sample is in an isotropic homogeneous ﬁeld of light,
like that provided by illuminating the interior of an ICAM sur-
rounded by a surface that maximizes diffuse reﬂectance. The com-
mercial integrating spectrophotometer utilized herein was loosely
based on those described by others (Elterman, 1970; Fry et al.,
1992; Javorﬁ et al., 2006; Hodgkinson et al., 2009) with two notable
improvements: it was a dual beam instrument with both sample
and reference compartments equipped with matching ICAMs; and
it permitted the rapid acquisition of up to 100 absorbance scans
per second over a wavelength range of 300 nm. Another notable
feature of this and all other ICAMs is that the effective path length
of the observation chamber must be considerably longer than the
diameter of the cavity due to multiple reﬂections at the cavity wall,
a feature that provides much greater sensitivity.

Prior reductionist studies reported that cell-free extracts
derived from iron-grown L. ferrooxidans (Hart et al., 1991; Blake
and Shute, 1997), the closely related L. ferriphilum (Ram et al.,
2005), or a microbial community with a low diversity of microbes
that was dominated by Leptospirillum group II bacteria (Singer
et al., 2008) all contained readily discernible quantities of an
acid-soluble, acid-stable cytochrome with an unusual absorbance
maximum at 579 nm in the reduced state. The probable participa-
tion of this novel cytochrome 579 in the aerobic iron respiratory
chain of the Leptospirillum species is implied because the only

known reducing substrates for aerobic respiration that are utilized
by these organisms are soluble and insoluble ferrous iron. The
same logic applies to the observations that the gene product of the
DNA that encodes for cytochrome 579 was expressed in the micro-
bial communities dominated by Leptospirillum group II bacteria.
In either case, the participation of the expressed cytochrome was
inferred from its existence and its cell-free behavior, but no direct
observations of its function in situ were reported.

It is very difﬁcult to reconstitute functional electron transport
chains using partially puriﬁed components from cell-free extracts
when the organism is an obligate acidophile like L. ferrooxidans.
If the cell-free extracts are prepared at strongly acidic pH values,
one must be concerned about altering or even precipitating those
terminal components of the chain that face inward toward the
cytoplasm, which is generally agreed to be neutral or only mildly
acidic at the worst (Cobley and Cox, 1983; Michels and Bakker,
1985). If the cell-free extracts are prepared at near neutral pH val-
ues, one must be concerned about altering the functional behavior
of those initial components of the chain that normally exchange
electrons in their strongly acidic milieu. In addition, ionic iron is
not sufﬁciently soluble at near neutral pH to permit functional
studies on ferrous reduction of puriﬁed proteins or components
within cell-free extracts. The surest way to study the details and
principal features of respiratory electron transfer in obligate aci-
dophiles is to conduct direct observations on the intact chain as
it functions in situ under physiological conditions. That type of
direct observation now appears to be possible using the ICAM
that effectively negates the effects of light scattering by the turbid
suspensions of intact bacteria.

Any kinetic mechanism that is described by the Michaelis–
Menten formalism generates at least three hypotheses (Chance,
1943; Bright and Porter, 1975): (i) the velocity of product for-
mation must be a hyperbolic function of the substrate concen-
tration; (ii) the velocity of product formation must be directly
proportional to the concentration of the catalyst–substrate com-
plex from which product formation occurs in a rate-limiting
reaction; and (iii) the total amount of product formed (or sub-
strate utilized) must be directly proportional to the integral

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 136 | 7

Blake II and Griff

Respiratory cytochromes in Leptospirillum ferrooxidans

over time of the concentration of the limiting catalyst com-
plex. The behavior of the intact L. ferrooxidans and its reduced
cytochrome 579 fulﬁlled the predictions of all three hypotheses.
The V max obtained from the non-linear ﬁt of Eq. 3 to the data
in Figure 5C was 3.6× 10
−7 mol of iron oxidized/s/liter. This rate
equals 2.6× 10
−15 mol of iron oxidized/hour/cell, because there
were 5× 108 cells/ml in the observation cavity. If one assumes that
there are roughly 6× 10
−14 g of carbon per cell of L. ferrooxidans
(Blake et al., 1994), then the maximum rate of iron oxidation
becomes approximately 0.5 mol of iron oxidized/hour/mole of
cellular carbon. This value is slightly lower than those reported
elsewhere for L. ferrooxidans at temperatures from 30 to 40˚C and
slightly different pH values (Eccleston et al., 1985). Similarly, the
value of K M of 8.7 μM that was derived from the data in Figure 5C
is quite a bit lower than those ranging from 250 to 500 μM as
reported by others for the same strain of L. ferrooxidans (Eccleston
et al., 1985). The origins of these differences are unknown.

It must be noted that direct observations on electron trans-
port reactions in intact bacteria also have their limitations if one
or more of the colored components has a small absorption coef-
ﬁcient or is present in considerably lower concentrations than
those of the other components. The studies described above offer
a case in point. If cytochrome 579 participates in the aerobic
iron respiratory chain of L. ferrooxidans, then what are the other
components and why are they not equally prominent in the vis-
ible absorbance spectra collected using the intact bacteria? The
remarkably clear isosbestic points observed in Figures 4B,C indi-
cate that cytochrome 579 is by far and away the principal absorbing
species that undergoes changes in its redox state during the reac-
tion. Given the extreme acid stability of the cytochrome 579 that
was puriﬁed from cell-free extracts of L. ferriphilum (Ram et al.,
2005), one can hypothesize that the cytochrome 579 functions
outside of the plasma membrane and is perhaps the initial cellu-
lar electron acceptor from ferrous ions in the acidic milieu. It is
unlikely that a single acid-stable, acid-soluble cytochrome is both
the initial iron oxidase in the acid milieu and the terminal oxidase
that reduces molecular oxygen. There must be subsequent electron
transfer reactions across the plasma membrane to one or more
components on the cytosolic side to be consistent with the Mitchell
hypothesis as it is applied to oxidative phosphorylation in obligate
acidophiles (Ingledew, 1982). Perhaps these putative components
either possess lower absorption coefﬁcients or they are present
at much lower concentrations than the prominent cytochrome
579. In addition to the exergonic transfer of electrons from Fe(II)
to molecular oxygen, L. ferrooxidans must also accomplish the
+
“uphill” transfer of electrons from Fe(II) to NAD
.

or NADP

+

REFERENCES
Auernik, K. S., and Kelly, R. M. (2008).
Identiﬁcation of components of
electron transport chains in the
extremely thermoacidophilic cre-
narchaeon Metallosphaera sedula
through iron and sulfur compound
oxidation
transcriptomes. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 74, 7723–7732.

Blake, R. C. II, Howard, G. T., and
McGinness, S. (1994). Enhanced
yield of iron-oxidizing bacteria by

in situ electrochemical reduction
of
soluble iron in the growth
medium. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
60, 2704–2710.

Blake, R. C. II, and Shute, E. A. (1997).
“Puriﬁcation and characterization
of a novel cytochrome from Lep-
tospirillum ferrooxidans,” in Inter-
national Biohydrometallurgy Sym-
posium ‘97 – BIOMINE97 (Glen-
side: Australian Mineral Founda-
tion), PB3.1–PB3.10.

Presumably the formation of reduced pyridine dinucleotides for
anabolic metabolism must also require electron transport pro-
teins that, in principle, could be observed as they function in the
intact bacterium. There were no indications of additional electron
transport proteins in the spectra shown above.

Attempts to identify other electron transfer cytochromes in
the aerobic iron respiratory chain of intact L. ferrooxidans using
classical respiratory inhibitors were unsuccessful. Sodium cyanide
complexes spontaneously with ferrous ions to form ferrocyanide
(Blake et al., 1991). Similarly, when 100 μM sodium azide was
mixed with 1.0 mM ferrous ions at pH 1.7, a new absorbance band
with a peak at 380 nm formed rapidly and spontaneously in the
spectrophotometer (data not shown). This spectrum was identical
to that published previously for a aqueous complex of Fe(II) with
azide (Chacarolli et al., 2000). Interestingly, when 100 μM sodium
azide was mixed with intact bacteria in the absence of Fe(II) at pH
1.7, the cytochrome 579 was reduced to the same extent as that
shown in Figure 3 or Figure 4 (data not shown). When L. ferroox-
idans was heat-inactivated by incubating a suspension at 90˚C for
30 min, the cytochromes that were still visible in the intact cell did
not show any change when exposed to 100 mM Fe(II).

Despite the limitations discussed above, the direct and accurate
observation of absorbance changes in situ in intact organisms is
a useful complement to traditional reductionist approaches and
recent advances in proteomic and transcriptomic studies. The
colored prosthetic groups of most electron transport proteins
comprise intrinsic spectrophotometric probes whereby transient
changes in the oxidation–reduction state of the proteins may be
monitored with great sensitivity. There is no better means to
establish physiological relevance in a metabolic function than to
directly observe it as it occurs in the intact bacterium. The move-
ment of electrons through electron transfer complexes is central
to energy production in all living cells. The ability to conduct
direct spectrophotometric studies under non-invasive physiologi-
cal conditions represents a new and powerful approach to examine
the extents and rates of biological events in situ without dis-
rupting the complexity of the live cellular environment. Studies
such as these should increase our fundamental understanding of
biological energy transduction.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by grants DE-SC0007229 from the
United States Department of Energy, 1G12RR026260 from the
National Institutes of Health, and W911NF-07-1-001 from the
United States Department of Defense through its Army Research
Ofﬁce.

Blake, R. C.

II,

Schute, E. A.,
Greenwood, M. M., Spencer, G.
M., and Ingeldew, W. J. (1993).
Enzymes of aerobic respiration on
iron. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 11,
9–18.

II,

Schute, E. A.,
Blake, R. C.
Waskovsky,
J., and Harrison, A.
P. Jr. (1992). Respiratory compo-
nents in acidophilic bacteria that
respire on iron. Geomicrobiol. J. 10,
173–192.

Blake, R. C. II, White, K. J., and Shute, E.
A. (1991). Mixed ligand complexes
of iron with cyanide and phenan-
throline as new probes of metallo-
protein electron transfer reactivity. J.
Biol. Chem. 266, 19203–19211.
J., and Porter, D.

J. T.
(1975). “Flavoprotein oxidases,” in
The Enzymes XII: Oxidation Reduc-
tion Part B,
ed. P. D. Boyer
(New York, NY: Academic Press),
421–505.

Bright, H.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 136 | 8

Blake II and Griff

Respiratory cytochromes in Leptospirillum ferrooxidans

Castelle, C., Guiral, M., Malarte, G.,
Ledgham, F., Leroy, G., Brugna,
M., and Giudici-Orticoni, M. T.
(2008). A new iron-oxidizing/O2-
reducing supercomplex spanning
both inner and outer membranes,
isolated from the extreme acidophile
Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. J. Biol.
Chem. 283, 25803–25811.

Chacarolli, C.

J., Andrade,

J. F.,
Guimarales, O. M., Balbo, V.
R., Venezuela, C. S., and Teruel,
F. S.
(2000). Spectrophotomet-
ric study of
iron oxidation in
the
iron(II)/azide/tetrahyrofuran
system and some analytical appli-
cations. Anal. Chim. Acta 411,
217–222.

Chance, B. (1943). The kinetics of the
enzyme-substrate compound of per-
oxidase. J. Biol. Chem. 151, 553–577.
Chen, L., Brugger, K., Skovgaard, M,
Redder, P., She, Q., Torarinsson, E.,
Greve, B., Awayez, M., Zibat, A.,
Klenk, H. P., and Garrett, R. A.
(2005). The genome of Sulfolobus
acidocaldarius, a model organism of
the Crenarchaeota. J. Bacteriol. 187,
4992–4999.

Clark, D. A., and Norris, P. R. (1996).
Acidimicrobium ferrooxidans gen.
nov., sp. nov.: mixed-culture ferrous
iron oxidation with Sulfobacillus
species. Microbiology 142, 785–790.
Clum, A., Nolan, M., Lang, E., Del Rio,
T. G., Tice, H., Copeland, A., Cheng,
J. F., Lucas, S., Chen, F., Bruce, D.,
Goodwin, L., Pitluck, S., Ivanova, N.,
Mavromatis, K., Mikhailova, N., Pati,
A., Chen, A., Palaniappan, K., Göker,
M., Spring, S., Land, M., Hauser, L.,
Chang, Y. J., Jeffries, C. C., Chain, P.,
Bristow, J., Eisen, J. A., Markowitz,
V., Hugenholtz, P., Kyrpides, N.
C., Klenk, H. P., and Lapidus, A.
(2009). Complete genome sequence
of Acidimicrobium ferrooxidans type
strain. Stand. Genomic Sci. 1, 38–45.
Cobley, J. G., and Cox, J. C. (1983).
Energy conservation in acidophilic
bacteria. Microbiol. Rev. 47, 579–595.
Cox, J. C., and Boxer, D. H. (1978). The
puriﬁcation and some properties of
rusticyanin, a blue copper protein
involved in iron (II) oxidation from
Thiobacillus ferroxidans. Biochem. J.
174, 497–502.

Dinarieva, T. Y., Zhuravleva, A. E.,
Pavlenko, O. A., Tsaplina, I. A.,
and Netrusov, A. I. (2010). Fer-
rous iron oxidation in moderately
thermophilic acidophile Sulfobacil-
lus sibiricus N1T. Can. J. Microbiol.
56, 803–808.

Dopson, M., Baker-Austin, C., and
Bond, P. L. (2005). Analysis of dif-
ferential protein expression during
growth states of Ferroplasma strains

and insights into electron transport
for iron oxidation. Microbiology 151,
4127–4137.

Eccleston, M., Kelly, D. P., and Wood, A.
P. (1985). “Autotrophic growth and
iron oxidation and inhibition kinet-
ics of Leptospirillum ferrooxidans,” in
Planetary Ecology, eds D. E. Caldwell,
J. A. Brierley, and C. L. Brierley (New
York, NY: Van Nostrand Reinhold),
263–272.

Elterman, P. (1970). Integrating cav-
ity spectroscopy. Appl. Opt. 9,
2140–2142.

Fry, E. S., Kattawar, G. W., and Pope,
R. M. (1992).
Integrating cavity
absorption meter. Appl. Opt. 31,
2055–2065.

Fry, E. S., Kattawar, G. W., Strycker, B. D.,
and Zhai, P. W. (2010). Equivalent
path lengths in an integrating cavity:
comment. Appl. Opt. 49, 575–577.

Golyshina, O. V., Pivovarova, T. A.,
Karavaiko, G.
I., Kondrateva, T.
F., Moore, E. R., Abraham, W.
R., Lunsdorf, H., Timmis, K. N.,
Yakimov, M. M., and Golyshin, P.
N. (2000). Ferroplasma acidiphilum
gen. nov., sp. nov., an acidophilic,
autotrophic, ferrous-iron-oxidizing,
cell-wall-lacking, mesophilic mem-
ber of
the Ferroplasmaceae fam.
nov., comprising a distinct lineage
of the Archaea. Int. J. Syst. Evol.
Microbiol. 50, 997–1006.

Golyshina, O. V., Yakimov, M. M.,
Lunsdorf, H., Ferrer, M., Nimtz,
M., Timmis, K. N., Wray, V., Tin-
dall, B.
J., and Golyshin, P. N.
(2009). Acidiplasma aeolicum gen.
nov., sp. nov., a novel euryarchaeon
of the family Ferroplasmaceae iso-
lated from a hydrothermal pool, and
transfer of Ferroplasma cupricumu-
lans to Acidiplasma cupricumulans
comb. nov. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Micro-
biol. 59, 2815–2823.

Guo, X., You, X. Y., Liu, L. J., Zhang, J.
Y., Liu, S. J., and Jiang, C. Y. (2009).
Alicyclobacillus aeris sp. nov., a novel
ferrous iron- and sulfur-oxidizing
bacterium isolated from a copper
mine. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 59,
2415–2420.
Hallberg, K.

B., Gonzalez-Toril,
E., and Johnson, D. B.
(2010).
Acidithiobacillus ferrivorans, sp. nov.;
facultatively
anaerobic, psychro-
tolerant iron- and sulfur-oxidizing
isolated from metal
acidophiles
mine-impacted
environments.
Extremophiles 14, 9–19.

Harrison, A. P. Jr. (1984). The acidic
thiobacilli and other acidophilic
bacteria that share their habitat.
Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 38, 265–292.

Hart, A. J., Murrell, J. C., Poole, R. K.,
and Norris, P. R. (1991). An acid-

T.,

stable cytochrome in iron-oxidizing
ferrooxidans.
Leptospirillum
FEMS Microbiol.
Lett.
81,
89–94.
Hettmann,

Schmidt, C.

L.,
Anemuller,
Zahringer, U.,
Moll, H., Petersen, A., and Schafer,
G. (1998). Cytochrome b558/566
from the archaeon Sulfolobus aci-
docaldarius.
J. Biol. Chem. 273,
12032–12040.

S.,

Hodgkinson,

J., Masiyano, D., and
Tatam, R. P. (2009). Using inte-
grating spheres as absorption cells:
path-length distribution and appli-
cation of Beer’s law. Appl. Opt. 48,
5748–5758.

Huber, G., Spinnler, C., Gambacorta,
A., and Stetter, K. O. (1989). Met-
allosphaera sedula gen. and sp. nov.
represents a new genus of aero-
bic, metal-mobilizing,
thermoaci-
dophilic archaebacteria. Syst. Appl.
Microbiol. 12, 38–47.

Huber, G., and Stetter, K. O. (1991). Sul-
folobus metallicus, sp. nov., a novel
strictly chemolithoautotrophic ther-
mophilic archaeal species of metal-
mobilizers. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 14,
372–378.

Huber, H., and Stetter, K. O. (1989).
Thiobacillus prosperous sp. nov., rep-
resents a new group of halotoler-
ant metal-mobilizing bacteria iso-
lated from a marine geothermal
ﬁeld. Arch. Microbiol. 151, 479–485.
Ingledew, W. J. (1982). The bioen-
ergetics
acidophilic
chemolithotroph. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 683, 89–117.

an

of

Javorﬁ, T., Erostyak, J., Gal, J., Buzady,A.,
Menczel, L., Grab, G., and Naqvi, K.
R. (2006). Quantitative spectropho-
tometry using integrating cavities.
J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 82,
127–131.

Jiang, C. Y., Liu, Y., Liu, Y. Y., You, X.
Y., Guo, X., and Liu, S. J. (2009).
Alicyclobacillus ferrooxydans sp. nov.,
a ferrous-oxidizing bacterium from
solfataric soil. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Micro-
biol. 58, 2898–2903.

Johnson, D. B., Bacelar-Nicolau, P.,
Okibe, N., Thomas, A., and Hall-
berg, K. B. (2009). Ferrimicrobium
acidiphilum gen. nov.,
sp. nov.
and Ferrithrix thermotolerans gen.
nov., sp. nov.: heterotrophic, iron-
acidophilic
oxidizing,
actinobacteria.
J. Syst. Evol.
Microbiol. 59, 1082–1089.

extremely

Int.

Johnson, D. B., Joulian, C., d’Hugues,
P., and Hallberg, K. B. (2008). Sul-
fobacillus benefaciens sp. nov., an aci-
dophilic facultative anaerobic Firmi-
cute isolated from mineral bioleach-
ing operations. Extremophiles 12,
789–798.

Karavaiko, G.

I., Golyshina, O. V.,
Troitskii, A. V., Valieho-Roman,
K. M., Golovacheva, R. S., and
Pivovarova, T. A.
(1994). Sul-
furococcus yellowstonii sp. nov., a
iron- and sulfur-
new species of
oxidizing
thermoacidophilic
archaebacteria. Mikrobiologiya 63,
668–682.

Kelly, D. P., and Wood, A. P. (2000).
Reclassiﬁcation of some species of
Thiobacillus
to the newly desig-
nated genera Acidithiobacillus gen.
nov., Halothiobacillus
gen. nov.
and Thermithiobacillus gen. nov.
Int.
J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 50,
511–516.

Markosyan, G. E. (1972). A new aci-
dophilic iron bacterium Leptospiril-
lum ferrooxidans. Biol. Zh. Arm. 25,
26–33.

Merzlyak, M. N., and Naqvi, K. R.
(2000). On recording the
true
absorption spectrum and the scat-
tering spectrum of a turbid sample:
application to cell suspensions of
the cyanobacterium Anabaena vari-
abilis. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol.
58, 123–129.

Michels, M.,

a

and Bakker, E. P.
large,
(1985). Generation of
protonophore-sensitive
proton
motive force and pH difference in
the acidophilic bacteria Thermo-
plasma acidophilum and Bacillus
acidocaldarius.
J. Bacteriol. 161,
231–237.

Nelson, N. B., and Prezelin, B. B.
(1993). Calibration of an integrat-
ing sphere for determining the
absorption coefﬁcient of
scatter-
ing suspensions. Appl. Opt. 32,
6710–6717.

Norris, P. R., Clark, D. A., Owen, J. P.,
and Waterhouse, S. (1996). Charac-
teristics of Sulfobacillus acidophilus
sp. nov. and other moderately
mineral-sulphide-
thermophilic
oxidizing
bacteria. Microbiology
142, 775–783.

Ram, R. J., VerBerkmoes, N., Thelen,
M. P., Tyson, G. W., Baker, B. J.,
Blake, R. C. II, Shah, M., Het-
tich, R., and Banﬁeld, J. F. (2005).
Community proteomics of a nat-
ural microbial bioﬁlm. Science 308,
1915–1920.

gen.

infernus

Segerer, A., Neuner, A., Kristjansson,
J. K., and Stetter, K. O. (1986).
Acidianus
nov.,
sp. nov., and Acidianus brierleyi
comb. nov.:
facultatively aerobic,
extremely acidophilic, thermophilic
sulfur-metabolizing
archaebac-
teria.
J. Syst. Bacteriol. 36,
559–564.

Int.

Shibata, K., Benson, A. A.,

and
Calvin, M. (1954). The absorption

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 136 | 9

Blake II and Griff

Respiratory cytochromes in Leptospirillum ferrooxidans

suspensions of

spectra of
living
microorganisms. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 15,461–470.

Siezen, R. J., and Wilson, G. (2009).
genomics. Microb.

Bioleaching
Biotechnol. 2, 297–303.

Singer, S. W., Chan, C. S., Zemla,
A., VerBerkmoes, N. C., Hwang,
M., Hettlich, R. L., Banﬁeld, J. L.,
and Thelen, M. P. (2008). Char-
acterization of cytochrome 579, an
unusual cytochrome isolated from
an iron-oxidizing microbial com-
munity. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74,
4454–4462.

Takai, M., Kamimura, K., and Sugio,
T.
(2001). A new iron oxidase
from a moderately thermophilic
iron oxidizing bacterium strain
TI-1.
268,
Eur.
1653–1658.

Biochem.

J.

Tuovinen, O. H., and Kelly, D. P.
(1973). Studies on the growth of
Thiobacillus ferrooxidans. I. Use of
membrane ﬁlters and ferrous iron
agar
to determine viable num-
bers, and comparison with 14CO2-
ﬁxation and iron oxidation as mea-
sures of growth. Arch. Microbiol. 22,
285–296.

Valdes,

J., Eisen,

J., Pedroso,

I., Quatrini,
R., Tettelin, H., Blake, R. C.
II, Malek,
J. A., and
(2008). Model-
Holmes, D. S.
ing Acidithiobacillus
ferrooxidans
metabolism: from genome sequence
to industrial applications. BMC
Genomics 9, 597. doi:10.1186/1471-
2164-9-597

Yarzábal, A., Appia-Ayme, C., Ratouch-
niak, J., and Bonnefoy, V. (2004).
Regulation of the expression of the

ferrooxidans

Acidithiobacillus
rus
operon encoding two cytochromes
c,
and
rusticyanin. Microbiology
150,
2113–2123.

cytochrome

oxidase

a

Yarzábal, A., Brasseur, G., Appia-Ayme,
J., Lund, K.,
C., Ratchouchniak,
J.
Lemesle-Meunier, D., DeMoss,
A., and Bonnefoy, V. (2002). The
high molecular weight cytochrome
c Cyc2 of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxi-
dans is an outer membrane protein.
J. Bacteriol. 184, 313–317.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 22 November 2011; accepted: 21
March 2012; published online: 12 April
2012.
Citation: Blake II RC and Griff MN
(2012) In situ spectroscopy on intact
Leptospirillum ferrooxidans reveals that
reduced cytochrome 579 is an obligatory
intermediate in the aerobic iron respira-
tory chain. Front. Microbio. 3:136. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00136
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Microbiological Chemistry, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Blake II and Griff. This
is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attri-
bution Non Commercial License, which
permits non-commercial use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in other forums,
provided the original authors and source
are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 136 | 10

