REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 03 May 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00164

Salmonella enterica: a surprisingly well-adapted
intracellular lifestyle

Thomas Dandekar 1*, Astrid Fieselmann1, Jasmin Popp 2 and Michael Hensel 2
1 Department of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany
2 Division of Microbiology, University of Osnabrück, Osnabrück, Germany

Edited by:
Reinhard Guthke, Leibniz Institute
for Natural Product Research
and Infection Biology -
Hans-Knoell-Institute, Germany
Reviewed by:
Michael Lalk, University of
Greifswald, Germany
Karsten Tedin, Freie Universität
Berlin, Germany
*Correspondence:
Thomas Dandekar, Department of
Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University
of Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074
Würzburg, Germany. e-mail:
dandekar@biozentrum.uni-wuerzburg.de

The infectious intracellular lifestyle of Salmonella enterica relies on the adaptation to
nutritional conditions within the Salmonella-containing vacuole (SCV) in host cells. We
summarize latest results on metabolic requirements for Salmonella during infection. This
includes intracellular phenotypes of mutant strains based on metabolic modeling and
experimental tests, isotopolog proﬁling using 13C-compounds in intracellular Salmonella,
and complementation of metabolic defects for attenuated mutant strains towards a com-
prehensive understanding of the metabolic requirements of the intracellular lifestyle of
Salmonella. Helpful for this are also genomic comparisons. We outline further recent stud-
ies and which analyses of intracellular phenotypes and improved metabolic simulations
were done and comment on technical required steps as well as progress involved in the
iterative reﬁnement of metabolic ﬂux models, analyses of mutant phenotypes, and iso-
topolog analyses. Salmonella lifestyle is well-adapted to the SCV and its speciﬁc metabolic
requirements. Salmonella metabolism adapts rapidly to SCV conditions, the metabolic
generalist Salmonella is quite successful in host infection.

Keywords: metabolism, Salmonella-containing vacuole, regulation, virulence

INTRODUCTION
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) is
an important human gastrointestinal pathogen with an invasive
and facultative intracellular lifestyle (Neidhardt, 1996; Eisenreich
et al., 2010). Among the various habitats that can be colonized by
Salmonella, the adaptation to life inside the host cell is of spe-
ciﬁc interest, since this ability is considered as crucial for systemic
infections with fatal outcome. The World Health Organization
estimated 1.4 million cases of non-typhoidal Salmonella infec-
tions. Furthermore, these cause 580 deaths annually even in the
United States (World Health Organization, 2005). Infections are
often associated with selected subgroups as elderly or patients
suffering from HIV and connective tissue disorders (Cummings
et al., 2010).

Throughout the intracellular life, Salmonella remains in a
membrane-bound compartment, which is termed Salmonella-
containing vacuole or SCV. The SCV is probably a unique com-
partment that is formed by the combined action of a large number
of bacterial virulence factors (Figure 1). Virulent Salmonellae
are able to modify this vacuole in order to escape killing in the
endocytic pathway, and to proliferate within host cells (Haraga
et al., 2008). The ability to survive and replicate within host
cells is closely related to the systemic pathogenesis of Salmonella
in a murine model of typhoid fever. Mutant strains defective
in intracellular replication due to auxotrophies are also attenu-
ated in virulence in an animal murine model of typhoid fever
(Fields et al., 1986). Salmonella is able to rapidly multiply in var-
ious eukaryotic cell lines, but the proliferation appears to be far
less rapid within cells in tissues of infected hosts, indicating a
more restrictive situation in vivo (Mastroeni et al., 2009). The

SCV is commonly considered as a nutritional deprived environ-
ment, and this notion is based on the phenotypes of auxotrophic
strains, analyses of bacterial reporter strains, and microarray
analyses. However,
the fact that Salmonella replicates within
the SCV indicates the successful adaptation to this intracellular
environment.

Despite the remarkable increase in understanding of the cellular
microbiology of Salmonella infections and the molecular functions
of virulence factors required for intracellular life, the nutritional
basis of life of Salmonella within the SCV is still not completely
understood.

Understanding how Salmonella survives and thrives within this
compartment and how nutrients are acquired is not only essential
for the understanding of the intracellular lifestyle, but might as
well open new avenues to therapeutic interference with Salmonella
infections.

intracellular Salmonella,

METHODS AND APPROACHES TO GET INSIGHTS
INTO INTRACELLULAR NUTRITION
To target metabolism of
several
approaches have been established covering in vitro approaches
from analyzing simple growth behavior in full or minimal medium
and changes in morphology (Paterson et al., 2009), intracellular
replication ability (Bowden et al., 2009, 2010) to more complex
transcriptome analysis (Eriksson et al., 2003) or 13C-isotopolog
proﬁling analysis (13C-IPA; Götz and Goebel, 2010) in a cell cul-
ture model. Experiments to test if a gene of interest contributes
to virulence are mainly done in macrophage cell lines as strains
unable to replicate within macrophages proved to be avirulent
(Fields et al., 1986). In addition, epithelial cell infection models,

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 164 | 1

“fmicb-03-00164” — 2012/5/2 — 14:55 — page 1 — #1

Dandekar et al.

Salmonella enterica lifestyle

virulence in mouse models (Tchawa Yimga et al., 2006; Bowden
et al., 2009; Paterson et al., 2009) and a proteome analysis with
Salmonella isolated from infected mice (recovered from cecum
and spleen) has been performed (Becker et al., 2006) providing
information about the essential metabolic enzymes and pathways.
Data on metabolite levels would provide important complemen-
tary information, but are often difﬁcult to obtain for intracellular
bacteria and require complex experimental setups. Another com-
plementary approach is proteome analysis, a modern technique
to directly determine enzyme type and amount as well as modiﬁ-
cations (e.g., regulatory phosphorylation of metabolic enzymes).
The fact that there may be differences between results obtained
by in vitro and in vivo approaches does not render data from in
vitro experiments questionable. The data may very well be reli-
able (i.e., reproducible) and of importance for understanding of
a limiting number of speciﬁc factors. The differences in results
from in vivo analyses can best be explained by the presence of a
large number of additional factors (immune responses, different
concentration gradients of nutrients in different tissues, cytokines,
etc.) that are often interrelated and affect pathogen survival and
replication in host tissue. For example, comparing experimental
evidence including proteomics, metabolomics, and survival data
on mutants with in vivo and in vitro conditions, conﬂicting results
can be observed for mutant strains of Salmonella with defects in
enzymes of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. The mutant strains
showed even increased replication in a murine RAW macrophage
cell line, but were highly reduced in virulence in an animal model
(Bowden et al., 2010).

As they are easier to study and analyze, cell culture models for
Salmonella infections will remain the essential basis for the under-
standing of the cellular and molecular changes and mechanisms of
the intracellular bacterial nutrition. Cell culture experiments are
less complex and laborious than animal experiments and offer the
possibility to study such important aspects of intracellular nutri-
tion as access of Salmonella to host cell nutrients or to nutrients
in extracellular medium. Attenuation of certain mutant strains
can be directly linked to the lack of a certain metabolite in the
cell culture media. Supplementation experiments with labeled
carbon sources (C-sources) allow to analyze if and how this nutri-
ents reach Salmonella inside its SCV. Data gained from in vitro
experiments help to establish and improve mathematical models
of Salmonella during infection. By contrast, the large number of
additional and partially unknown factors affecting the pathogen
in in vivo infection studies would lead to models of extreme
complexity.

SALMONELLA INTRACELLULAR LIFESTYLE IN COMPARISON
TO LIFESTYLES OF OTHER INTRACELLULAR PATHOGENS
Salmonella is well-adapted to the SCV compartment as seen if
compared to cytoplasmic lifestyle (e.g., Listeria) or Legionella
as a further pathogen in a membrane-bound compartment. In
Salmonella, glucose represents a major C-source. However, glu-
coneogenesis rather than glycolysis is observed for cytoplasmic
listerial intracellular metabolism. This is required to synthesize
glucose from available substrates. Glucose is then predominantly
degraded in the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). A complete
TCA cycle is observed for Salmonella. However, in cytoplasmic

FIGURE 1 | Intracellular lifestyle of Salmonella. Salmonella is taken up
by host cells either by Salmonella-induced invasion (T3SS-1 triggered
macropinocytosis) or via phagocytosis. By translocating effector proteins
via the T3SS-2 into the host cell, the SCV undergoes an altered maturation
process characterized by speciﬁc endosomal markers. The onset of
Salmonella-induced ﬁlaments (SIFs) formation coincides with the start of
Salmonella replication between 4 and 6 h after infection. SIFs develop on a
microtubule scaffold.

such as HeLa or CaCo-2 cells (Götz and Goebel, 2010) which are
targeted ﬁrst in Salmonella infection are under investigation.

The importance of certain metabolic functions and their corre-
sponding pathways can be investigated by intracellular replication
assays performed in murine macrophage cell lines with Salmonella
wild-type (WT) and mutant strains with metabolic defects (Bow-
den et al., 2009; Lim et al., 2010). Mutant strains can be easily
generated by the λ-Red mediated mutagenesis approach (Dat-
senko and Wanner, 2000). The intracellular replication ability
of these mutant strains compared to the WT strain indicates the
importance of the respective metabolic pathway for intracellular
nutrition and, in turn, intracellular survival and replication. Other
useful ways to “scan” for the complete setup of essential genes and
metabolic enzymes are transcriptome and proteome analyses of
Salmonella strains isolated from infected murine macrophage cell
lines (Eriksson et al., 2003; Shi et al., 2006) giving direct evidence
of genes and proteins expressed under intracellular conditions.
The application of 13C-IPA to follow metabolic ﬂuxes in the host
and the bacteria cells in vitro is on the rise (Figure 2). It has been
widely used for analyzing metabolic ﬂuxes in different bacterial
species like Escherichia coli (Fischer and Sauer, 2003) or intracel-
lular pathogens like Salmonella, enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC; Götz
and Goebel, 2010), Listeria (Eylert et al., 2008), and Legionella
(Eylert et al., 2010).

In vitro approaches provide essential clues about the nutritional
status of intracellular Salmonella. However, the gained in vitro data
are often supported by, or compared to, data received from ani-
mal models, e.g., mouse (Bowden et al., 2009). A large number of
different mutant strains with metabolic defects has been tested for

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 164 | 2

“fmicb-03-00164” — 2012/5/2 — 14:55 — page 2 — #2

Dandekar et al.

Salmonella enterica lifestyle

FIGURE 2 | Principles of isotopolog proﬁling with labeled [U-13C6]
glucose. The fate of labeled glucose via different metabolic routes can
be followed by isotopolog proﬁling in analyzing resulting metabolites
or products (in this case amino acids). An example is given for the
biosynthetic routes of the two aspartate isotopologs 13C2-aspartate

and 13C3-aspartate (represented by orange and blue arrows,
respectively) and the origin of a 13C3-alanine. Isotopolog studies
are described in Eisenreich et al. (2006), Eylert et al. (2008), and
Eylert et al. (2010). 13C-atoms are marked in red and indicated by
an asterisk.

Listeria the enzyme 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase is missing
(Glaser et al., 2001; Eisenreich et al., 2006), oxaloacetate is
formed by carboxylation of C3 compounds like pyruvate and the
anaplerotic enzyme pyruvate carboxylase becomes crucial (Schar
et al., 2010), major C-source is glycerol. De novo synthesized liste-
rial amino acids are Ala, Asp, Glu, Ser, Thr, Val, and Gly (Eisenreich
et al., 2010), indicating that other amino acids are taken up in the
host cell cytoplasm (Schauer et al., 2010).

For comparison, Legionella pneumophila, a gram-negative
intracellular pathogen and causative agent for Legionnaire’s dis-
ease was long time supposed to feed solely on amino acids while
residing in the host alveolar macrophages (Tesh and Miller, 1981).
Indeed, the amino acids Cys, Gln, Ser, and Arg are efﬁciently
used as carbon and energy sources in vivo (Wieland et al., 2005).
However, recent studies highlight that also glucose is metabo-
lized by Legionella during infection of eukaryotic cells. In contrast
to Salmonella, Legionella predominantly degrades glucose by the

2-keto-3-deoxy-phosphogluconate pathway (KDPGP) and only in
small quantities by glycolysis. The non-oxidative branch of PPP
also accounts for small amounts of glucose catabolism (Harada
et al., 2010). 13C-IPA further revealed that there is no evidence
for a functional glyoxylate bypass (Eylert et al., 2010), conﬁrming
earlier models build on genome sequence analysis (Cazalet et al.,
2004). Furthermore, 13C-IPA results indicate that a complete and
active TCA cycle occurs in Legionella and that the inability to syn-
thesize amino acids de novo is only valid for Ile, Leu, Val, Phe, Met,
Arg, and Tyr.

COMPUTATIONAL AND SYSTEM BIOLOGICAL ANALYSES
OF THE METABOLISM OF INTRACELLULAR SALMONELLA
A number of recent studies highlight the importance of system bio-
logical modeling of Salmonella during infection (Bumann, 2009b;
McDermott et al., 2011). Besides the genome information, the
analysis of the pathogen proteomes during infection provides

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 164 | 3

“fmicb-03-00164” — 2012/5/2 — 14:55 — page 3 — #3

Dandekar et al.

Salmonella enterica lifestyle

an important basis for infection research, as well as for devis-
ing novel control strategies including antibiotics and vaccines
(Bumann, 2009a). On this, independent models for Salmonella
metabolism are built (Becker et al., 2006; AbuOun et al., 2009;
Raghunathan et al., 2009; Eisenreich et al., 2010). In such mod-
els the ﬂow of metabolites is modeled in terms of pathways.
Enzyme chains are calculated such that metabolites are balanced,
i.e., consumed and produced in equilibrium, this is called ﬂux
balance analysis (FBA). If such a chain of metabolic enzymes
can not be dissected any further, this is named an elementary
mode. Helpful software tools include the COBRA Toolbox (Schel-
lenberger et al., 2011) and YANAsquare (Schwarz et al., 2007)
which can compile available biochemical and genome data sys-
tematically and calculate ﬂux distributions by FBA or elementary
mode analysis (EMA). Speciﬁc tools such as the KEGGbrowser
(Schwarz et al., 2007) simplify the direct import of available bio-
chemical data into metabolic network reconstructions even on
genome-scale basis. Furthermore, metabolic gaps and dubious
annotations for enzymes of central metabolism often occur and
therefore different genome annotation software and comparisons
are strongly recommended to improve the network reconstruction
(Gaudermann et al., 2006).

Recently, a community effort towards a knowledge-base and
mathematical model of S. Typhimurium strain LT2 has been
initiated, resulting in the BiGG knowledge-base of Salmonella
metabolism (Thiele et al., 2011). A consensus metabolic recon-
struction was obtained from two independently developed (Rup-
pin et al., 2010) metabolic reconstructions for S. Typhimurium.
The joined reconstruction effort included, furthermore, the devel-
opment and implementation of a community-based workﬂow
for annotation and corrections including incorporation of ther-
modynamic information (to decide on reversible and irreversible
reactions). By this, metabolite transporters and reactions are more
accurately identiﬁed and considered. Higher reliable consensus
models improve, furthermore, the potential of multi-target drug
therapy approaches for speciﬁc strains though of course the host
response is another important factor to consider.

Our metabolic modeling approach calculating elementary ﬂux
modes on central carbon and amino acid metabolism in S.
Typhimurium indicates that the anaplerotic reactions around
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to oxaloacetate are pivotal and occur
in many ﬂux modes. For modeling growth on glucose as the sole C-
source, PEP carboxylase (ppc) plays a central role in directing the
ﬂux to the TCA cycle. However, disruption of PEP carboxylase can
be partly compensated by alternative routes in the network regard-
ing carbohydrate metabolism. A ppc-deﬁcient mutant showed no
reduced virulence in vivo (Tchawa Yimga et al., 2006), indicating
the availability of further C-sources such as amino acids which,
through transaminase reactions, also can feed into the TCA cycle.
This would give support to a model that contains both glucose and
amino acids as C-sources. Here, the ﬂux through PEP carboxy-
lase decreased and the ﬂux through PEP carboxykinase (pckA)
increased, compared to a medium with only glucose. PEP car-
boxykinase catalyzes a reaction in the opposite direction of the
normal ﬂow cycle, i.e., increasing the ﬂow from oxaloacetate to
PEP. The direct conversion of oxaloacetate to aspartate cannot
be easily compensated by alternative ﬂux modes. Transaminase

activity can be compensated, for instance, loss of two transam-
inases (aspC and tyrB) is required before aspartate auxotrophy
appears. Moreover, aspartate can also be acquired from the host.
However, the production and availability of oxaloacetate is criti-
cal, requiring increased PEP carboxylase activity or a reversal of the
ﬂow from oxaloacetate to aspartate. This and similar other model-
ing results suggest that amino acid metabolism is easier impaired
and more critical in the SCV than in intracytoplasmic survival
(Schauer et al., 2010).

Flux balance analysis and EMA calculate metabolic pathways
but the integration of experimental “omics” data allows to bet-
ter determine metabolic ﬂux strengths (Covert et al., 2004). Tools
have thus recently been developed that help to integrate experi-
mental data into metabolic models such as YANAvergence (Liang
et al., 2011) ﬁt experimental ﬂux measurements, enzyme activities,
gene expression data (Cecil et al., 2011), as well as extracellular
metabolite ratios to computational predictions.

Due to the intracellular lifestyle, the host provides further nutri-
ents by transporters (Figure 3). Overall, there is an intensive
exchange of metabolites during growth in the host cell. Game
theoretical approaches treat such interdependencies in a novel
mathematical way showing advantages as well as limitations for
any speciﬁc survival strategy (bacterial pathogen) or opposing
strategy from the host (Ruppin et al., 2010; Schuster et al., 2010b,
2011). This becomes even more important as the robust Salmonella
metabolism including its redundant, overlapping pathway organi-
zation limits possibilities for new antimicrobials interfering with
its metabolic processes (Becker et al., 2006). Moreover, the poten-
tial of central carbon metabolism as a target for microbial defense
depends on the environmental factors of the speciﬁc niche and the
genetic and phenotypic traits of infecting bacteria. For instance, in
dormant sub-populations, or “persisters,” the uptake of glucose,
mannitol, or fructose implies a direct inﬂuence in preparatory
steps of glycolysis. This potentiates the killing by aminoglyco-
sides (Allison et al., 2011). Thus, for an iterative reﬁnement of
computational modeling the integration of transporter reactions
(Raghunathan et al., 2009) and a strain-speciﬁc analysis (Liang
et al., 2011) is crucial. In this regard, a global gene expression anal-
ysis of S. Typhimurium (Harvey et al., 2011) during colonization
of the chicken’s cecal lumen and cecal mucosa demonstrates very
speciﬁc Salmonella metabolic adaptations to its environment. For
comparison, differences in expression of transporters and in the
usage of C-sources regarding three speciﬁc niches (cecal lumen,
mucosal wall, and the SCV in macrophages and epithelial cells)
are illustrated in Figure 3.

THE ROLE OF CENTRAL CARBON METABOLISM PATHWAYS
DURING INTRACELLULAR SURVIVAL
Salmonella is in fact a pathogen with a very broad and versa-
tile metabolism and as already seen by its comparatively large
genome, is a generalist among gram-negative bacteria (Figure 4).
For instance, Salmonella can easily metabolize glucose combining
various pathways to supply both energy and amino acids and the
same applies for most nutrient sources.

Furthermore, the combination of different pathways guaran-
tees a ﬁne-tuned balance of internal metabolites. Due to this
redundancy it is not easy to block growth of Salmonella by

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 164 | 4

“fmicb-03-00164” — 2012/5/2 — 14:55 — page 4 — #4

Dandekar et al.

Salmonella enterica lifestyle

FIGURE 3 | Activity of nutrient transport systems in various host habitats
colonized by Salmonella. Transporter gene expression and carbon source
usage is exempliﬁed according to Hautefort et al. (2008), Eisenreich et al.
(2010), and Harvey et al. (2011). During the colonization of the intestine,
Salmonella ﬁrst resides in the cecal lumen (bottom left), then attaches to the
mucosal layer (bottom right) until it invades macrophages and epithelial cells

forming the SCV (upper part). Transporter proteins differentially expressed in
the speciﬁc niches are represented as small ovals with transported
metabolites at the outside of the Salmonella cell (central oval) and gene
names on the inside. Carbon sources suggested according to literature are
illustrated as gray boxes. Salmonella genome information is according to
McClelland et al. (2001).

antibiotics targeted against key metabolic enzymes of primary
metabolism (Becker et al., 2006). In the following we discuss
speciﬁc Salmonella pathways.

THE ROLE OF CATABOLISM OF GLUCOSE
There are three routes for the catabolism of glucose: (i) glycolysis,
(ii) the PPP, and (iii) the Entner–Doudoroff pathway also known as
the KDPGP. The two latter pathways for glucose utilization seem
to be of lesser importance for Salmonella. A Salmonella mutant
strain deﬁcient in zwf (encoding glucose-6-phosphate dehydro-
genase), catalyzing the ﬁrst step of both PPP and KDPGP, and
a double mutant strain in gnd (PPP) and edd (KDPGP), or a
double mutant in gnd (PPP) and edd (KDPGP) are not atten-
uated in proliferation in the murine macrophage cell line RAW
264.7 (own unpublished results). Nevertheless, it was reported
that a zwf mutant shows reduced virulence in a mouse model
of systemic infection (Lundberg et al., 1999). This group refers

to the importance of NADPH production in the PPP which is
used as electron donor for reductases required for oxidative stress
response. However, we think that in our cell culture models the
superoxide levels should be less high than in the mouse infection
model and this may explain the decreased need for such reduc-
tases and for NADPH. Other important PPP products like ribose
used for nucleoside synthesis can still be produced by the non-
oxidative part of PPP. We suggest that PPP and KDPGP play no
important role if glucose is the major substrate. Isotopolog pro-
ﬁling experiments in CaCo-2 cells showed that the internalized
glucose is mainly converted by glycolysis and/or KDPGP path-
way and excluded PPP as a major route for glucose catabolism
(Götz and Goebel, 2010). Salmonella studied in epithelial cell lines
are signiﬁcantly less challenged with reactive oxygen intermediates
(ROI) and reactive nitrogen intermediates (RNI) responses, hence,
the generation of NADPH would be less important than in an ani-
mal model. In particular, the activity of the PPP may become

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 164 | 5

“fmicb-03-00164” — 2012/5/2 — 14:55 — page 5 — #5

Dandekar et al.

Salmonella enterica lifestyle

FIGURE 4 | Salmonella central carbon metabolism. Shown are genes and
enzymes of the central carbon metabolism covering glycolysis, PPP,
KDPG/Entner–Doudoroff pathway, oxidative carboxylation, TCA cycle, and
anaplerotic reactions. Boxes represent metabolites, arrows indicate enzyme
reactions. Metabolites and enzymes are colored according to the color of
their pathway name. Arrows are directed according ﬂux direction under
glucose metabolism but may vary under different conditions. Detailed
information on importance of the illustrated pathways in intracellular infection
is outlined in the text including behavior of an array of different enzyme
mutations. 1,3pg, 1,3-bisphospho-D-glycerate; 2pg, 2-phospho-D-glycerate;

3pg, 3-phospho-D-glycerate; 6pg, 6-phospho-D-gluconate; αkg,
α-ketoglutarate; ac-coa, acetyl-CoA; cit, citrate; dhap, dihydroxyacetone
phosphate; e4p, D-erythrose-4-phosphate; f1,6bp, fructose-1,6-bisphosphate;
f6p, D-fructose-6-phosphate; fum, fumarate; gap,
D-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate; glyox, glyoxylate; icit, isocitrate; kdpg,
2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-gluconate-6-phosphate; mal, (S)-malate; mg,
methylglyoxal; oaa, oxaloacetate; pep, phosphoenolpyruvate; pyr, pyruvate;
r5p, D-ribose-5-phosphate; ru5p, D-ribulose-5-phosphate; s7p,
D-sedoheptulose-7-phosphate; suc, succinate; suc-coa, succinyl-CoA; x5p,
D-xylulose-5-phosphate.

important if Salmonella is challenged with higher degrees of
oxidative stress.

The signiﬁcance of glucose as one of the major C-sources, and
glycolysis as the main route for utilization has recently been shown
(Bowden et al., 2009). Extending the set of glycolysis mutant
strains analyzed by Bowden et al. (2009), work in our groups
showed that eno, fba, pgk, gapA, or tpiA deﬁcient strains are
strongly attenuated in intracellular replication and survival in
RAW 264.7 cells (unpublished results). In case of a tpiA mutant it
was demonstrated that reduced growth in rich medium (lysogeny
broth, LB) and decreased ﬁtness in mice seems to depend on accu-
mulation of the toxic electrophile methylglyoxal from accumulated

dihydroxyacetone phosphate by reaction of the methylglyoxal syn-
thetase (Paterson et al., 2009). Overproduction of methylglyoxal
as a result of tpiA mutation for E. coli has been shown before
(Cooper and Anderson, 1970; Cooper, 1984) and although the
concentration is lower in the tpiA mutant of Salmonella, it still
leads to reduced growth in medium and lower ﬁtness in mice
(Paterson et al., 2009). Mutant strains deﬁcient in eno, fba, gapA,
or pgk show similar growth characteristics in medium containing
just traces of glucose or other C-sources ending up in glycolytic
intermediates, e.g., in LB or minimal medium containing ribose.
None of these mutant strains was able to grow in these media, but
growth was observed on minimal medium with glycerol or PEP

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 164 | 6

“fmicb-03-00164” — 2012/5/2 — 14:55 — page 6 — #6

Dandekar et al.

Salmonella enterica lifestyle

as C-source. The growth defect in the presence of sugars is due to
accumulation of phosphorylated sugars, i.e., fructose-6-phosphate
(f6p), glucose-6-phosphate (g6p), and fructose-1,6-bisphosphate
(f1,6bp), that appear to inﬂuence RNA stability as observed in E.
coli mutant strains (Bock and Neidhardt, 1966; Singer et al., 1991;
Morita et al., 2003). Glucose is the main C-source in common cell
culture media for eukaryotic host cells along with amino acids. The
inability of these mutants to survive intracellularly suggests that
the metabolism of glucose through glycolysis and the accumula-
tion of phosphorylated sugars is harmful, caused by the knockout
of the aforementioned glycolytic genes. Nevertheless, further ana-
lytical approaches such as quantiﬁcation of metabolites by GC–MS
are required to determine the presence and accumulation of these
glycolytic intermediates.

OXIDATIVE DECARBOXYLATION OF PYRUVATE – THE
CONNECTION TO THE TCA CYCLE
Pyruvate as ﬁnal product of glycolysis or KDPGP can be further
metabolized to acetyl-CoA by reaction of pyruvate dehydrogenase.
This production of acetyl-CoA and the connection to the TCA
cycle is of great importance as indicated by the reduced growth
of a pyruvate dehydrogenase subunit I deﬁcient strain (aceE)
in rich media (LB) and strong attenuation of intracellular repli-
cation. An aceE mutant of S. enterica serovar Enteritidis tested
in a chicken infection model also showed reduced growth com-
pared to a WT strain, a lower invasion rate in HeLa cells and
was less resistant to ROI. Chicken macrophages (HD-11) were
able to eliminate this strain completely within 24 h after infection
(Pang et al., 2011). In non-activated RAW 264.7 cells that produce
low amounts of ROI, reduced replication was observed (unpub-
lished observations). The loss of aceE may also have inﬂuence
on the expression of virulence genes important for the defense
against ROI. The attenuation of the aceE strain may be due
to the metabolic burden of virulence gene expression and the
lower energy production due to this knockout. Energy is prob-
ably mainly produced by glycolysis resulting in less ATP than
via respiratory chain of the reduction agents produced in the
TCA cycle.

THE ROLE OF THE TCA CYCLE AND ANAPLEROTIC
REACTIONS
The TCA cycle plays an important role as a source for precursors
for anabolic pathways, e.g., amino acids, and reducing agents used
as electron donors in the respiratory chain or for biosynthesis.
Due to this central role, it is obvious that in the last years research
is focused on this part of the central carbon metabolism. Some
groups already showed loss of virulence in a murine model for
mutants with defects in the TCA cycle (Tchawa Yimga et al., 2006;
Bowden et al., 2010), concluding that the ability to run the full
TCA cycle is critical for virulence. The latter group could show
that for some of these TCA cycle mutant strains showing reduced
virulence in the murine model (mdh, sdhCDAB, and sucCD)
an increased replication in resting and activated macrophages
(RAW 264.7) could be observed that is probably due to differ-
ences in the in vitro and in vivo environment (available nutrients,
etc.). An sdhA mutant strain of E. coli had an expanded life
span due to a lower production of superoxide in contrast to the

WT (Gonidakis et al., 2011). The phenomenon may explain the
observed increased intracellular replication for the mdh, sdhCDAB,
and sucCD strains of Salmonella in vitro. A TCA cycle mutant
strain with an icdA deletion was not tested in this experimental
setup but we could observe a strong attenuation in inactivated
murine RAW macrophages. The strong attenuation of the icdA
mutant could be due to the accumulation of an inhibitory prod-
uct like citrate or isocitrate as was shown for an E. coli icd mutant
(Lakshmi and Helling, 1976).

In view of the signiﬁcance of the anaplerotic reaction for sur-
vival in macrophages (Figure 4), it seems quite convincing that the
glyoxylate shunt, which is used during growth on acetate and fatty
acids is important for chronic infections but not for acute infec-
tions (Fang et al., 2005; Tchawa Yimga et al., 2006). This supports
the suggestion that acetate and fatty acids are of no importance as
C-sources in acute infection either due to their absence or the pres-
ence of more favorable C-sources like glucose. This is conﬁrmed
by transcriptome data observing no up-regulation in expression of
the isocitrate lyase gene aceA (Eriksson et al., 2003) and by obser-
vations that Salmonella strains with a defect in β-oxidation of fatty
acids (fadD) also showed the same virulence as the WT strain in a
murine model (Tchawa Yimga et al., 2006).

The direct conversion of PEP to oxaloacetate, an important
precursor for the amino acids aspartate and asparagine, is another
anaplerotic reaction preventing the TCA cycle from idling and
is catalyzed by the enzyme PEP carboxylase (Sabe et al., 1984).
Loss of this enzyme does not lead to reduced virulence in a
murine model (Tchawa Yimga et al., 2006) indicating the pres-
ence of C-sources other than glucose, e.g., amino acids,
in
amounts required for intracellular replication of Salmonella. This
would make redundant the replenishment of the TCA cycle by
this route.

TOWARDS A COMPREHENSIVE UNDERSTANDING OF THE
METABOLIC REQUIREMENTS OF THE INTRACELLULAR
LIFESTYLE OF SALMONELLA
The environmental and nutritional conditions encountered by
Salmonella within the SCV are still a matter of debate. In the
process of SCV formation an acidiﬁcation of the intravacuo-
lar environment takes place (Rathman et al., 1996). Salmonella
metabolism during infection adapts to this intracellular life style
in the host cell. It is regulated by different transcription fac-
tors (Eisenreich et al., 2010; Götz and Goebel, 2010). However,
to what extent can the SCV be reached from outside? Are there
macrophage-speciﬁc strategies of adaptation? A number of recent
efforts were stimulated by these questions (Eriksson et al., 2003;
Becker et al., 2006; Bowden et al., 2009; Götz and Goebel, 2010)
and gene knockout strategies as well as metabolite measurements
and modeling were applied to better understand Salmonella life
inside the cell.

Limitation of magnesium, phosphate, and iron occur as genes
for their uptake are up-regulated in Salmonella during infection.
By gene expression analysis it could also be shown that glycol-
ysis, KDPGP, and TCA cycle are highly expressed in SCV of
macrophages and epithelial cells (Hautefort et al., 2008). In con-
trast, gluconeogenesis is not required for a full virulent phenotype
in mice (Tchawa Yimga et al., 2006).

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 164 | 7

“fmicb-03-00164” — 2012/5/2 — 14:55 — page 7 — #7

Dandekar et al.

Salmonella enterica lifestyle

In a number of reports, the nutrient-poor, underfed conditions
of the SCV were stressed (Eriksson et al., 2003; Ibarra et al., 2009).
This applies even more for the early phases of the infection. Fur-
thermore, detailed studies suggest that intracellular Salmonella
deploys speciﬁc mechanisms to redirect vacuolar transport to
make use of host-derived nutrients (Kuhle et al., 2006; Drecktrah
et al., 2007; Rajashekar et al., 2008).

Direct comparison of

intracellular lifestyles of bacterial
pathogens such as Salmonella and Legionella that reside within a
membrane-bound compartment, to those with survival and repli-
cation within the cytoplasm of host cells is of interest. For the
latter, survival depends on the availability of cytoplasmic host
cell metabolites and tight regulation is necessary such as by the
pathogenicity factor PrfA in Listeria (Eylert et al., 2008) to sur-
vive surprisingly poor nutritional conditions (Eriksson et al., 2003;
Ibarra et al., 2009). For the Salmonella lifestyle in the SCV, also
strong metabolic adaptations are necessary, in particular regard-
ing low abundant nutrients and ions, however, carbohydrates are
not that limiting. The survival under these different conditions of
intracellular life in the host cell indicates successful adaptation to
different metabolic limitations.

The expression of virulence factors by Salmonella does not
come without a price. For example, in a recent study retarded
growth of S. Typhimurium cells expressing the type III secre-
tion system 1 (T3SS-1) compared to the minus phenotype was
observed and the effects on growth kinetics were modeled (Sturm
et al., 2011). Growth retardation was at least partially attributable
to the expression of
the T3SS-1 effector and/or translocon
proteins. In spite of this growth penalty, the T3SS-1(+) sub-
population increased from <10% to approximately 60% during
the late logarithmic growth phase of an LB batch culture. As
shown by experimental data and mathematical modeling, this
was attributable to an increasing initiation rate of expression
of T3SS-1 genes, in response to environmental cues accumulat-
ing during this growth phase. The key is here to mathematically
describe the whole system, correctly quantify responses and obtain
results from the model which agree with observation. Such
models and methods can, furthermore, also be transferred to bet-
ter understand other genetic variations pertaining, for instance,
to effector proteins and estimate the cost of virulence regard-
ing growth and metabolism. Such systems biology approaches
to Salmonella lifestyle and pathogenicity are expected to grow
(Helaine et al., 2010).

Furthermore, a number of

technical developments con-
tributed to the understanding of bacterial metabolism during
infection. The modeling of genome-scale metabolic networks
is now feasible, originally pioneered by the Palsson group
(Price et al., 2004a). However, even with strong computational
power at hand, detailed modeling requires additional meth-
ods to handle the combinatorial explosion of different pathways
concerned,
for instance, by dividing the metabolic network
(Schuster et al., 2002) or sampling averages over high numbers
of different modes (Price et al., 2004b). Furthermore, a num-
ber of recent developments tackle new software solutions for
metabolic modeling including modiﬁcations of extreme path-
way analysis (Kaleta et al., 2009; Schuster et al., 2010a). More-
over, the analysis of isotopolog data proﬁts from advances in

software development (Nanchen et al., 2007). Achieving gene
knockout combinations experimentally has been advanced tech-
nically (Datsenko and Wanner, 2000; Gerlach et al., 2009) and
this has been complemented by in silico prediction studies on
gene knockouts agreeing well with these experiments. This can
also be applied to study survival during infection (Raghunathan
et al., 2009).

IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
Pathogenicity can arise from a bacterial specialization where
intrinsic cellular functions are especially adapted to the host’s
environment such as in exclusive human pathogens like Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis (Moller and Hoal, 2010), Neisseria gonorrhoeae
(Criss and Seifert, 2012), N. meningitides (Criss and Seifert, 2012),
and Mycoplasma pneumoniae (Dumke et al., 2011). In contrast,
Salmonella is a surprisingly successful intracellular pathogen that
is less specialized but rather a generalist with an extraordinary
metabolic versatility. Furthermore, E. coli, Pseudomonas spp., Kleb-
siella spp., and further bacteria are common pathogens with a
similar metabolic background which are not highly specialized for
a speciﬁc host environment.

To underline this, a broad spectrum of central carbon
metabolism routes constitutes the repertoire of the Salmonella
lifestyle (Figure 4). Glucose, the predominant C-source during
SCV colonization can either be degraded in the glycolytic pathway
or the KDPG route, the former one preferentially used. The TCA
cycle as the major biosynthetic origin of precursor and provider
of reductive agents is complete and is supported by important
anaplerotic reactions that lead the metabolic ﬂux to the TCA
cycle, mainly by the PEP carboxylase. However, this enzyme can be
compensated by other ﬂux modes as shown by EMA. In systemic
infections, the PPP generates NADPH required for reductases in
oxidative stress response. Salmonella is well-equipped to rapidly
adapt to various environments during the passage through the
host’s body.

The ﬂexible metabolic abilities of Salmonella make it chal-
lenging to elucidate targets to inhibit metabolic functions during
infection. The pathogen efﬁciently modiﬁes its unique vacuo-
lar compartment for its beneﬁts. Additionally, the transport of
nutrients to the SCV in response of Salmonella effector proteins
is currently under investigation. Host–pathogen metabolism is
intertwined.

Is there an Achilles’ heel of Salmonella metabolism in infec-
tion? To answer this we suggest a combination of a thorough
analysis of central metabolic enzymes such as mutant phenotypes
of glycolytic enzymes with systemic analysis such of transporter
expression proﬁles, strain-speciﬁc analysis, and projecting those
on the very speciﬁc environmental conditions under study. Thus,
the loss of pyruvate dehydrogenase may have an inﬂuence on the
expression of virulence genes important for ROI defense. Fur-
ther, mutants with a defect in the TCA cycle showed reduced
virulence in a murine infection model. In Salmonella, the T3SS-
2 is responsible for translocation of over 20 virulence proteins
into the host cell cytoplasm (Haraga et al., 2008). SifA is prob-
ably the most prominent among these effectors in maintaining
the integrity of the SCV and induction of extensive networks of
tubular membrane compartments including Salmonella-induced

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 164 | 8

“fmicb-03-00164” — 2012/5/2 — 14:55 — page 8 — #8

Dandekar et al.

Salmonella enterica lifestyle

ﬁlaments and recently identiﬁed further tubular compartment
(Schroeder et al., 2011).

Future work will take up the challenge of this surprisingly well-
adapted pathogen by looking more closely at the host–pathogen
interaction, not only regarding metabolic interactions for fur-
ther pathways including secondary metabolism, iso-enzymes, and
intertwined links between pathways (including supplementation
experiments), but also regarding the regulatory and immune
response from the host, for instance, potential immune mod-
iﬁers as novel approaches to boost host response in severe
infections by Salmonella. Infectious disease burden in develop-
ing countries will doubtless proﬁt from improved hygiene and
clean water supply but also protective nutrient additives (e.g.,

vitamins; golden rice, and similar recent developments) and
regarding trace elements such as selenocysteine. Challenges in
industrialized countries include persistent infection which can
again be coped with metabolic approaches relying, for instance,
on elicitors of growth which in turn make the previous per-
sister Salmonella vulnerable to standard antibiotics. In general,
the exploration of the link between metabolism and infection
has to be explored further to improve medical options against
Salmonella.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the German Research Foundation
(DFG), grants Da 208/13-2 and He 1964/14-1.

REFERENCES
AbuOun, M., Suthers, P. F.,

Jones,
G. I., Carter, B. R., Saunders, M. P.,
Maranas, C. D., Woodward, M. J.,
and Anjum, M. F. (2009). Genome
scale reconstruction of a Salmonella
metabolic model: comparison of sim-
ilarity and differences with a com-
mensal Escherichia coli strain. J. Biol.
Chem. 284, 29480–29488.

Allison, K. R., Brynildsen, M. P., and
Collins,
J. J. (2011). Metabolite-
enabled eradication of bacterial per-
sisters by aminoglycosides. Nature
473, 216–220.

Becker, D., Selbach, M., Rollenhagen,
C., Ballmaier, M., Meyer, T. F.,
Mann, M., and Bumann, D. (2006).
Robust Salmonella metabolism limits
possibilities for new antimicrobials.
Nature 440, 303–307.

Bock, A., and Neidhardt, F. C. (1966).
Properties of a mutant of Escherichia
coli with a temperature-sensitive
fructose-1,6-diphosphate aldolase. J.
Bacteriol. 92, 470–476.

Bowden, S. D., Ramachandran, V. K.,
Knudsen, G. M., Hinton, J. C., and
Thompson, A. (2010). An incom-
plete TCA cycle increases survival
of Salmonella Typhimurium dur-
ing infection of resting and acti-
vated murine macrophages. PLoS
ONE 5, e13871. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0013871

Bowden, S. D., Rowley, G., Hinton, J. C.,
and Thompson, A. (2009). Glucose
and glycolysis are required for the
successful infection of macrophages
and mice by Salmonella enter-
ica serovar Typhimurium.
Infect.
Immun. 77, 3117–3126.

Bumann, D. (2009a). Pathogen pro-
teomes during infection: a basis for
infection research and novel control
strategies.
J. Proteomics 73, 2267–
2276.

Bumann, D. (2009b). System-level anal-
ysis of Salmonella metabolism during
infection. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 12,
559–567.

Cazalet, C., Rusniok, C., Bruggemann,
H., Zidane, N., Magnier, A., Ma,
L., Tichit, M., Jarraud, S., Bouchier,
C., Vandenesch, F., Kunst, F., Eti-
enne, J., Glaser, P., and Buchrieser,
C. (2004). Evidence in the Legionella
pneumophila genome for exploita-
tion of host cell functions and high
genome plasticity. Nat. Genet. 36,
1165–1173.

Cecil, A., Rikanovic, C., Ohlsen, K.,
Liang, C., Bernhardt, J., Oelschlaeger,
T. A., Gulder, T., Bringmann, G.,
Holzgrabe, U., Unger, M., and Dan-
dekar, T. (2011). Modeling antibiotic
and cytotoxic effects of the dimeric
isoquinoline IQ-143 on metabolism
and its regulation in Staphylococ-
cus aureus, Staphylococcus epider-
midis and human cells. Genome Biol.
12, R24.

Cooper, R. A. (1984). Metabolism
of methylglyoxal in microorganisms.
Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 38, 49–68.

Cooper, R. A., and Anderson, A. (1970).
The formation and catabolism of
methylglyoxal during glycolysis in
Escherichia coli.
11,
273–276.

FEBS Lett.

Covert, M. W., Knight, E. M., Reed,
J. L., Herrgard, M. J., and Pals-
son, B. O. (2004). Integrating high-
throughput and computational data
elucidates bacterial networks. Nature
429, 92–96.

Criss, A. K., and Seifert, H. S. (2012). A
bacterial siren song: intimate inter-
actions between Neisseria and neu-
trophils. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 10,
178–190.

Datsenko, K. A.,

Cummings, P. L., Sorvillo, F., and Kuo,
T. (2010). Salmonellosis-related mor-
tality in the United States, 1990–2006.
Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 7, 1393–1399.
and Wanner, B.
L. (2000). One-step inactivation of
chromosomal genes in Escherichia
coli K-12 using PCR products. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 6640–6645.
Drecktrah, D., Knodler, L. A., Howe,
D., and Steele-Mortimer, O. (2007).

Salmonella trafﬁcking is deﬁned
by continuous dynamic interactions
with the endolysosomal system. Traf-
ﬁc 8, 212–225.

Dumke, R., Hausner, M., and Jacobs,
E. (2011). Role of Mycoplasma pneu-
moniae glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) in medi-
ating interactions with the human
extracellular matrix. Microbiology
157, 2328–2338.

Eisenreich, W., Dandekar, T., Heese-
mann, J., and Goebel, W. (2010).
Carbon metabolism of intracellular
bacterial pathogens and possible links
to virulence. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 8,
401–412.

Eisenreich, W., Slaghuis, J., Laupitz, R.,
Bussemer, J., Stritzker, J., Schwarz,
C.,
Schwarz, R., Dandekar, T.,
Goebel, W., and Bacher, A. (2006).
13C isotopologue perturbation stud-
ies of Listeria monocytogenes carbon
metabolism and its modulation by
the virulence regulator PrfA. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103, 2040–
2045.

Eriksson, S., Lucchini, S., Thomp-
son, A., Rhen, M., and Hinton,
J. C. (2003). Unravelling the biol-
ogy of macrophage infection by gene
expression proﬁling of intracellular
Salmonella enterica. Mol. Microbiol.
47, 103–118.

N.,

Eylert, E., Herrmann, V., Jules, M.,
Gillmaier,
Lautner, M.,
Buchrieser, C., Eisenreich, W., and
Heuner, K. (2010).
Isotopologue
proﬁling of Legionella pneumophila:
role of serine and glucose as car-
bon substrates. J. Biol. Chem. 285,
22232–22243.

Eylert, E., Schar, J., Mertins, S., Stoll, R.,
Bacher, A., Goebel, W., and Eisenre-
ich, W. (2008). Carbon metabolism
of Listeria monocytogenes growing
inside macrophages. Mol. Microbiol.
69, 1008–1017.

Fang, F. C., Libby, S. J., Castor, M.
E., and Fung, A. M. (2005). Isoc-
itrate lyase (AceA) is required for

Salmonella persistence but not for
acute lethal infection in mice. Infect.
Immun. 73, 2547–2549.

Fields, P. I., Swanson, R. V., Haidaris, C.
G., and Heffron, F. (1986). Mutants of
Salmonella Typhimurium that can-
not survive within the macrophage
are avirulent. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 83, 5189–5193.

Fischer, E., and Sauer, U. (2003).
Metabolic ﬂux proﬁling of Escheri-
chia coli mutants in central carbon
metabolism using GC–MS. Eur.
J.
Biochem. 270, 880–891.

Gaudermann, P., Vogl, I., Zientz, E.,
Silva, F. J., Moya, A., Gross, R.,
and Dandekar, T. (2006). Analysis of
and function predictions for previ-
ously conserved hypothetical or puta-
tive proteins in Blochmannia ﬂori-
danus. BMC Microbiol. 6, 1. doi:
10.1186/1471-2180-6-1

Gerlach, R. G.,

Jäckel, D., Holzer,
S. U., and Hensel, M. (2009). Rapid
oligonucleotide-based recombineer-
ing of the chromosome of Salmonella
enterica. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75,
1575–1580.

Glaser, P., Frangeul, L., Buchrieser, C.,
Rusniok, C., Amend, A., Baquero,
F., Berche, P., Bloecker, H., Brandt,
P., Chakraborty, T., Charbit, A.,
Chetouani, F., Couve, E., De Daru-
var, A., Dehoux, P., Domann, E.,
Dominguez-Bernal, G., Duchaud, E.,
Durant, L., Dussurget, O., Entian, K.
D., Fsihi, H., Garcia-Del Portillo, F.,
Garrido, P., Gautier, L., Goebel, W.,
Gomez-Lopez, N., Hain, T., Hauf, J.,
Jackson, D., Jones, L. M., Kaerst, U.,
Kreft, J., Kuhn, M., Kunst, F., Kurap-
kat, G., Madueno, E., Maitournam,
A., Vicente, J. M., Ng, E., Nedjari,
H., Nordsiek, G., Novella, S., De
Pablos, B., Perez-Diaz, J. C., Purcell,
R., Remmel, B., Rose, M., Schlueter,
T., Simoes, N., Tierrez, A., Vazquez-
Boland, J. A., Voss, H., Wehland, J.,
and Cossart, P. (2001). Comparative
genomics of Listeria species. Science
294, 849–852.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 164 | 9

“fmicb-03-00164” — 2012/5/2 — 14:55 — page 9 — #9

Dandekar et al.

Salmonella enterica lifestyle

Gonidakis, S., Finkel, S. E.,

and
Longo, V. D. (2011). Lifespan exten-
sion and paraquat
resistance in
a ubiqui-deﬁcient Escherichia coli
mutant depend on transcription fac-
tors ArcA and TdcA. Aging (Albany
NY) 3, 291–303.

Harada, E.,

Götz, A., and Goebel, W. (2010).
Glucose and glucose 6-phosphate
as carbon sources in extra- and
intracellular growth of enteroinvasive
Escherichia coli and Salmonella enter-
ica. Microbiology 156, 1176–1187.
Shiota,

S.,
Nakayama, H.,
and Yoshida, S.
(2010). Glucose metabolism in
Legionella pneumophila: dependence
on the Entner–Doudoroff pathway
and connection with intracellular
bacterial growth. J. Bacteriol. 192,
2892–2899.

Iida, K.,

Haraga, A., Ohlson, M. B., and Miller, S.
I. (2008). Salmonellae interplay with
host cells. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6,
53–66.

Harvey, P. C., Watson, M., Hulme, S.,
Jones, M. A., Lovell, M., Berchieri,
A. Jr., Young, J., Bumstead, N., and
Barrow, P. (2011). Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium colonizing the
lumen of the chicken intestine grows
slowly and upregulates a unique set
of virulence and metabolism genes.
Infect. Immun. 79, 4105–4121.

Hautefort, I., Thompson, A., Eriksson-
Ygberg, S., Parker, M. L., Lucchini, S.,
Danino, V., Bongaerts, R. J., Ahmad,
N., Rhen, M., and Hinton, J. C.
(2008). During infection of epithe-
lial cells Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium undergoes a time-
dependent
transcriptional adapta-
tion that results in simultaneous
expression of
three type 3 secre-
tion systems. Cell. Microbiol. 10,
958–984.

Helaine, S., Thompson, J. A., Watson, K.
G., Liu, M., Boyle, C., and Holden, D.
W. (2010). Dynamics of intracellular
bacterial replication at the single cell
level. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
3746–3751.

Ibarra, J. A., Knodler, L. A., Sturde-
vant, D. E., Virtaneva, K., Carmody,
A. B., Fischer, E. R., Porcella, S.
F., and Steele-Mortimer, O. (2009).
Induction of Salmonella pathogenic-
ity island 1 under different growth
conditions can affect Salmonella-host
cell interactions in vitro. Microbiology
156, 1120–1133.

Kaleta, C., De Figueiredo, L. F., and
Schuster, S. (2009). Can the whole be
less than the sum of its parts? Pathway
analysis in genome-scale metabolic
networks using elementary ﬂux pat-
terns. Genome Res. 19, 1872–1883.

Kuhle, V., Abrahams, G. L., and Hensel,
M. (2006). Intracellular Salmonella

enterica redirect exocytic transport
processes in a Salmonella pathogenic-
ity island 2-dependent manner. Traf-
ﬁc 7, 716–730.

Lakshmi, T. M., and Helling, R. B.
(1976). Selection for citrate syn-
thase deﬁciency in icd mutants of
Escherichia coli.
J. Bacteriol. 127,
76–83.

Liang, C., Liebeke, M., Schwarz, R.,
Zuhlke, D., Fuchs, S., Menschner,
L., Engelmann, S., Wolz, C., Jaglitz,
S., Bernhardt, J., Hecker, M., Lalk,
M., and Dandekar, T. (2011). Staphy-
lococcus aureus physiological growth
limitations:
insights from ﬂux cal-
culations built on proteomics and
external metabolite data. Proteomics
11, 1915–1935.

Lim, S., Kim, M., Choi, J., and Ryu, S.
(2010). A mutation in tdcA attenuates
the virulence of Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium. Mol. Cells 29,
509–517.

Lundberg, B. E., Wolf, R. E. Jr., Din-
auer, M. C., Xu, Y., and Fang, F. C.
(1999). Glucose 6-phosphate dehy-
drogenase is required for Salmonella
Typhimurium virulence and resis-
tance to reactive oxygen and nitro-
gen intermediates. Infect. Immun. 67,
436–438.

Mastroeni, P., Grant, A., Restif, O., and
Maskell, D. (2009). A dynamic view
of the spread and intracellular dis-
tribution of Salmonella enterica. Nat.
Rev. Microbiol. 7, 73–80.

McClelland, M., Sanderson, K. E., Spi-
eth, J., Clifton, S. W., Latreille, P.,
Courtney, L., Porwollik, S., Ali, J.,
Dante, M., Du, F., Hou, S., Layman,
D., Leonard, S., Nguyen, C., Scott,
K., Holmes, A., Grewal, N., Mul-
Sun, H.,
vaney, E., Ryan, E.,
Florea, L., Miller, W.,
Stonek-
ing, T., Nhan, M., Waterston, R.,
and Wilson, R. K. (2001). Com-
plete genome sequence of Salmonella
enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2.
Nature 413, 852–856.

McDermott, J. E., Yoon, H., Nakayasu,
E. S., Metz, T. O., Hyduke, D. R.,
Kidwai, A. S., Palsson, B. O., Adkins,
J. N., and Heffron, F. (2011). Tech-
nologies and approaches to elucidate
and model the virulence program of
Salmonella. Front. Microbiol. 2, 121.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00121

Moller, M., and Hoal, E. G. (2010). Cur-
rent ﬁndings, challenges and novel
approaches in human genetic suscep-
tibility to tuberculosis. Tuberculosis
(Edinb) 90, 71–83.

Inada, T.,

Morita, T., El-Kazzaz, W., Tanaka,
Y.,
and Aiba, H.
(2003). Accumulation of glucose 6-
phosphate or fructose 6-phosphate
is
for destabilization
of glucose transporter mRNA in

responsible

Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 278,
15608–15614.

Nanchen, A., Fuhrer, T., and Sauer, U.
(2007). Determination of metabolic
ﬂux ratios from 13C-experiments and
gas chromatography-mass spectrom-
etry data: protocol and principles.
Methods Mol. Biol. 358, 177–197.

Neidhardt, F. C. (1996). Escherichia coli
and Salmonella: Cellular and Molec-
ular Biology. Washington, DC: ASM
Press.

Pang, E., Tien-Lin, C., Selvaraj, M.,
Chang, J., and Kwang, J. (2011). Dele-
tion of the aceE gene (encoding a
component of pyruvate dehydroge-
nase) attenuates Salmonella enterica
serovar Enteritidis. FEMS Immunol.
Med. Microbiol. 63, 108–118.

Paterson, G. K., Cone, D. B., Northen,
H., Peters, S. E., and Maskell, D. J.
(2009). Deletion of the gene encod-
ing the glycolytic enzyme triosephos-
phate isomerase (tpi) alters morphol-
ogy of Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium and decreases ﬁtness
in mice. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 294,
45–51.

Price, N. D., Reed, J. L., and Palsson,
B. O. (2004a). Genome-scale models
of microbial cells: evaluating the con-
sequences of constraints. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 2, 886–897.

Price, N. D., Schellenberger, J., and Pals-
son, B. O. (2004b). Uniform sampling
of steady-state ﬂux spaces: means
to design experiments and to inter-
pret enzymopathies. Biophys. J. 87,
2172–2186.

J.,

Raghunathan, A., Reed,

Shin,
S., Palsson, B.,
and Daeﬂer, S.
(2009). Constraint-based analysis
of metabolic capacity of Salmonella
typhimurium during host-pathogen
interaction. BMC Syst. Biol. 3, 38. doi:
10.1186/1752-0509-3-38

Rajashekar, R., Liebl, D., Seitz, A., and
Hensel, M. (2008). Dynamic remod-
eling of the endosomal system during
formation of Salmonella-induced ﬁl-
aments by intracellular Salmonella
enterica. Trafﬁc 9, 2100–2116.

Infect.

Ruppin,

Sjaastad, M. D.,
Rathman, M.,
and Falkow,
S.
(1996). Acidiﬁ-
cation of phagosomes containing
Salmonella typhimurium in murine
macrophages.
Immun. 64,
2765–2773.
E.,

J. A., De
Papin,
and Schuster,
Figueiredo, L. F.,
S.
(2010). Metabolic reconstruc-
tion, constraint-based analysis and
game theory to probe genome-scale
metabolic networks. Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 21, 502–510.

Sabe, H., Miwa, T., Kodaki, T., Izui, K.,
Hiraga, S., and Katsuki, H. (1984).
Molecular cloning of
the phos-
phoenolpyruvate carboxylase gene,

ppc, of Escherichia coli. Gene 31,
279–283.

Schar, J., Stoll, R., Schauer, K., Loefﬂer,
D. I., Eylert, E., Joseph, B., Eisenre-
ich, W., Fuchs, T. M., and Goebel, W.
(2010). Pyruvate carboxylase plays a
crucial role in carbon metabolism of
extra- and intracellularly replicating
Listeria monocytogenes. J. Bacteriol.
192, 1774–1784.

Schauer, K., Geginat, G., Liang, C.,
Goebel, W., Dandekar, T., and Fuchs,
T. M. (2010). Deciphering the intra-
cellular metabolism of Listeria mono-
cytogenes by mutant screening and
modelling. BMC Genomics 11, 573.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-573

Schellenberger,

I., Orth,

J., Que, R., Flem-
ing, R. M., Thiele,
J.
D., Feist, A. M., Zielinski, D. C.,
Bordbar, A., Lewis, N. E., Rahma-
nian, S., Kang, J., Hyduke, D. R.,
and Palsson, B. O. (2011). Quantita-
tive prediction of cellular metabolism
with constraint-based models:
the
COBRA Toolbox v2.0. Nat. Protoc. 6,
1290–1307.

Schroeder, N., Mota, L. J., and Mer-
esse, S. (2011). Salmonella-induced
tubular networks. Trends Microbiol.
19, 268–277.

Schuster, S., De Figueiredo, L. F., and
Kaleta, C. (2010a). Predicting novel
pathways in genome-scale metabolic
networks. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 38,
1202–1205.

Schuster, S., Kreft, J. U., Brenner, N.,
Wessely, F., Theissen, G., Ruppin, E.,
and Schroeter, A. (2010b). Coopera-
tion and cheating in microbial exoen-
zyme production – theoretical analy-
sis for biotechnological applications.
Biotechnol. J. 5, 751–758.

Schuster, S., De Figueiredo, L. F.,
Schroeter, A., and Kaleta, C. (2011).
Combining metabolic pathway anal-
ysis with Evolutionary Game Theory:
explaining the occurrence of
low-
yield pathways by an analytic opti-
mization approach. Biosystems 105,
147–153.

I.,

Schuster, S., Pfeiffer, T., Moldenhauer,
F., Koch,
and Dandekar, T.
(2002). Exploring the pathway struc-
ture of metabolism: decomposition
into subnetworks and application to
Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Bioinfor-
matics 18, 351–361.

Schwarz, R., Liang, C., Kaleta, C., Kuh-
nel, M., Hoffmann, E., Kuznetsov, S.,
Hecker, M., Grifﬁths, G., Schuster, S.,
and Dandekar, T. (2007). Integrated
network reconstruction, visualiza-
tion and analysis using YANAsquare.
BMC Bioinformatics 8, 313. doi:
10.1186/1471-2105-8-313

Shi, L., Adkins,

J. N., Coleman,

J.
R., Schepmoes, A. A., Dohnkova,
A., Mottaz, H. M., Norbeck, A. D.,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 164 | 10

“fmicb-03-00164” — 2012/5/2 — 14:55 — page 10 — #10

Dandekar et al.

Salmonella enterica lifestyle

Purvine, S. O., Manes, N. P., Small-
wood, H. S., Wang, H., Forbes, J.,
Gros, P., Uzzau, S., Rodland, K.
D., Heffron, F., Smith, R. D., and
Squier, T. C. (2006). Proteomic anal-
ysis of Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium isolated from RAW
264.7 macrophages: identiﬁcation of
a novel protein that contributes to the
replication of serovar Typhimurium
inside macrophages. J. Biol. Chem.
281, 29131–29140.

Singer, M., Walter, W. A., Cali, B. M.,
Rouviere, P., Liebke, H. H., Gourse,
R. L., and Gross, C. A. (1991).
Physiological effects of the fructose-
1,6-diphosphate aldolase ts8 muta-
tion on stable RNA synthesis in
Escherichia coli.
J. Bacteriol. 173,
6249–6257.

Sturm, A., Heinemann, M., Arnol-
dini, M., Benecke, A., Ackermann,
M., Benz, M., Dormann, J., and
Hardt, W. D. (2011). The cost of

growth

retarded
of
virulence:
Salmonella
Typhimurium cells
expressing type III secretion sys-
tem 1. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002143. doi:
10.1371/journal.ppat.1002143

Tchawa Yimga, M., Leatham, M. P.,
Allen,
J. H., Laux, D. C., Con-
way, T., and Cohen, P. S. (2006).
Role of gluconeogenesis and the tri-
carboxylic acid cycle in the viru-
lence of Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium in BALB/c mice. Infect.
Immun. 74, 1130–1140.

Tesh, M.

J.,

and Miller, R. D.
(1981). Amino acid requirements for
Legionella pneumophila growth.
J.
Clin. Microbiol. 13, 865–869.

S. I., Sigurbjornsdottir, S., Stein-
mann, J., Sudarsan, S., Swainston, N.,
Thijs, I. M., Zengler, K., Palsson, B.
O., Adkins, J. N., and Bumann, D.
(2011). A community effort towards
a knowledge-base and mathemati-
cal model of the human pathogen
Salmonella Typhimurium LT2. BMC
Syst. Biol. 5, 8. doi: 10.1186/1752-
0509-5-8

Wieland, H., Ullrich,

S.,
and Neumeister, B.

Lang,
(2005).
F.,
of
Intracellular multiplication
depends
Legionella
on host cell amino acid trans-
porter SLC1A5. Mol. Microbiol. 55,
1528–1537.

pneumophila

Thiele, I., Hyduke, D. R., Steeb, B.,
Fankam, G., Allen, D. K., Bazzani, S.,
Charusanti, P., Chen, F. C., Fleming,
R. M., Hsiung, C. A., De Keers-
maecker, S. C., Liao, Y. C., Mar-
chal, K., Mo, M. L., Ozdemir, E.,
Raghunathan, A., Reed, J. L., Shin,

World Health Organization.

(2005).
Drug-resistant Salmonella. WHO
Fact Sheet 139. Geneva: WHO.

Conflict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any

commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 15 December 2011; accepted:
12 April 2012; published online: 03 May
2012.
Citation: Dandekar T, Fieselmann A,
Popp J and Hensel M (2012) Salmonella
enterica:
a surprisingly well-adapted
intracellular lifestyle. Front. Microbio.
3:164. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00164
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Microbial Immunology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Dandekar, Fiesel-
mann, Popp and Hensel. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of
the Creative Commons
Attribution Non Commercial License,
which permits non-commercial use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in other
forums, provided the original authors and
source are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 164 | 11

“fmicb-03-00164” — 2012/5/2 — 14:55 — page 11 — #11

