REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 18 June 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00217

Viroids: from genotype to phenotype just relying on RNA
sequence and structural motifs

Ricardo Flores 1*, Pedro Serra1, Sofía Minoia1, Francesco Di Serio2 and Beatriz Navarro2

1 Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular de Plantas (UPV-CSIC), Valencia, Spain
2 Istituto di Virologia Vegetale (CNR), Unità Organizzativa di Bari, Bari, Italy

Edited by:
K. Andrew White, York University,
Canada
Reviewed by:
Martin Pelchat, University of Ottawa,
Canada
Biao Ding, The Ohio State University,
USA
*Correspondence:
Ricardo Flores, Instituto de Biología
Molecular y Celular de Plantas
(UPV-CSIC), Universidad Politécnica,
46022 Valencia, Spain.
e-mail: rﬂores@ibmcp.upv.es

As a consequence of two unique physical properties, small size and circularity, viroid RNAs
do not code for proteins and thus depend on RNA sequence/structural motifs for interact-
ing with host proteins that mediate their invasion, replication, spread, and circumvention
of defensive barriers. Viroid genomes fold up on themselves adopting collapsed secondary
structures wherein stretches of nucleotides stabilized by Watson–Crick pairs are ﬂanked
by apparently unstructured loops. However, compelling data show that they are instead
stabilized by alternative non-canonical pairs and that speciﬁc loops in the rod-like secondary
structure, characteristic of Potato spindle tuber viroid and most other members of the fam-
ily Pospiviroidae, are critical for replication and systemic trafﬁcking. In contrast, rather than
folding into a rod-like secondary structure, most members of the family Avsunviroidae adopt
multibranched conformations occasionally stabilized by kissing-loop interactions critical for
viroid viability in vivo. Besides these most stable secondary structures, viroid RNAs alter-
natively adopt during replication transient metastable conformations containing elements
of local higher-order structure, prominent among which are the hammerhead ribozymes
catalyzing a key replicative step in the family Avsunviroidae, and certain conserved hairpins
that also mediate replication steps in the family Pospiviroidae. Therefore, different RNA
structures – either global or local – determine different functions, thus highlighting the
need for in-depth structural studies on viroid RNAs.

Keywords: catalytic RNAs, hammerhead ribozyme, RNA silencing, small non-coding RNAs

INTRODUCTION
Since their discovery some 50 years ago (Diener and Raymer, 1967;
Diener, 1972, 2003) viroids have exerted a particular fascination
because they are the lowest step of the biological scale: simple RNA
genomes of just ∼250–400 nucleotides (nt). How such tiny mol-
ecules manipulate the machinery of the organisms they parasitize
to ensure their replication and systemic invasion and, possibly as a
fortuitous consequence, often incite disease? How they select their
speciﬁc hosts, hitherto restricted to higher plants, and evade the
defensive response they mount? Moreover, given that viroids do
not encode proteins, these remarkable goals must be achieved by
direct interaction of the genomic RNAs (or derivatives thereof)
with host components. Which are the RNA sequence/structural
motifs involved in these interactions? Viroids have also caught
much attention because some “code” for ribozymes (of the ham-
merhead class, the simplest described so far) that play a key role
in their replication. In other words, they are catalytic RNAs pos-
sessing a genotype and expressing a phenotype without recurring
to protein intermediation. Altogether, these astonishing properties
make viroids unique systems to investigate how cells decipher sig-
nals contained in foreign (and most likely endogenous) RNAs or,
considered from the reverse perspective, how RNA structure deter-
mines function. Here we present an overview of the ideas on this
topic – since the inception of the viroid concept to recent develop-
ments – showing that this research ﬁeld has been and continues to
be fertile and promising. For in-depth treatment of other aspects

on viroid biology the reader is referred to previous reviews (Hadidi
et al., 2003; Flores et al., 2005, 2011a; Tsagris et al., 2008; Ding,
2009).

CIRCULARITY AND ROLLING-CIRCLE REPLICATION
Besides their minimal size, viroid genomes display another pecu-
liar structural property with deep functional connotations: they
are circular RNAs. Strong hints in this respect were obtained even
before Potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTVd), the type member of the
group, was identiﬁed as a physical entity. While treatments with
exonucleases abolished infectivity of the RNA from Tobacco mosaic
virus (TMV), no detectable effect was observed on PSTVd infectiv-
ity, which also remained unaffected following co-treatment with
alkaline phosphatase to remove hypothetical terminal phospho-
ryl groups that might impede exonuclease attack (Diener, 1971).
Electron microscopy under denaturing conditions conﬁrmed this
point (Sänger et al., 1976; McClements and Kaesberg, 1977) that
was further corroborated by direct sequencing of PSTVd (Gross
et al., 1978). Because circular RNAs cannot be translated by ribo-
some scanning from their 5
-end and, additionally, PSTVd lacked
typical AUG initiation codons (Gross et al., 1978), it was concluded
that this was a non-protein-coding RNA. All subsequent work with
different viroids – in which no internal ribosomal entry site has
been reported and attempts to verify their translation in vitro and
in vivo have failed (Davies et al., 1974; Semancik et al., 1977) –
sustain this notion. Therefore, to complete their biological cycle

(cid:48)

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 1

Flores et al.

Viroids: from structure to function

viroids are signiﬁcantly more host-dependent than viruses (that
encode one or more proteins).

The circular nature of the genomic viroid RNA has another
key consequence in replication. When entering an appropriate
host, this RNA – to which the (+) polarity is assigned by conven-
tion – is reiteratively transcribed by a cellular RNA polymerase into
oligomeric (−) strands that, by themselves or after cleavage and
circularization, serve as templates for a second RNA–RNA tran-
scription round leading to oligomeric (+) strands that are cleaved
and ligated into the ﬁnal circular product. This rolling-circle mech-
anism with only RNA intermediates (Grill and Semancik, 1978)
has two variants. In PSTVd and members of its family (Pospivi-
roidae) replication takes place in the nucleus and all steps are cat-
alyzed by host enzymes (Branch and Robertson, 1984; Branch et al.,
1988), while in Avocado sunblotch viroid (ASBVd; Symons, 1981)
and members of its family (Avsunviroidae), replication occurs in
plastid (mostly chloroplasts) with cleavage of oligomeric strands
being mediated by hammerhead ribozymes (Hutchins et al., 1986;
Daròs et al., 1994). A more detailed account of viroid replication
can be found in a recent review (Flores et al., 2009).

ROD-LIKE VERSUS BRANCHED SECONDARY STRUCTURE:
IN SILICO AND IN VITRO EVIDENCE
Viroid genomes fold up on themselves adopting collapsed sec-
ondary structures wherein stretches of nucleotides paired through
canonical Watson–Crick interactions are ﬂanked by loops of
apparently unpaired nucleotides. Circularity facilitates intramol-
ecular folding, and together, the two features afford protection
against both exonucleases (demanding free termini), and endonu-
cleases (acting preferentially on single-stranded regions). This
peculiar secondary structure became evident upon sequencing
PSTVd: thermodynamics-based predictions, RNase, and bisul-
ﬁte probing in vitro, and electron microscopy revealed that the
359-nt PSTVd RNA adopts a rod-like secondary structure with a
width roughly similar to that of a double-stranded DNA (Sogo
et al., 1973; Sänger et al., 1976; Gross et al., 1978; Riesner et al.,
1979; Figure 1). Additional support for this view was provided
when similar structures of maximal base-pairing were predicted
for two other viroids related to PSTVd but different in size and
with just 60–73% nucleotide sequence identity: Chrysanthemum
Stunt viroid (CSVd), and Citrus exocortis viroid (CEVd; Haseloff
and Symons, 1981; Gross et al., 1982). Although probing with
nucleases and dimethyl sulfate supplied evidence for a bifurca-
tion in the left-terminal domain of the PSTVd rod-like struc-
ture (Gast et al., 1996), subsequent nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) analysis of the 69-nt forming this domain, conﬁrmed by
temperature-gradient gel electrophoresis, and UV melting exper-
iments, sustain the elongated rod form as the thermodynamically
favored conformation (Dingley et al., 2003). Further supporting
this notion, recent application of SHAPE (selective 2
-hydroxyl
acylation analyzed by primer extension) – a relatively novel tech-
nique that interrogates local backbone RNA ﬂexibility in solution
at single-nucleotide resolution (Merino et al., 2005; Weeks and
Mauger, 2011) and permits coupling these data to computer-
assisted structure prediction – has failed to reveal the presence
of Y-shaped, or cruciform structures in CEVd and some other
members of the family Pospiviroidae (Xu et al., 2012). However,

(cid:48)

despite this evidence, the universality of the rod-like structure of
viroids should not be taken for granted within this family, as illus-
trated by early results indicating that the most stable secondary
structure predicted for Pear blister canker viroid (PBCVd) is cruci-
form and that none of the other energetically close conformations
are elongated (Hernández et al., 1992).

Within the family Avsunviroidae embracing chloroplastic
viroids (Flores et al., 2000, 2005), the rod-like structure is the
exception rather than the rule. Even if ASBVd, the type member
of this family, was initially proposed to fold into an elongated
conformation (Symons, 1981), other data point to a bifurcated
left-terminal domain (Gast et al., 1996; Navarro and Flores, 2000).
Moreover, molecular characterization of Peach latent mosaic viroid
(PLMVd; Hernández and Flores, 1992), and Chrysanthemum
chlorotic mottle viroid (CChMVd; Navarro and Flores, 1997) pre-
dicted multibranched most stable conformations, and subsequent
sequencing of many natural variants of PLMVd (Ambrós et al.,
1998, 1999; Pelchat et al., 2000; Malﬁtano et al., 2003; Rodio et al.,
2006; Fekih Hassen et al., 2007; Yazarlou et al., 2012), and CCh-
MVd (De la Peña et al., 1999; De la Peña and Flores, 2002) not only
corroborated this view, but also provided evidence for the signif-
icance of the multibranched conformations in vivo. Additional
credence for such a PLMVd secondary structure was obtained
by in vitro nuclease mapping and oligonucleotide binding shift
assays (Bussière et al., 2000); this work also indicated the exis-
tence of an element of tertiary structure, speciﬁcally a pseudoknot
interaction between two hairpin loops stabilizing the proposed
branched conformation (see below), and suggested the possibil-
ity of a similar kissing-loop interaction in CChMVd (Bussière
et al., 2000). SHAPE examination of several PLMVd variants is
also consistent with the proposed branched conformation or with
variations thereof (Dubé et al., 2011). Finally, computer-assisted
analysis of the sequence of the fourth member of this family, Egg-
plant latent viroid (ELVd), has predicted a secondary structure
with two bifurcations (Fadda et al., 2003a).

ROD-LIKE VERSUS BRANCHED SECONDARY STRUCTURE:
IN VIVO EVIDENCE
Is the elongated conformation obtained for PSTVd and related
viroids by in silico and in vitro approaches physiologically rele-
vant? This issue is not trivial because structural inferences derived
from thermodynamics-based studies and probing analyses of RNA
in solution should not be interpreted as directly reﬂecting the sit-
uation in vivo. While predictions of RNA secondary structure by
free energy minimization (Nussinov and Jacobson, 1980; Zuker
and Stiegler, 1981) are usually correct for small structural motifs
like hairpins, they must be considered just tentative for larger
RNAs because of the lack of accurate thermodynamic estimates
for all sequence motifs and higher-order interactions (Mathews
and Turner, 2006). On the other hand, nucleotides non-reacting
in chemical probing in vitro do not necessarily reﬂect base-pairing
in vivo, because they might be involved in tertiary non-canonical
interactions or in RNA-protein contacts. Moreover, in its physio-
logical habitat the genomic viroid RNA must interact with differ-
ent host proteins mediating replication and movement, and these
interactions may impact deeply on its structure: for instance, the
rod-like conformation proposed for most members of the family

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 2

Flores et al.

Viroids: from structure to function

FIGURE 1 | Structural features of viroids. Upper and middle panels,
schemes of the characteristic rod-like secondary structures of the genomic
RNAs of Potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTVd) and Hop stunt viroid (HSVd)
respectively (family Pospiviroidae). The approximate location of the ﬁve
structural domains – terminal left (TL), pathogenic (P), central (C), variable (V),
and terminal right (TR) – is indicated, as well as that of the central conserved
region (CCR), the terminal conserved region (TCR), and the terminal
conserved hairpin (TCH). Lower panel, scheme of the multibranched

secondary structure of the genomic RNA of Peach latent mosaic viroid
(PLMVd; family Avsunviroidae), in which the sequences conserved in most
natural hammerhead ribozymes are boxed with black and white backgrounds
for the (+) and (−) polarities, respectively; the kissing-loop interaction is
indicated with lines, and the characteristic 12-nt hairpin insertion of the
reference variant containing the pathogenicity determinant of an extreme
chlorosis (peach calico) is highlighted with blue color. For a more detailed
representation of the PSTVd secondary structure see Figure 5.

Potato spindle tuber viroid must be transiently unfolded during
replication by the enzymatic complex catalyzing transcription. In
this same context, since RNA folding occurs during transcription,
the speciﬁc initiation site of viroid strands can have functional
implications.

Nonetheless, data from three independent lines support that
this elongated conformation is biologically signiﬁcant: (i) a less-
than-unit (341 nt) infectious PSTVd variant, identiﬁed in plants
agrotransformed with the dimeric form of an in vitro-deleted 350-
bp (non-infectious) PSTVd-cDNA unit, results from an additional
9-nt deletion in vivo that restores the rod-like secondary structure
(Wassenegger et al., 1994), (ii) the longer-than-unit natural vari-
ants of Coconut cadang–cadang viroid (CCCVd; Haseloff et al.,
1982) and CEVd (Semancik et al., 1994; Fadda et al., 2003b) accu-
mulating in infected tissues result from repetitions of the right
terminal domain that also preserve the rod-like secondary struc-
ture, and (iii) replication and directional PSTVd trafﬁcking across
speciﬁc cellular boundaries is mediated or inﬂuenced by RNA
motifs, particularly loops, of the rod-like secondary structure (see
below).

What about in the family Avsunviroidae? Evidence for the
physiological relevance of the branched conformations proposed
for PLMVd and CChMVd is particularly strong. Sequencing of
many natural variants has shown that they display an extreme

sequence heterogeneity (Ambrós et al., 1998, 1999; De la Peña
et al., 1999; Pelchat et al., 2000; De la Peña and Flores, 2002;
Malﬁtano et al., 2003; Rodio et al., 2006; Fekih Hassen et al.,
2007; Yazarlou et al., 2012), most likely resulting from the high
mutation rate of these viroids during replication catalyzed by a
single-subunit, nuclear-encoded chloroplastic RNA polymerase
without proof-reading ability (Navarro et al., 2000; Rodio et al.,
2007); this mutation rate has been measured for CChMVd and is
the highest reported for any biological entity (Gago et al., 2009).
Remarkably, however, the sequence heterogeneity occurs in such a
manner that the changes map at loops or, when affecting a base-
pair, they are mostly co-variations or substitutions of Watson–
Crick by wobble base-pairs (or vice-versa) that do not distort
the computer-predicted branched conformations. Co-variations
or compensatory mutations are regarded the most compelling
feature for testing computer-predicted structures in RNA (Gutell
et al., 1994).

The CChMVd natural variability also supports that

the
branched conformation is further stabilized by a kissing-loop
interaction (Gago et al., 2005) resembling another one proposed
in PLMVd from in vitro assays. Speciﬁcally, site-directed mutage-
nesis, bioassays, and progeny analyses showed that: (i) single CCh-
MVd mutants partially disrupting the kissing-loops display low or
no infectivity, which was recovered in double mutants restoring

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 3

Flores et al.

Viroids: from structure to function

the interaction, (ii) mutations affecting regions adjacent to the
kissing-loops reverted to wild-type or led to stem rearrangements
preserving this interaction, and (iii) the interchange between four
nucleotides from each of the two kissing-loops generated a viable
CChMVd variant with eight mutations. Moreover, denaturing and
non-denaturing PAGE revealed that the kissing-loop interaction
determines proper in vitro folding of CChMVd RNA, and that
this interaction only exists in the (+) polarity strand (Gago et al.,
2005), as most likely also occurs in PLMVd (Dubé et al., 2010).
Conservation of a similar loop-loop interaction in two viroids with
low sequence similarity strongly suggests a role in the adoption
and stabilization of a compact folding critical for viroid viability
in vivo (Gago et al., 2005), although what may be this speciﬁc
role remains unknown. Interestingly, a similar kissing-loop inter-
action has been predicted in the (+) strand of a recently described
viroid-like RNA from grapevine with hammerhead ribozymes in
both polarity strands (Wu et al., 2012). Even if preliminary bioas-
says have failed to detect autonomous replication for this small
grapevine RNA, it is most likely a new viroid species of the genus
Pelamoviroid formed so far by PLMVd and CChMVd (Navarro
and Flores, 1997).

Another structural aspect of interest in PLMVd is that its
secondary structure contains a long double-stranded region, inter-
spersed with small loops, in which the nucleotides forming part of
both hammerhead structures face each other (Hernández and Flo-
res, 1992). Yet, in the most stable secondary structures predicted
for some sequence variants, this region (the so-called hammer-
head arm) adopts an alternative cruciform conformation that is
also supported by co-variations in natural variants (a solid argu-
ment for relevance in vivo; Ambrós et al., 1998, 1999), and by
recent SHAPE probing in vitro (Dubé et al., 2011). Intriguingly, a
similar cruciform domain is formed in the hammerhead arm of
CChMVd (Navarro and Flores, 1997; De la Peña et al., 1999), but
with an extra-helical A in the junction between two of the stems
that is indispensable for infectivity, possibly because this singular
location induces a deformation of the cruciform domain critical
for interacting with other RNA regions or host factors involved in
CChMVd replication, transport, or accumulation (De la Peña and
Flores, 2001). This nucleotide also forms part of the (+) hammer-
head structure, an alternative folding transiently adopted during
replication in vivo, and causes in vitro a moderate decrease of the
trans-cleaving rate constant with respect to the same ribozyme
without this residue. Therefore, certain natural hammerheads
appear to deviate from the optimal catalytic format due to the
involvement of some of their nucleotides in critical function(s)
other than self-cleavage, a consequence of the need to compress
genetic information in very small genomes like those of viroids
(De la Peña and Flores, 2001).

The secondary structure with two bifurcations predicted for
ELVd is also partly supported by co-variations (Fadda et al.,
2003a). However, the limited sequence heterogeneity detected in
members of the family Pospiviroidae (Góra et al., 1994), the repli-
cation of which is mediated by the multi-subunit nuclear RNA
polymerase II (Mühlbach and Sänger, 1979; Flores and Seman-
cik, 1982; Schindler and Mühlbach, 1992), has precluded the
implementation of this approach for validating their proposed
secondary structure.

CONSERVED DOMAINS, SEQUENCE MOTIFS, AND HAIRPINS
IN THE FAMILY POSPIVIROIDAE: FUNCTIONAL
SIGNIFICANCE
Early pair-wise comparisons looking for local similarities between
members of the family Pospiviroidae, mostly of the genus Pospivi-
roid whose type species is PSTVd, led to the proposal that the
rod-like secondary structure could be splitted into ﬁve domains:
TL (terminal left), P (pathogenic), C (central), V (variable), and
TR (terminal right; Figure 1; Keese and Symons, 1985). These
domains, besides playing a role in intermolecular RNA rearrange-
ments contributing to viroid evolution (Keese and Symons, 1985;
Koltunow and Rezaian, 1989), were associated with speciﬁc func-
tions; for instance, the P domain was related to symptom expres-
sion, although subsequent work unveiled a more complex scenario
controlled by discrete determinants located in the ﬁve domains
(Sano et al., 1992; Qi and Ding, 2003).

Within the C domain it is found the central conserved region
(CCR), formed by two stretches of conserved nucleotides in the
upper and lower strands ﬂanked by an imperfect inverted repeat
in the upper strand (McInnes and Symons, 1991), and within the
TL domain are found the terminal conserved region (TCR) or the
terminal conserved hairpin (TCH), because both appear mutually
exclusive (Koltunow and Rezaian, 1988; Puchta et al., 1988; Flores
et al., 1997; Figure 1). These elements, the conservation of which
in sequence and secondary structure or location strongly suggests
their involvement in key functional roles, serve as one of the main
criteria for viroid classiﬁcation (Flores et al., 1997). However, data
for such a role are only available for the CCR so far. Superimposed
on the CCR primary structure, there are other elements of higher-
order structure. In particular, studies using a set of biochemical
and biophysical techniques showed that, during thermal denatu-
ration, PSTVd and some closely related viroids assume metastable
branched conformations that are trapped by quick cooling, while
slow cooling renaturation favors adoption of the native rod-like
structure (Henco et al., 1979; Riesner et al., 1979). From these
studies it was proposed that thermal denaturation might recapit-
ulate unfolding (or transient folding) during replication in vivo
(Riesner, 1991).

The metastable conformations contain hairpins, prominent
among which is hairpin I (HP I) formed by the upper CCR strand
and the ﬂanking imperfect repeats. The ﬁnding that the nucleotide
variability between members of the family Pospiviroidae preserves
HP I (Riesner et al., 1979; Visvader et al., 1985; Polivka et al.,
1996) – including the capping palindromic tetraloop with the
two central residues phylogenetically conserved, the adjacent 3-
bp stem with its central pair also phylogenetically conserved, an
internal symmetric loop of 1–3 nt in each strand presumably sta-
bilized by non-canonical interactions (Gast et al., 1998), and a
stem of 9–10 bp occasionally interrupted by a 1-nt symmetric or
asymmetric internal loop (Visvader et al., 1985; Flores et al., 1997;
Figure 2) – adds further support to this structural element serv-
ing as the basis for an important function in vivo. In agreement
with this notion, results obtained with an in vivo system based
in transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana lines expressing dimeric tran-
scripts of CEVd, Apple scar skin viroid (ASSVd), and Hop stunt
viroid (HSVd) – that mimic the replicative intermediates – have
mapped the cleavage site of the (+) strands of these three viroids

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 4

Flores et al.

Viroids: from structure to function

FIGURE 2 | Hairpin I structures of the ﬁve type species of the family
Pospiviroidae. This element of secondary structure is formed by the
upper CCR strand and a ﬂanking inverted repeat of PSTVd, HSVd,
CCCVd, ASSVd, and CbVd-1 (Coleus blumei viroid 1). Red fonts indicate
conserved nucleotides in structurally similar positions. Continuous and
broken lines represent Watson–Crick and non-canonical base-pairs,

respectively. Notice that the variability preserves the overall structure of
hairpin I, including the terminal palindromic tetraloop, the adjacent 3-bp
stem, and the long stem. Left inset, hairpin I of the wild-type CEVd
variant used to transform A. thaliana (notice two co-variations with
respect to PSTVd at the basis of the long stem). Reproduced with
permission from Gas et al. (2007).

at the upper CCR strand (Daròs and Flores, 2004; Gas et al.,
2007), in a position homologous to that proposed for PSTVd
with an in vitro system (Baumstark et al., 1997). Moreover, as
a consequence of the peculiar features of HP I (Figure 2), the
corresponding sequence of di- or oligomeric RNAs can alterna-
tive form a long double-stranded structure with a GC-rich central
region of 10 bp containing the cleavage sites. The adoption in vivo
of this double-stranded structure, which would be the actual sub-
strate for cleavage in line with an early proposal (Diener, 1986),
could be facilitated by hairpin I. More speciﬁcally, during tran-
scription of oligomeric (+) RNAs of the family Pospiviroidae, a
kissing-loop interaction between the palindromic tetraloops of
two consecutive hairpin I motifs (Figure 3A), paralleling the sit-
uation observed in retroviruses (Paillart et al., 2004), might start
intramolecular dimerization and their stems then form a longer
interstrand duplex (Gas et al., 2007; Figure 3B). Furthermore,
(cid:48)
the cleavage sites in the double-stranded structure leave two 3
-
protruding nucleotides in each strand (Figure 3C), the hallmark
of class III RNases that display a clear preference for substrates with
a compact secondary structure, like viroids, and generate products
with 5
-hydroxyl termini (MacRae
and Doudna, 2007). The monomeric linear CEV (+) strands that
accumulate in A. thaliana transgenically expressing the corre-
sponding dimeric transcripts have indeed these termini (Gas et al.,
2008), the ligation of which, interestingly, occurs through a novel
pathway.

-phosphomonoester and free 3

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

The ensuing ligation of these termini appears to be facilitated
by an alternative extended conformation similar, if not identi-
cal, to the rod-like secondary structure containing an element of
local tertiary structure in the CCR stabilized by non-canonical

interactions. Early UV irradiation and enzymatic and chemical
probing of puriﬁed PSTVd circular RNA unveiled the existence
of such an element with high sequence and structural similarity
to loop E of eukaryotic 5S rRNA (Branch et al., 1985; Gast et al.,
1996), and direct UV irradiation of PSTVd-infected tomato leaves
and subsequent RNA analysis showed the same UV-induced cross-
linking, thus indicating that loop E is also formed in vivo (Eiras
et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2007). Moreover, phylogenetic dissec-
tion supports that this element is conserved in other members of
the genus Pospiviroid, a notion further conﬁrmed by a structural
model for PSTVd loop E – based on isostericity matrix and muta-
genic analyses (see below) – that can be extended to other closely
related viroids like CEVd (Zhong et al., 2006). In vitro evidence
for the involvement of loop E in ligation was derived from incu-
bation with a potato nuclear extract of a monomeric (+) PSTVd
RNA with a short repeat of the upper CCR strand: detection of the
infectious monomeric circular form led to the proposal that the
enzymatic cleavage and ligation of the PSTVd (+) strand results
from a switch from a branched structure (containing a GAAA-
capped hairpin) to an extended conformation containing loop E
(Baumstark et al., 1997). In vivo evidence obtained with 16 CEVd
mutants expressed transgenically in A. thaliana corroborates this
view with some modiﬁcations: processing is driven by an inter-
play between RNA conformations involving the hairpin I/double-
stranded structure formed by the upper CCR strand and ﬂanking
nucleotides in cleavage, and loop E and ﬂanking nucleotides of
both strands in ligation (Gas et al., 2007, 2008; Figure 3D). In
(cid:48)
(cid:48)
the latter conformation, the 5
-
hydroxyl termini to be joined must lie in close proximity and
proper orientation.

-phosphomonoester and free 3

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 5

Flores et al.

Viroids: from structure to function

transport was advanced (Flores et al., 1997). In support of this
proposal, recent data show that L5 and TFIIIA from A. thaliana
bind PSTVd (+) RNA in vitro with the same afﬁnity as they bind
their cognate 5S rRNA, whereas the afﬁnity for a chloroplastic
viroid is signiﬁcantly lower (Eiras et al., 2011). Because loop E is
not conserved in other members of the family Pospiviroidae apart
from those forming the genus Pospiviroid, it remains to be deter-
mined whether alternative elements of local tertiary structure,
different in sequence but functionally equivalent, play a role simi-
lar to that of loop E. Altogether these results highlight that a small
structural element, like loop E, can mediate multiple functions.
This is also the case for HP I, which either itself or its conserved
sequence, has been additionally involved in driving the import
of PSTVd into the nucleus (Zhao et al., 2001; Abraitiene et al.,
2008). In permeabilized tobacco protoplasts, nuclear transport
of ﬂuorescein-labeled PSTVd RNA is cytoskeleton-independent,
uncoupled to the Ran GTPase cycle, and facilitated by a speciﬁc
and saturable receptor (Woo et al., 1999). In a related context, a
small purine/pyrimidine motif in the TR domain, conserved in all
members of the genus Pospiviroid, has been proposed to medi-
ate systemic transport (Gozmanova et al., 2003; Maniataki et al.,
2003).

In addition to HP I, the metastable conformations unveiled
by thermal denaturation analyses also contain HP II, formed by
sequences from the lower strand of the rod-like structure posi-
tioned at both sides of the CCR (Henco et al., 1979; Riesner et al.,
1979). The functional relevance of HP II is supported by its con-
servation in the genus Pospiviroid, and by the critical role played by
its core region in infectivity (Loss et al., 1991; Qu et al., 1995; Can-
dresse et al., 2001). More speciﬁcally, HP II is adopted by sequential
folding in the (−) strand replicative intermediate, and is essential
for its template activity in (+) strand synthesis (Qu et al., 1995;
Schroder and Riesner, 2002). Other hairpins have been only found
in speciﬁc viroids, like HP III in PSTVd (Riesner et al., 1979), and
HP IV in Columnea latent viroid (CLVd; Owens et al., 2003), but
their functional role, if any, is not known.

There is an increasing appreciation that the small RNA motifs
seemingly unstructured due to the absence of Watson–Crick base-
pairs – one example being the loops in the rod-like secondary
structure of PSTVd – are instead stabilized by alternative inter-
actions. Actually, each RNA base can form hydrogen bonds with
another base via one of the three edges (Watson–Crick, Hoog-
steen, and sugar), with their glycosidic bonds being oriented cis
or trans relative to each other (Figure 4; Leontis and Westhof,
2001). Isosteric (that is, similar in shape) relationships for each
base-pairing family are compiled in isostericity matrices that pro-
vide the rationale for explaining and predicting recurrent three-
dimensional (3D) motifs in non-homologous RNAs, wherein they
are more conserved in structure (their nucleotides adopt similar
spatial arrangements) than in sequence (Leontis et al., 2002). This
approach has been used to validate a 3D model of PSTVd loop
E inferred from comparative sequence analysis as well as from
NMR and X-ray crystal structures of similar motifs in other RNAs
and, besides, it has allowed the design of disruptive and compen-
satory mutations; functional analyses of such mutants in vitro and
in vivo has shown that the structural integrity of this element of
tertiary structure is critical for accumulation (Zhong et al., 2006).

FIGURE 3 | Model for processing in vivo of the oligomeric (+)
replicative intermediates of the family Pospiviroidae. The model
predicts a kissing-loop interaction between the palindromic tetraloops of
two consecutive hairpin I motifs (A), with their stems then forming a longer
interstrand duplex (B). This double-stranded structure is the substrate for
cleavage at speciﬁc positions in both strands (C). Following a second
conformational switch, the resulting unit-length strands adopt the extended
rod-like structure with loop E (in outlined fonts) and the adjacent bulged-U
helix (D), which is the substrate for ligation (E). R and Y refer to purines and
pyrimidines, respectively, the S-shaped line denotes the UV-induced
cross-link, and white arrowheads mark the cleavage sites in the
double-stranded structure and the ligation site in the extended
conformation. Reproduced with permission from Gas et al. (2007).

Remarkably, loop E has been also involved in host speciﬁcity
(Wassenegger et al., 1996), pathogenesis (Qi and Ding, 2003),
and accumulation (Zhong et al., 2006) of PSTVd. Furthermore,
because loop E is part of the binding site of at least two proteins –
transcription factor IIIA that activates 5S rRNA transcription, and
the ribosomal protein L5 implicated in post-transcriptional deliv-
ery of this RNA from the nucleoplasm to the nucleolus – the
possibility that loop E could also act in PSTVd as a binding site for
recruiting proteins involved in its replication and/or intranuclear

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 6

Flores et al.

Viroids: from structure to function

FIGURE 4 | Geometric classiﬁcation of RNA base-pairing. The upper
panel shows that each nucleotide base has three edges (Watson–Crick,
Hoogsteen, and sugar) that can potentially form hydrogen bonds with one
of the three edges of another base. Thus, each base is represented by a
triangle and can potentially pair with up to three other bases. The
interacting bases can pair with a cis or trans relative orientation of their
glycosidic bonds; this is illustrated in the lower panels for the cis and trans
orientations of nucleotides pairing at the Hoogsteen edge of one base and

the sugar edge of the second base. In these base-pairs, the Watson–Crick
edges of the interacting bases are available for further interactions – with
other RNAs, proteins, or small molecules. The cross and circle in the
triangle where the Hoogsteen and sugar edges meet indicate 5(cid:48) → 3(cid:48) and
3(cid:48) → 5(cid:48) orientations, respectively, of the sugar-phosphodiester backbones
relative to the plane of the page. W–C, Watson–Crick edge; H, Hoogsteen
edge; SE, sugar edge. Reproduced with permission from Zhong et al.
(2006).

RNA signatures also regulate short (cell-to-cell) and long distance
movement of viroids through the plasmodesmata and phloem,
respectively. More speciﬁcally: (i) unidirectional PSTVd trafﬁck-
ing from the bundle sheath to mesophyll in young tobacco leaves
demands a bipartite RNA motif (Qi et al., 2004), (ii) entry of
PSTVd from non-vascular into phloem tissue to initiate systemic
infection is mediated by an U/C motif (forming a water-inserted
cis Watson–Crick/Watson–Crick base-pair ﬂanked by short con-
ventional helices), a 3D model based on comparisons with X-ray
crystal structures of similar motifs in rRNAs and supported by

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

-CGA-3

(cid:48). . .5

combined mutagenesis and co-variation analyses (Zhong et al.,
2007), and (iii) trafﬁcking from palisade mesophyll to spongy
mesophyll requires an RNA motif called loop 6 (consisting of
(cid:48)
the sequence 5
ﬂanked on both sides by cis
Watson–Crick G/C and G/U wobble base-pairs) the 3D model
of which, describing all non-Watson–Crick base-pairs, has been
derived by isostericity-based sequence comparisons with 3D RNA
motifs from the RNA X-ray crystal structure database (Takeda
et al., 2011). Finally, extending this approach, a genome-wide
mutational analysis has identiﬁed loops/bulges in PSTVd that

-GAC-3

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 7

Flores et al.

Viroids: from structure to function

FIGURE 5 | A genomic map of PSTVd loop motifs that are essential/critical for replication and systemic trafﬁcking. Superscripts 1 and 2 refer to data
from Zhong et al. (2006) and Zhong et al. (2007), respectively. R, replication; T, trafﬁcking. Reproduced with permission from Zhong et al. (2008).

are essential or important for autonomous replication in single
cells (protoplasts) or for systemic trafﬁcking, thus providing a
framework for future studies on RNA motifs that regulate these
two functional properties in PSTVd and perhaps in other RNAs
(Zhong et al., 2008; Figure 5). In conclusion, signiﬁcant advances
in understanding viroid-host relationships should be expected
from a comprehensive dissection of viroid RNA structural motifs
and, particularly, on how they interact with their cognate cellular
factors (Takeda and Ding, 2009; Ding, 2010).

(cid:48)
,3

HAMMERHEAD RIBOZYMES AND OTHER ELEMENTS OF
HIGHER-ORDER STRUCTURE IN THE FAMILY
AVSUNVIROIDAE: FUNCTIONAL SIGNIFICANCE
As indicated above, the ﬁnding that members of the family Avsun-
viroidae are catalytic RNAs is one of the most striking features
of viroids. The catalytic activity of these RNAs resides in the
ability of their both polarity strands to fold into hammerhead
structures, which facilitate splitting of a speciﬁc phosphodiester
(cid:48)
bond through a transesteriﬁcation that produces 5
-hydroxyl and
(cid:48)
2
cyclic phosphodiester termini (Hutchins et al., 1986; Prody
et al., 1986). An account of the data supporting the functional
role of hammerhead ribozymes in promoting self-excision into
unit-length strands of the multimeric intermediates, generated in
replication through a rolling-circle mechanism, has been presented
previously (Flores et al., 2000, 2001). From a structural perspec-
tive, X-ray crystallography (and to a lower extent NMR, see below),
have provided key insights on the actual shape of two of these
ribozymes in their natural (full-length) version, and reconciled
conﬂicting interpretations of previous structural and biochem-
ical data obtained with minimal (incomplete) versions thereof.
Rather than being composed of a central conserved core ﬂanked
by three double-stranded helices (I, II, and III) usually capped
by short loops (1, 2, and 3), altogether looking like a hammer-
head, the actual shape instead resembles a misshapen Y in which
helices II and III are virtually colinear (Martick and Scott, 2006; Chi
et al., 2008; Figures 6A,B). Importantly, these studies conﬁrmed
physical contacts between loops 1 and 2 predicted by in vitro and
in vivo analyses of natural hammerheads showing that this tertiary
interaction is critical for catalysis at the low physiological levels
of Mg2+
(De la Peña et al., 2003; Khvorova et al., 2003), most
likely because it facilitates sampling of the active conformation.

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

Dissection by NMR spectroscopy, site-directed mutagenesis, and
kinetic and infectivity analyses of another two natural hammer-
heads (those of CChMVd) has resulted in a detailed picture of the
loop–loop contacts (Figure 6C), the key aspects of which – base-
pairing between the pyrimidine at the 5
side of loop 1 and the
purine at the 3
side of loop 2, and interaction of an extra-helical
pyrimidine of loop 1 with loop 2 – appear to exist in other nat-
ural hammerheads as well (Dufour et al., 2009). Incorporation of
these tertiary stabilization motifs has resulted in a second gener-
ation of hammerheads catalyzing trans-cleavage of speciﬁc RNAs
at the low concentrations of Mg2+
existing in vivo (Carbonell
et al., 2011 and references therein). Comparative studies on the
effects of mutations in co- and post-transcriptional self-cleavage
have revealed an additional feature of natural hammerheads: they
have been evolutionarily selected to operate co-transcriptionally,
in other words, concurrently with RNA folding during replication
(Carbonell et al., 2006). This ﬁnding, together with the existence
of alternative non-self-cleaving conformations that involve the
nucleotides conserved in hammerheads (Hernández and Flores,
1992; Flores et al., 2000), explain why a fraction of the viroid
molecules remains uncleaved and can thus serve as templates for
replication through a rolling-circle mechanism. Analysis of ELVd
RNAs expressed in chloroplasts of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii has
shown that deletion mutants able to self-cleave efﬁciently dis-
play ligation defects, indicating that additional nucleotides – apart
those forming the hammerhead – are involved in the conformation
promoting ligation (Martínez et al., 2009). Moreover, this confor-
mation should favor the physical proximity and positioning of
the 5
cyclic phosphodiester termini (result-
ing from self-cleavage) for their joining most likely catalyzed by a
chloroplastic tRNA ligase (Nohales et al., 2012).

-hydroxyl and 2

,3

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

(cid:48)

Apart

from the kissing-loop interaction stabilizing the
branched conformation of PLMVd, CChMVd, and the viroid-
like RNA from grapevine, the existence of other elements of
tertiary structure has been proposed. In particular, co-variations
between the hairpin loops A and B of the most stable secondary
structure predicted for PLMVd preserve a potential base-pairing
interaction between these two hairpin loops, thus suggesting the
adoption – at least in some variants and perhaps only transiently –
of another kissing-loop interaction (Ambrós et al., 1998). Recent
in vitro probing supports the existence of this interaction (Dubé

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 8

Flores et al.

Viroids: from structure to function

FIGURE 6 | Secondary structure and tridimensional model proposed for
most natural hammerhead ribozymes. (A) Schematic representation of a
typical hammerhead structure (that of the plus strand of PLMVd) as originally
formulated. Residues strictly or highly conserved in most natural
hammerheads are on a black background. Arrow marks the self-cleavage site
and dashes indicate Watson–Crick (and wobble) base-pairs. (B) Schematic
representation of the same hammerhead structure according to X-ray

crystallography and NMR data. The proposed tertiary interaction between
loops 1 and 2 that facilitates catalytic activity in vivo, is denoted with a gray
oval. Dashes indicate Watson–Crick (and wobble) base-pairs and dots
non-canonical interactions. (C) Detailed 3D model of this hammerhead
structure showing the interactions between loops 1 and 2 (in magenta).
Residues in yellow form a local element of higher-order structure (the uridine
turn).

et al., 2011). On the other hand, application of an experimental
approach similar to that leading to discovery of loop E in PSTVd –
UV irradiation, denaturing PAGE, and Northern blot hybridiza-
tion – has disclosed another element of tertiary structure between
two conserved nucleotides located far apart in the sequence of
the PLMVd (+) strand. Moreover, the same cross-linked species
was also observed when PLMVd-infected leaves were irradiated
prior to RNA extraction, indicating that the UV-sensitive element
of tertiary structure exists also in vivo (Hernández et al., 2006).
Its functional role, however, remains unknown. Finally, accord-
ing to new data, the monomeric linear (+) form of ELVd has the
potential for trafﬁcking from the cytoplasm into the nucleus and
subsequently from this organelle into chloroplasts, where repli-
cation occurs; this trafﬁcking appears to be mediated by a RNA
sequence and/or structural motif restricted to the left-terminal
domain of the ELVd RNA (Gómez and Pallás, 2012).

CONCLUDING REFLECTIONS AND PROSPECTS
The hypothesis that single-stranded RNA chains fold into a series
of hairpin-like helices in which base-pairing by hydrogen bonds
takes place, being extruded as loops the bases with no partner
available, was proposed more than 50 years ago (Fresco et al.,
1960). This ﬁrst RNA secondary structure model has been fully
validated and is now at the core of all studies on RNA structure
including predictions with algorithms that search for secondary
structures of minimal free energy. These in silico approaches have
been complemented by analyses in vitro, with SHAPE playing a
prominent role in recent years. Besides, X-ray crystallography and
NMR have provided a 3D view of small RNA motifs as well as
of RNAs of increasing size, showing that most loops – initially
regarded as unstructured motifs – are instead stabilized by complex
arrays of non-canonical interactions. Databases storing detailed
structural descriptions of these RNA motifs, some of which occur

recurrently in many RNAs, have become irreplaceable tools when
examining new RNAs, specially if combined with other approaches
like isostericity matrices.

In the previous sections we have presented a series of RNA
motifs/domains to exemplify the key functions they mediate in
viroids. This series, however, is not exhaustive. The initiation sites
of ASBVd (+) and (−) RNAs, and of PSTVd (−) RNA, are con-
tained within terminal hairpin loops of their predicted quasi-rod-
or rod-like secondary structures, respectively (Navarro and Flo-
res, 2000; Kolonko et al., 2006), with the hairpin loop in PSTVd
also binding in vitro, directly or indirectly, the RNA polymerase II
involved in replication (Bojic et al., 2012). In contrast, both initia-
tion sites have been mapped in PLMVd at short double-stranded
RNA motifs that also include the hammerhead self-cleavage sites
(Delgado et al., 2005; Motard et al., 2008), thus illustrating that two
quite different structural motifs may play similar functional roles
and that even a single motif may be involved in more than one
function. Furthermore, given that RNA folds co-transcriptionally,
the initiation sites of nascent viroid strands may inﬂuence the
adoption of transient metastable structures that are functionally
important (Delgado et al., 2005).

The collapsed folding of viroid strands makes them potential
substrates for the RNA silencing defensive response that they elicit
in their hosts, because this response is speciﬁcally triggered by
double-stranded or highly structured single-stranded RNAs (see
for reviews Carthew and Sontheimer, 2009; Llave, 2010). The evi-
dence supporting this notion is compelling and includes detection
and characterization in plants infected by members of both fam-
ilies of viroid-derived small RNAs (vd-sRNAs) with the typical
properties of the small interfering (si) and micro (mi) RNAs, which
by loading the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), guide it
against speciﬁc targets (see for a review Flores et al., 2011a). Some
of the vd-sRNAs may be relevant for pathogenesis. Pertinent to

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 9

Flores et al.

Viroids: from structure to function

this context is an extreme albinism termed peach calico (PC)
induced by PLMVd variants of 348–351 nt containing a speciﬁc
insertion of 12–14 nt, which interestingly, folds into a hairpin
capped by a U-rich tetraloop (Malﬁtano et al., 2003; Rodio et al.,
2006; Figure 1). Recent evidence indicates that PC – manifested
at the cell level in altered plastids with irregular shape and size,
and with rudimentary thylakoids resembling proplastids (Rodio
et al., 2007) – is possibly induced via RNA silencing by two 21-nt
vd-sRNAs that contain the speciﬁc insertion and prime RISC for
cleaving the mRNA coding for the chloroplastic heat-shock pro-
tein 90 (Navarro et al., 2012a). Therefore, PC appears incited by
the primary rather than by the secondary structure of the spe-
ciﬁc insertion, with its folding into a hairpin perhaps affording
additional stability to the motif. These results support a previous
proposal (Papaefthimiou et al., 2001; Wang et al., 2004), but do
not exclude alternative mechanisms of viroid pathogenesis based
on structural motifs of the genomic RNA directly interacting with
still unidentiﬁed host factors (Owens et al., 1996; Schmitz and
Riesner, 1998; De la Peña et al., 1999; see for reviews Owens and
Hammond, 2009; Navarro et al., 2012b).

To conclude, the two most prominent structural features of
viroids – circularity and compact folding – are also displayed by

the RNA of human hepatitis delta virus (HDV), thus illustrating
a remarkable example of convergent evolution between plant
and animal systems. Like in the family Pospiviroidae, HDV RNA
adopts a rod-like secondary structure and replicates in the nucleus
through a rolling-circle mechanism involving RNA polymerase II,
and like in the family Avsunviroidae, replication is also mediated by
ribozymes (although of a non-hammerhead class; see for reviews
Taylor and Pelchat, 2010; Flores et al., 2011b). Therefore, structural
similarity has a functional correlate, highlighting that additional
efforts focusing in the ultimate goal of elucidating RNA structure
in vivo should certainly pay off.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. J. A. Daròs for critical reading and suggestions, Dr.
B. Ding for kindly providing Figures 4 and 5, and Dr. M. de la
Peña for kindly providing Figure 6. Research in Ricardo FLores
laboratory is presently supported by grant BFU2011-28443 from
the Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia (MEC) of Spain. During
this work Pedro Serra has been supported by postdoctoral con-
tracts from the Generalitat Valenciana (APOSTD/2010, program
VALi+d) and the MEC (program Juan de la Cierva), and Soﬁa
Minoia by a predoctoral fellowship from the MEC.

REFERENCES
Abraitiene, A., Zhao, Y., and Hammond,
R. (2008). Nuclear targeting by frag-
mentation of
the potato spindle
tuber viroid genome. Biochem. Bio-
phys. Res. Commun. 368, 470–475.

Ambrós, S., Hernández, C., Desvi-
gnes, J. C., and Flores, R. (1998).
Genomic structure of three pheno-
typically different isolates of peach
latent mosaic viroid: implications of
the existence of constraints limiting
the heterogeneity of viroid quasi-
species. J. Virol. 72, 7397–7406.

Ambrós, S., Hernández, C., and Flo-
res, R. (1999). Rapid generation
of genetic heterogeneity in proge-
nies from individual cDNA clones
of peach latent mosaic viroid in
its natural host. J. Gen. Virol. 80,
2239–2252.

Baumstark, T., Schröder, A. R., and Ries-
ner, D. (1997). Viroid processing:
switch from cleavage to ligation is
driven by a change from a tetraloop
to a loop E conformation. EMBO J.
16, 599–610.

Bojic, T., Beeharry, Y., Zhang, D. J.,
and Pelchat, M. (2012). Tomato
RNA polymerase II interacts with
the rod-like conformation of the
left terminal domain of the potato
spindle tuber viroid positive RNA
genome. J. Gen. Virol. (in press).
doi:10.1099/vir.0.041574–41570

Branch, A. D., Benenfeld, B. J., and
Robertson, H. D. (1985). Ultraviolet
light-induced crosslinking reveals a
unique region of local tertiary struc-
ture in potato spindle tuber viroid

and HeLa 5S RNA. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 82, 6590–6594.

Branch, A. D., Benenfeld, B. J., and
Robertson, H. D. (1988). Evidence
for a single rolling circle in the
replication of potato spindle tuber
viroid. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
85, 9128–9132.

Branch, A. D., and Robertson, H.
D. (1984). A replication cycle for
viroids and other small infectious
RNAs. Science 223, 450–454.

Bussière, F., Ouellet,

J., Côté, F.,
Lévesque, D., and Perreault, J. P.
(2000). Mapping in solution shows
the peach latent mosaic viroid to
possess a new pseudoknot in a com-
plex, branched secondary structure.
J. Virol. 74, 2647–2654.

secondary hairpin II

Candresse, T., Góra-Sochackab, A.,
and Zagórski, W. (2001). Restora-
tion of
is
associated with
of
infectivity of a non-viable recom-
binant
75,
29–34.

viroid. Virus Res.

restoration

Carbonell, A., De la Peña, M., Flo-
res, R., and Gago, S. (2006). Effects
of the trinucleotide preceding the
self-cleavage site on eggplant latent
viroid hammerheads: differences in
co- and post-transcriptional self-
cleavage may explain the lack of
trinucleotide AUC in most natural
hammerheads. Nucleic Acids Res. 34,
5613–5622.

Carbonell, A., Flores, R., and Gago, S.
(2011). Trans-cleaving hammerhead
ribozymes with tertiary stabilizing
motifs: in vitro and in vivo activity

against a structured viroid RNA.
Nucleic Acids Res. 39, 2432–2444.

Carthew, R. W., and Sontheimer, E.
J. (2009). Origins and mechanisms
of miRNAs and siRNAs. Cell 136,
642–655.

Chi, Y.

I., Martick, M., Lares, M.,
Kim, R., Scott, W. G., and Kim,
(2008). Capturing ham-
S. H.
merhead ribozyme structures
in
general
action
base catalysis. PLoS Biol. 6, e234.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060234

by modulating

Daròs, J. A., and Flores, R. (2004). Ara-
bidopsis thaliana has the enzymatic
machinery for replicating represen-
tative viroid species of the family
Pospiviroidae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 101, 6792–6797.

Daròs, J. A., Marcos, J. F., Hernández,
C., and Flores, R. (1994). Replication
of avocado sunblotch viroid: evi-
dence for a symmetric pathway with
two rolling circles and hammerhead
ribozyme processing. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 12813–12817.

Davies,

J. W., Kaesberg, P.,

and
Diener, T. O. (1974). Potato spin-
dle tuber viroid. XII. An investiga-
tion of viroid RNA as a messenger
for protein synthesis. Virology 61,
281–286.

De la Peña, M., and Flores, R. (2001).
An extra nucleotide in the consensus
catalytic core of a viroid hammer-
head ribozyme: implications for the
design of more efﬁcient ribozymes.
J. Biol. Chem. 276, 34586–34593.

De la Peña, M., and Flores, R. (2002).
Chrysanthemum chlorotic mottle

viroid RNA: dissection of the patho-
genicity determinant and compara-
tive ﬁtness of symptomatic and non-
symptomatic variants. J. Mol. Biol.
321, 411–421.

De la Peña, M., Gago, S., and Flores,
R. (2003). Peripheral regions of nat-
ural hammerhead ribozymes greatly
increase their self-cleavage activity.
EMBO J. 22, 5561–5570.

De la Peña, M., Navarro, B., and Flo-
res, R. (1999). Mapping the mole-
cular determinant of pathogenicity
in a hammerhead viroid: a tetraloop
within the in vivo branched RNA
conformation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 96, 9960–9965.

Delgado, S., Martínez de Alba, E.,
Hernández, C., and Flores, R. (2005).
A short double-stranded RNA motif
of peach latent mosaic viroid con-
tains the initiation and the self-
cleavage
sites of both polarity
strands. J. Virol. 79, 12934–12943.

Diener, T. O. (1971). “A plant virus
with properties of a free nucleic
acid: potato spindle tuber viroid,”
in Comparative Virology, eds K.
Maramorosch and E. Kurstak (New
York: Academic Press), 433–478.

Diener, T. O. (1972). Potato spin-
dle tuber viroid VIII. Correlation
of infectivity with a UV-absorbing
component and thermal denatura-
tion properties of the RNA. Virology
50, 606–609.

Diener, T. O. (1986). Viroid processing:
a model involving the central con-
served region and hairpin I. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 83, 58–62.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 10

Flores et al.

Viroids: from structure to function

Diener, T. O.

(2003). Discovering
viroids: a personal perspective. Nat.
Rev. Microbiol. 1, 75–80.

Diener, T. O., and Raymer, W. B. (1967).
Potato spindle tuber virus: a plant
virus with properties of a free nucleic
acid. Science 158, 378–381.

Ding, B. (2009). The biology of viroid-
host interactions. Annu. Rev. Phy-
topathol. 47, 105–131.

Ding,

B.

self-
(2010). Viroids:
and
fast-
replicating, mobile,
regulatory
evolving
noncoding
RNAs. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. RNA 1,
362–375.

Dingley, A. J., Steger, G., Esters, B.,
Riesner, D., and Grzesiek, S. (2003).
Structural characterization of
the
69 nucleotide potato spindle tuber
viroid left-terminal domain by NMR
and thermodynamic analysis. J. Mol.
Biol. 334, 751–767.

Dubé, A., Baumstark, T., Bisaillon, M.,
and Perreault, J. P. (2010). The RNA
strands of the plus and minus polar-
ities of peach latent mosaic viroid
fold into different structures. RNA
16, 463–473.

Dubé, A., Bolduc, F., Bisaillon, M., and
Perreault, J. P. (2011). Mapping stud-
ies of the peach latent mosaic viroid
reveal novel structural features. Mol.
Plant Pathol. 12, 688–701.

Dufour, D., De la Peña, M., Gago,
S., Flores, R., and Gallego,
J.
(2009). Structure-function analysis
of the ribozymes of chrysanthemum
chlorotic mottle viroid: a loop-loop
interaction motif conserved in most
natural hammerheads. Nucleic Acids
Res. 37, 368–381.

Eiras, M., Kitajima, E. W., Flores, R., and
Daròs, J. A. (2007). Existence in vivo
of the loop E motif in potato spindle
tuber viroid RNA. Arch. Virol. 152,
1389–1393.

Eiras, M., Nohales, M. A., Kitajima, E.
W., Flores, R., and Daròs, J. A. (2011).
Ribosomal protein L5 and transcrip-
tion factor IIIA from Arabidopsis
thaliana bind in vitro speciﬁcally
potato spindle tuber viroid RNA.
Arch. Virol. 156, 529–533.

Fadda, Z., Daròs, J. A., Fagoaga, C., Flo-
res, R., and Duran-Vila, N. (2003a).
Eggplant latent viroid (ELVd): can-
didate type species
for a new
genus within family Avsunviroidae
(hammerhead viroids). J. Virol. 77,
6528–6532.

Fadda, Z., Daròs, J. A., Flores, R., and
Durán-Vila, N. (2003b). Identiﬁca-
tion in eggplant of a variant of cit-
rus exocortis viroid (CEVd) with
a 96 nucleotide duplication in the
right terminal region of the rod-like
secondary structure. Virus Res. 97,
145–149.

Fekih Hassen, I., Massart, S., Motard,
J., Roussel, S., Parisi, O., Kummert,
J., Fakhfakh, H., Marrakchi, M., Per-
reault, J. P., and Jijakli, M. H. (2007).
Molecular features of new peach
latent mosaic viroid variants sug-
gest that recombination may have
contributed to the evolution of this
infectious RNA. Virology 360, 50–57.
Flores, R., Daròs, J. A., and Hernán-
dez, C. (2000). The Avsunviroidae
family: viroids with hammerhead
ribozymes. Adv. Virus Res. 55,
271–323.

Flores, R., Di Serio, F., and Hernández,
C. (1997). Viroids: the noncoding
genomes. Semin. Virol. 8, 65–73.

Flores, R., Di Serio, F., Navarro, B.,
Duran-Vila, N., and Owens, R. A.
(2011a). “Viroids and viroid diseases
of plants,” in Studies in Viral Ecology,
Vol. 1, Microbial and Botanical Host
Systems, ed. C. J. Hurst (Hoboken,
NJ: John Wiley & Sons), 311–346.

Flores, R., Grubb, D., Elleuch, A.,
Nohales, M. A., Delgado, S., and
Gago, S.
(2011b). Rolling-circle
replication of viroids, viroid-like
satellite RNAs and hepatitis delta
virus: variations on a theme. RNA
Biol. 8, 200–206.

Flores, R., Gas, M. E., Molina-Serrano,
D., Nohales, M. A., Carbonell, A.,
Gago, S., De la Peña, M., and
Daròs, J. A. (2009). Viroid repli-
cation: rolling-circles, enzymes and
ribozymes. Viruses 1, 317–334.

Flores, R., Hernández, C., De la Peña,
M., Vera, A., and Daròs, J. A. (2001).
Hammerhead ribozyme structure
and function in plant RNA replica-
tion. Meth. Enzymol. 341, 540–552.
Flores, R., Hernández, C., Martínez de
Alba, E., Daròs, J. A., and Di Serio,
F. (2005). Viroids and viroid-host
interactions. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol.
43, 117–139.

Flores, R., and Semancik, J. S. (1982).
Properties of a cell-free system for
synthesis of citrus exocortis viroid.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 79,
6285–6288.

Fresco, J. R., Alberts, B. M., and Doty,
P. (1960). Some molecular details of
the secondary structure of ribonu-
cleic acid. Nature 188, 98–101.

Gago, S., De la Peña, M., and Flores, R.
(2005). A kissing-loop interaction in
a hammerhead viroid RNA critical
for its in vitro folding and in vivo
viability. RNA 11, 1073–1083.

Gago, S., Elena, S. F., Flores, R., and
Sanjuán, R. (2009). Extremely high
variability of a hammerhead viroid.
Science 323, 1308.

Gas, M. E., Hernández, C., Flores,
R., and Daròs, J. A. (2007). Pro-
cessing of nuclear viroids in vivo:

an interplay between RNA con-
formations. PLoS Pathog. 3, e182.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.0030182

Gas, M. E., Molina-Serrano, D., Hernán-
dez, C., Flores, R., and Daròs,
(2008). Monomeric linear
J. A.
RNA of
citrus exocortis viroid
resulting from processing in vivo
(cid:48)
has 5
-
hydroxyl termini: implications for
the ribonuclease and RNA ligase
involved in replication. J. Virol. 82,
10321–10325.

-phosphomonoester and 3

(cid:48)

Gast, F. U., Kempe, D., and Sänger, H. L.
(1998). The dimerization domain of
potato spindle tuber viroid, a pos-
sible hallmark for infectious RNA.
Biochemistry 37, 14098–14107.

Gast, F. U., Kempe, D., Spieker, R. L.,
and Sänger, H. L. (1996). Secondary
structure probing of potato spindle
tuber viroid (PSTVd) and sequence
comparison with other small path-
ogenic RNA replicons provides evi-
dence for central non-canonical
base-pairs, large A-rich loops, and
a terminal branch. J. Mol. Biol. 262,
652–670.

Gómez, G., and Pallás, V. (2012). Stud-
ies on subcellular compartmental-
ization of plant pathogenic non
coding RNAs give new insights
into the intracellular RNA-trafﬁc
mechanisms. Plant Physiol. 159,
558–564.

Góra, A., Candresse, T., and Zagórski,
W. (1994). Analysis of the popula-
tion structure of three phenotypi-
cally different PSTVd isolates. Arch.
Virol. 138, 233–245.

Gozmanova, M., Denti, M. A., Minkov,
I. N., Tsagris, M., and Tabler, M.
(2003). Characterization of the RNA
motif responsible for the speciﬁc
interaction of potato spindle tuber
viroid RNA (PSTVd) and the tomato
protein Virp1. Nucleic Acids Res. 31,
5534–5543.

Grill, L. K., and Semancik, J. S. (1978).
RNA sequences complementary to
citrus exocortis viroid in nucleic acid
preparations from infected Gynura
aurantiaca. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 75, 896–900.

Gross, H. J., Domdey, H., Lossow, C.,
Jank, P., Raba, M., Alberty, H., and
Sänger, H. L. (1978). Nucleotide
sequence and secondary structure of
potato spindle tuber viroid. Nature
273, 203–208.

Gross, H. J., Krupp, G., Domdey, H.,
Raba, M.,
Jank, P., Lossow, C.,
Alberty, H., Ramm, K., and Sanger,
H. L. (1982). Nucleotide sequence
and secondary structure of cit-
rus exocortis and chrysanthemum
stunt viroid. Eur. J. Biochem. 121,
249–257.

Gutell, R. R., Larsen, N., and Woese, C.
R. (1994). Lessons from an evolv-
ing rRNA: 16S and 23S rRNA struc-
tures from a comparative perspec-
tive. Microbiol. Rev. 58, 10–26.

Hadidi, A., Flores, R., Randles, J. W.,
and Semancik, J. S. (2003). Viroids.
Collingwood: CSIRO Publishing.

Haseloff,

J., Mohamed, N. A., and
Symons, R. H. (1982). Viroid RNAs
of
the cadang-cadang disease of
coconuts. Nature 229, 316–321.

Haseloff, J., and Symons, R. H. (1981).
Chrysanthemum stunt viroid: pri-
mary sequence and secondary struc-
ture. Nucleic Acids Res. 9, 2741–2752.
Henco, K., Sänger, H. L., and Riesner,
D. (1979). Fine structure melting of
viroids as studied by kinetic meth-
ods. Nucleic Acids Res. 6, 3041–3059.
Hernández, C., Di Serio, F., Ambrós, S.,
Daròs, J. A., and Flores, R. (2006).
An element of the tertiary structure
of peach latent mosaic viroid RNA
revealed by UV irradiation. J. Virol.
80, 9336–9340.

Hernández, C., Elena, S. F., Moya, A.,
and Flores, R. (1992). Pear blis-
ter canker viroid is a member of
the apple scar skin viroid sub-
group (apscaviroids) and also has
sequence homologies with viroids
from other subgroups. J. Gen. Virol.
73, 2503–2507.

Hernández, C., and Flores, R. (1992).
Plus and minus RNAs of peach
latent mosaic
viroid self-cleave
in vitro via hammerhead structures.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 89,
3711–3715.

Hutchins, C., Rathjen, P. D., Forster,
A. C., and Symons, R. H. (1986).
Self-cleavage of plus and minus
RNA transcripts of avocado sun-
blotch viroid. Nucleic Acids Res. 14,
3627–3640.

Keese, P., and Symons, R. H. (1985).
Domains in viroids: evidence of
intermolecular RNA rearrange-
ments and their contribution to
viroid evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 82, 4582–4586.

Khvorova, A., Lescoute, A., Westhof, E.,
and Jayasena, S. D. (2003). Sequence
elements outside the hammerhead
ribozyme catalytic core enable intra-
cellular activity. Nat. Struct. Biol. 10,
708–712.

Kolonko, N., Bannach, O., Ascher-
mann, K., Hu, K. H., Moors, M,
Schmitz, M., Steger, G., and Riesner,
D. (2006). Transcription of potato
spindle tuber viroid by RNA poly-
merase II starts in the left terminal
loop. Virology 347, 392–404.

Koltunow, A. M., and Rezaian, M. A.
(1988). Grapevine yellow speckle
viroid – structural features of a new

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 11

Flores et al.

Viroids: from structure to function

viroid group. Nucleic Acids Res. 16,
849–864.

Koltunow, A. M., and Rezaian, M.
A. (1989). Grapevine viroid-1B, a
new member of the apple scar skin
viroid group contains the left termi-
nal region of tomato planta macho
viroid. Virology 170, 575–578.

Leontis, N. B., Stombaugh,

J., and
Westhof, E. (2002). Motif predic-
lessons
tion in ribosomal RNAs:
and
automated
motif prediction in homologous
RNA molecules. Biochimie
84,
961–973.

prospects

for

Leontis, N. B., and Westhof, E. (2001).
Geometric nomenclature and classi-
ﬁcation of RNA base pairs. RNA 7,
499–512.

Llave, C. (2010). Virus-derived small
interfering RNAs at the core of plant-
virus interactions. Trends Plant Sci.
15, 701–707.

Loss, P., Schmitz, M., Steger, G.,
and Riesner, D. (1991). Formation
of a thermodynamically metastable
structure containing hairpin II is
critical for infectivity of potato spin-
dle tuber viroid RNA. EMBO J. 10,
719–727.

MacRae, I. J., and Doudna, J. A. (2007).
Ribonuclease revisited:
structural
insights into ribonuclease III family
enzymes. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 17,
1–8.

Malﬁtano, M., Di Serio, F., Covelli,
L., Ragozzino, A., Hernández, C.,
and Flores, R. (2003). Peach latent
mosaic viroid variants
inducing
peach calico contain a characteris-
tic insertion that is responsible for
this symptomatology. Virology 313,
492–501.

Maniataki, E., Tabler, M., and Tsagris,
M. (2003). Viroid RNA systemic
spread may depend on the interac-
tion of a 71-nucleotide bulged hair-
pin with the host protein VirP1. RNA
9, 346–354.

Martick, M., and Scott, W. G. (2006).
Tertiary contacts distant from the
active site prime a ribozyme for
catalysis. Cell 126, 309–320.

Martínez, F., Marqués, J., Salvador, M.
L., and Daròs, J. A. (2009). Muta-
tional analysis of eggplant latent
viroid RNA processing in Chlamy-
domonas reinhardtii chloroplast. J.
Gen. Virol. 90, 3057–3065.

Mathews, D. H., and Turner, D. H.
(2006). Prediction of RNA sec-
ondary structure by free energy min-
imization. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.
16, 270–278.

McClements, W. L., and Kaesberg, P.
(1977). Size and secondary struc-
ture of potato spindle tuber viroid.
Virology 76, 477–484.

McInnes, J. L., and Symons, R. H.
(1991). “Comparative structure of
viroids and their rapid detection
using radioactive and nonradioac-
tive nucleic acid probes,” in Viroids
and Satellites: Molecular Parasites
at
the Frontier of Life, ed. K.
Maramorosch (Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press), 21–58.

Merino, E. J., Wilkinson, K. A., Cough-
lan, J. L., and Weeks, K. M. (2005).
RNA structure analysis at single
nucleotide resolution by selective
(cid:48)
2
-hydroxyl acylation and primer
extension (SHAPE). J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 127, 4223–4231.

Motard, J., Bolduc, F., Thompson, D.,
and Perreault, J. P. (2008). The peach
latent mosaic viroid replication ini-
tiation site is located at a universal
position that appears to be deﬁned
by a conserved sequence. Virology
373, 362–375.

Mühlbach, H. P., and Sänger, H. L.
(1979). Viroid replication is inhib-
ited by α-amanitin. Nature 278,
185–188.

Navarro, B., and Flores, R. (1997).
Chrysanthemum chlorotic mottle
viroid: unusual
structural prop-
erties of a subgroup of viroids
with
ribozymes.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94,
11262–11267.

hammerhead

Navarro, B., Gisel, A., Rodio, M. E.,
Degado, S., Flores, R., and Di Serio,
F. (2012a). Small RNAs contain-
ing the pathogenic determinant of a
chloroplast-replicating viroid guide
the degradation of a host mRNA as
predicted by RNA silencing. Plant
J.
(in press). doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2313X.2012.04940.x

Navarro, B., Gisel, A., Rodio, M. E.,
Degado, S., Flores, R., and Di Serio, F.
(2012b). Viroids: how to infect a host
and cause disease without encoding
proteins. Biochimie 94, 1474–1480.
Navarro, J. A., and Flores, R. (2000).
the initiation
Characterization of
sites of both polarity strands of a
viroid RNA reveals a motif con-
served in sequence and structure.
EMBO J. 19, 2662–2670.

Navarro, J. A., Vera, A., and Flores,
R. (2000). A chloroplastic RNA
polymerase resistant to tagetitoxin
is involved in replication of avo-
cado sunblotch viroid. Virology 268,
218–225.

Nohales, M. A., Molina-Serrano, D.,
Flores, R., and Daròs, J. A. (2012).
Involvement of the chloroplastic iso-
form of tRNA ligase in the replica-
tion of the viroids belonging to the
family Avsunviroidae. J. Virol. doi:
10.1128/JVI.00629-12. [Epub ahead
of print].

Nussinov, R., and Jacobson,A. B. (1980).
Fast algorithm for predicting the sec-
ondary structure of single-stranded
RNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 77,
6309–6313.

Owens, R. A., and Hammond, R.
W. (2009). Viroid pathogenicity:
one process, many faces. Viruses 1,
298–316.

Owens, R. A., Sano, T., Feldstein, P. A.,
Hu, Y., and Steger, G. (2003). Identi-
ﬁcation of a novel structural inter-
action in columnea latent viroid.
Virology 313, 604–614.

Owens, R. A., Steger, G., Hu, Y., Fels,
A., Hammond, R. W., and Riesner,
D. (1996). RNA structural features
responsible for potato spindle tuber
viroid pathogenicity. Virology 222,
144–158.

Paillart, J. C., Shehu-Xhilaga, M., Mar-
quet, R., and Mak, J. (2004). Dimer-
ization of retroviral RNA genomes:
an inseparable pair. Nat. Rev. Micro-
biol. 2, 461–472.

Papaefthimiou,

I., Hamilton, A.

J.,
Denti, M. A., Baulcombe, D. C.,
Tsagris, M., and Tabler, M. (2001).
Replicating potato spindle tuber
viroid RNA is accompanied by short
RNA fragments that are charac-
teristic of post-transcriptional gene
silencing. Nucleic Acids Res. 29,
2395–2400.

Pelchat, M., Levesque, D., Ouellet,
J., Laurendeau, S., Levesque, S.,
Lehoux, J., Thompson, D. A., East-
well, K. C., Skrzeczkowski, L. J., and
Perreault, J. P. (2000). Sequencing of
peach latent mosaic viroid variants
from nine North American peach
cultivars shows that this RNA folds
into a complex secondary structure.
Virology 271, 37–45.

Polivka, H., Staub, U., and Gross, H. J.
(1996). Variation of viroid proﬁles
in individual grapevine plants: novel
grapevine, yellow speckle viroid 1
mutants show alterations of hairpin
I. J. Gen. Virol. 77, 155–161.

Prody, G. A., Bakos, J. T., Buzayan, J.
M., Schneider, I. R., and Bruening,
G. (1986). Autolytic processing of
dimeric plant virus satellite RNA.
Science 231, 1577–1580.

Puchta, H., Ramm, K., and Sänger, H.
L. (1988). The molecular structure
of hop latent viroid (HLV), a new
viroid occurring worldwide in hops.
Nucleic Acids Res. 16, 4197–4216.

Qi, Y., and Ding, B. (2003). Inhibition of
cell growth and shoot development
by a speciﬁc nucleotide sequence in
a noncoding viroid RNA. Plant Cell
15, 1360–1374.

Qi, Y., Pélissier, T., Itaya, A., Hunt,
E., Wassenegger, M., and Ding, B.
(2004). Direct role of a viroid RNA

motif in mediating directional RNA
trafﬁcking across a speciﬁc cellular
boundary. Plant Cell 16, 1741–1752.
Qu, F., Heinrich, C., Loss, P., Ste-
ger, G., Tien, P., and Riesner, D.
(1995). Multiple pathways of rever-
sion in viroids for conservation of
structural domains. EMBO J. 12,
2129–2139.

Riesner, D. (1991). Viroids: from ther-
modynamics to cellular structure
and function. Mol. Plant Microbe
Interact. 4, 122–131.

Riesner, D., Henco, K., Rokohl, U., Klotz,
G., Kleinschmidt, A. K., Domdey, H.,
Jank, P., Gross, H. J., and Sänger, H. L.
(1979). Structure and structure for-
mation of viroids. J. Mol. Biol. 133,
85–115.

Rodio, M. E., Delgado, S., De Stradis, A.
E., Gómez, M. D., Flores, R., and Di
Serio, F. (2007). A viroid RNA with
a speciﬁc structural motif inhibits
chloroplast development. Plant Cell
19, 3610–3626.

Rodio, M. E., Delgado, S., Flores, R.,
and Di Serio, F. (2006). Variants of
peach latent mosaic viroid inducing
peach calico: uneven distribution in
infected plants and requirements of
the insertion containing the patho-
genicity determinant. J. Gen. Virol.
87, 231–240.

are

(1976). Viroids

Sänger, H. L., Klotz, G., Riesner, D.,
J., and Kleinschmidt,
Gross, H.
A.
single-
stranded covalently-closed circu-
lar RNA molecules
existing as
highly base-paired rod-like struc-
tures. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 73,
3852–3856.

Sano, T., Candresse, T., Hammond, R.
W., Diener, T. O., and Owens, R.
A. (1992). Identiﬁcation of multiple
structural domains regulating viroid
pathogenicity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 89, 10104–10108.

Schindler, I. M., and Mühlbach, H.
P. (1992). Involvement of nuclear
DNA-dependent RNA polymerases
in potato spindle tuber viroid repli-
cation: a reevaluation. Plant Sci. 84,
221–229.

Schmitz,A., and Riesner, D. (1998). Cor-
relation between bending of the VM
region and pathogenicity of different
potato spindle tuber viroid strains.
RNA 4, 1295–1303.

Schroder, A. R. W., and Riesner, D.
(2002). Detection and analysis of
hairpin II, an essential metastable
structural element in viroid replica-
tion intermediates. Nucleic Acids Res.
30, 3349–3359.

Semancik, J. S., Conejero, V., and Ger-
(1977). Citrus exocortis
hart,
viroid: survey of protein synthesis
in Xenopus laevis oocytes following

J.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 12

Flores et al.

Viroids: from structure to function

addition of viroid RNA. Virology 80,
218–221.

Semancik,

J. S., Szychowski,

J. A.,
Rakowski, A. G., and Symons, R. H.
(1994). A stable 463 nucleotide vari-
ant of citrus exocortis viroid pro-
duced by terminal repeats. J. Gen.
Virol. 75, 727–732.

Sogo, J. M., Koller, T., and Diener, T. O.
(1973). Potato spindle tuber viroid
X. Visualization and size determina-
tion by electron microscopy. Virol-
ogy 55, 70–80.

Symons, R. H. (1981). Avocado sun-
blotch viroid: primary sequence
struc-
and proposed secondary
ture. Nucleic
9,
6527–6537.

Acids

Res.

Takeda, R., and Ding, B. (2009). Viroid
intercellular trafﬁcking: RNA motifs,
cellular factors and broad impacts.
Viruses 1, 210–221.

Takeda, R., Petrov, A.

I., Leontis,
N. B., and Ding, B. (2011). A
three-dimensional RNA motif
in
potato spindle tuber viroid medi-
ates trafﬁcking from palisade meso-
phyll to spongy mesophyll in Nico-
tiana benthamiana. Plant Cell 23,
258–272.

Taylor, J., and Pelchat, M. (2010). Ori-
gin of hepatitis delta virus. Future
Microbiol. 5, 393–402.

Tsagris, E. M., Martínez de Alba, A. E.,
Gozmanova, M., and Kalantidis, K.
(2008). Viroids. Cell. Microbiol. 10,
2168–2179.

Visvader,

J. E., Forster, A. C., and
Symons, R. H. (1985).
Infectiv-
ity and in vitro mutagenesis of
monomeric cDNA clones of citrus
exocortis viroid indicates the site

of processing of viroid precursors.
Nucleic Acids Res. 13, 5843–5856.

Wang, M. B., Bian, X. Y., Wu, L. M., Liu,
L. X., Smith, N. A., Isenegger, D., Wu,
R. M., Masuta, C., Vance, V. B., Wat-
son, J. M., Rezaian, A., Dennis, E. S.,
and Waterhouse, P. M. (2004). On
the role of RNA silencing in the path-
ogenicity and evolution of viroids
and viral satellites. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 101, 3275–3280.

Wang, Y., Zhong, X., Itaya, A., and Ding,
B. (2007). Evidence for the existence
of the loop E motif of potato spin-
dle tuber viroid in vivo. J. Virol. 81,
2074–2077.

Wassenegger, M., Heimes, S., and
Sänger, H. L. (1994). An infectious
viroid RNA replicon evolved from
an in vitro-generated non-infectious
viroid deletion mutant via a comple-
mentary deletion in vivo. EMBO J.
13, 6172–6177.
Wassenegger, M.,

Spieker, R. L.,
Thalmeir, S., Gast, F. U., Riedel, L.,
and Sänger, H. L. (1996). A single
nucleotide
substitution converts
potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTVd)
from a noninfectious to an infec-
tious RNA for Nicotiana tabacum.
Virology 226, 191–197.

Weeks, K. M., and Mauger, D. M.
(2011). Exploring RNA structural
codes with SHAPE chemistry. Acc.
Chem. Res. 44, 1280–1291.

Woo,Y.-M., Itaya,A., Owens, R. A., Tang,
L., Hammond, R. W., Chou, H.-C.,
Lai, M. M. C., and Ding, B. (1999).
Characterization of nuclear import
of potato spindle tuber viroid RNA
in permeabilized protoplasts. Plant
J. 17, 627–635.

Wu, Q., Wang, Y., Cao, M., Pantaleo, V.,
Burgyan, J., Lib, W. X., and Ding, S.
W. (2012). Homology-independent
discovery of replicating pathogenic
circular RNAs by deep sequencing
and a new computational algorithm.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109,
3938–3943.

Xu, W., Bolduc, F., Hong, N., and Per-
reault, J. P. (2012). The use of a
combination of computer-assisted
structure prediction and SHAPE
probing to elucidate the secondary
structures of ﬁve viroids. Mol.
Plant Pathol. (in press). doi:10.1111
/j.1364-3703.2011.00776.x

Yazarlou, A.,

Jafarpour, B., Tarighi,
S., Habili, N., and Randles,
J.
W. (2012). New Iranian and Aus-
tralian peach latent mosaic viroid
variants and evidence for rapid
sequence evolution. Arch. Virol. 157,
343–347.

Zhao, Y., Owens, R. A., and Hammond,
R. W. (2001). Use of a vector based
on potato virus X in a whole plant
assay to demonstrate nuclear target-
ing of potato spindle tuber viroid. J.
Gen. Virol. 82, 1491–1497.

Zhong, X., Archual, A. J., Amin, A. A.,
and Ding, B. (2008). A genomic map
of viroid RNA motifs critical for
replication and systemic trafﬁcking.
Plant Cell 20, 35–47.

Zhong, X., Leontis, N., Qiang, S., Itaya,
A., Qi, Y., Boris-Lawrie, K., and
Ding, B. (2006). Tertiary structural
and functional analysis of a viroid
RNA motif by isostericity matrix
and mutagenesis reveal
its essen-
tial role in replication. J. Virol. 80,
8566–8581.

Zhong, X., Tao, X., Stombaugh,

J.,
Leontis, N., and Ding, B. (2007).
Tertiary structure
and function
of an RNA motif
required for
plant vascular entry to initiate
systemic trafﬁcking. EMBO J. 26,
3836–3846.

Zuker, M., and Stiegler, P. (1981). Opti-
mal computer folding of lare RNA
sequences using thermodynamics
and auxiliary information. Nucleic
Acids Res. 9, 133–148.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 02 May 2012; paper pend-
ing published: 16 May 2012; accepted:
28 May 2012; published online: 18 June
2012.
Citation: Flores R, Serra P, Minoia
S, Di Serio F and Navarro B (2012)
Viroids: from genotype to phenotype just
relying on RNA sequence and struc-
tural motifs. Front. Microbio. 3:217. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00217
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Virology, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Flores, Serra, Minoia,
Di Serio and Navarro. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 217 | 13

