REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 14 February 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00031

Post-translational modiﬁcations of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus regulatory
proteins – SUMO and KSHV

Mel Campbell and Yoshihiro Izumiya*

Department of Dermatology, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA

Edited by:
Keiji Ueda, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Japan
Reviewed by:
Keiji Ueda, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Japan
Masahiro Fujimuro, Kyoto
Pharmaceutical University, Japan
*Correspondence:
Yoshihiro Izumiya, Department of
Dermatology, University of California
Davis Cancer Center, University of
California Davis, Research III Room
2400, 4645 2nd Avenue, Sacramento,
CA 95817, USA.
e-mail: yizumiya@ucdavis.edu

KSHV latency can be envisioned as an outcome that is balanced between factors that pro-
mote viral gene expression and lytic replication against those that facilitate gene silencing
and establish or maintain latency. A large body of work has focused on the activities of
the key viral regulatory proteins involved in KSHV latent or lytic states. Moreover, recent
studies have also begun to document the importance of epigenetic landscape evolution
of the KSHV viral genome during latency and reactivation. However, one area of KSHV
molecular virology that remains largely unanswered is the precise role of post-translational
modiﬁcations on the activities of viral factors that function during latency and reactivation.
In this review, we will summarize the post-translational modiﬁcations associated with three
viral factors whose activities contribute to the viral state. The viral proteins discussed are
the two major KSHV encoded transcription factors, K-Rta (KSHV replication and transcrip-
tional activator) and K-bZIP (KSHV basic leucine zipper) and the viral latency-associated
nuclear antigen (LANA). A special emphasis will be placed on the role of the sumoylation
pathway in the modulation of the KSHV lifecycle. Newly uncovered small ubiquitin-like
modiﬁer (SUMO)-associated properties of LANA and K-Rta will also be presented, namely
LANA histone targeting SUMO E3 ligase activity and K-Rta SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligase
function.

Keywords: KSHV, LANA, K-bZIP, K-Rta, SUMO, post-translational modiﬁcation, transcription

INTRODUCTION
Reactivation from a latent state is an important feature of infection
and disease caused by many herpesviruses. Although the molec-
ular mechanisms of reactivation have been extensively studied,
gaps exist in our current knowledge concerning the processes by
which these viruses establish, maintain, and emerge from latency.
KSHV latency can be envisioned as the outcome balanced between
factors that require viral gene expression and lytic replication
against those that are essential for establishment and/or main-
tenance of latent infection. In this review, we will provide an
update on three viral factors whose activities contribute to the
viral state with an emphasis on post-translational modiﬁcations
that modulate multiple functions of these factors. The viral pro-
teins discussed are the two major KSHV encoded transcription
factors, K-Rta and K-bZIP and the viral latency-associated nuclear
antigen (LANA).

K-bZIP
K-bZIP (K8) is an early lytic gene and is among the earliest
viral genes expressed after acute infection or during reactivation
from latency. K-bZIP is a 237-amino acid protein containing a
basic and leucine zipper domain and is the structural and posi-
tional analog of Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) BZLF1 (Lin et al.,
1999). K-bZIP has been reported to be phosphorylated (Polson
et al., 2001), sumoylated (Chang et al., 2010; Lefort et al., 2010),
and acetylated (Lefort et al., 2010). K-bZIP directly associates

with K-Rta in KSHV infected cells and represses K-Rta-mediated
transactivation at a subset of KSHV promoters. This activity of
K-bZIP is subject to post-translational modulation via phos-
phorylation (Izumiya et al., 2007) and sumoylation (Izumiya
et al., 2005). As detailed below, K-bZIP repression activity on
K-Rta-mediated transactivation is regulated in an opposing man-
ner by these two post-translational modiﬁcations. While K-bZIP
repression is largely dependent on sumoylation, phosphoryla-
tion serves as a negative regulator. A schematic diagram of K-
bZIP and its post-translational modiﬁcation sites are presented in
Figure 1.

PHOSPHORYLATION
K-bZIP was reported to be phosphorylated on residues Thr 111
and Ser 167 (Polson et al., 2001; Izumiya et al., 2007). Interestingly,
these sites are contained within cellular cyclin-dependent kinase
(CDK) recognition sites with the consensus sequence (S/T)PXR
suggesting that K-bZIP may be phosphorylated by CDKs. Indeed,
K-bZIP was conﬁrmed to be a substrate for several cellular CDK–
cyclin complexes in vitro, including CDK-2/cyclin A, CDK-1/cyclin
B, and CDK-2/cyclin E (Polson et al., 2001). K-bZIP was also
found to interact with, and be a substrate for, the viral protein
kinase (vPK, ORF36). vPK is a serine/threonine protein kinase
expressed from mRNAs with early and early-late kinetics and the
major vPK phosphorylation site on K-bZIP was determined to
also be residue threonine (T) 111 (Izumiya et al., 2007). K-bZIP

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 1

Campbell and Izumiya

Post modiﬁcations of KSHV proteins

FIGURE 1 | Schematic representation of KSHV K-bZIP. K-bZIP protein
and its post-translational modiﬁcation sites as discussed in the text are
depicted. Phosphorylation (Phospho), acetylation (Ac), and sumoylation

(SUMO) sites are shown. The K-bZIP SUMO interaction motif (SIM) and
nuclear localization signal (NLS) are also indicated. Numbers indicate
amino acid position.

directly interacts with K-Rta and represses K-Rta activation of
certain K-Rta responsive promoters such as ORF57 and K-bZIP,
but not at other similarly responsive promoters such as PAN. The
functional signiﬁcance of K-bZIP T111 phosphorylation site with
respect to repression of K-Rta-mediated transactivation was exam-
ined using a mutagenesis strategy in which T111 was changed
to a non-phospho acceptor reside alanine, or to aspartic acid, a
phospho-mimetic. In co-transfection experiments with K-Rta and
a K-Rta responsive promoter construct, K-bZIP-T111D repressive
function was similar to wild-type K-bZIP, whereas K-bZIP-T111A
was a more potent repressor. Moreover, K-bZIP-T111A was found
to be more heavily sumoylated than wild-type K-bZIP or K-bZIP-
T111D and overexpression of vPK reduced the sumoylation of
wild type K-bZIP. Taken together, these results are consistent with
a model whereby phosphorylation at T111 has a negative effect
on both the extent of sumoylation and the repressive activity of
K-bZIP (Izumiya et al., 2007). Thus K-bZIP activities are mod-
ulated by phosphorylation and sumoylation in an antagonistic
fashion similar to other cellular transcription factors such as ELK-
1 (Girdwood et al., 2003), AP-1 (Bossis et al., 2005), AIB1 (Wu
et al., 2006), progesterone receptor B (PR-B; Daniel et al., 2007;
Daniel and Lange, 2009), STAT1 (Zimnik et al., 2009), and KAP-1
(Goodarzi et al., 2011). KSHV genome-wide reporter assays sup-
port the notion that K-bZIP preferentially represses early-lytic
genes but not late gene promoters (Ellison et al., 2009), consis-
tent with temporal regulation of viral gene expression, potentially
mediated, in part, through a K-bZIP SUMO-phospho switch.

ACETYLATION
K-bZIP was reported to be acetylated on multiple residues and
K145 was identiﬁed as one acetylation site (Lefort et al., 2010). K-
bZIP was previously found associated with CBP (Hwang et al.,
2001) and the ability of K-bZIP to repress transcription was
reported to be mediated through sequestration of CBP. In co-
transfection experiments, increasing amounts of CBP resulted in
increased acetylation of K-bZIP and a reversal of K-bZIP-mediated
repression of the IFNα-activated 2
-OAS gene. In addition to
effects on chromatin, CBP may be capable of acetylating K-bZIP.

, 5

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

However, the functional role of K-bZIP acetylation in the KSHV
life cycle remains to be seen.

SUMOYLATION
Sumoylation (small ubiquitin-like modiﬁer) was identiﬁed as
a reversible post-translational protein modiﬁcation in 1997
(reviewed in Geiss-Friedlander and Melchior, 2007). Three iso-
forms of SUMO exist: SUMO-1, -2, and -3. SUMO-2 and SUMO-3
are highly homologous (97% identity in the mature form), whereas
SUMO-1 is more distantly related to both (∼50%). Hundreds
of protein targets for SUMO-modiﬁcation have been identiﬁed,
and the majority of these are nuclear proteins. Similar to phos-
phorylation, sumoylation is a rapid and reversible modiﬁcation.
Moreover, in a manner similar to the binding of phosphorylated
tyrosine residues by signaling molecules carrying phosphotyrosine
(PTB) or Src homology 2 (SH2) domains, sumoylated proteins are
speciﬁcally recognized by proteins containing one or more SUMO-
interacting motifs (SIM). Analogous to ubiquitylation, conjuga-
tion of SUMO to target proteins is a multi-step process involving
an E1 activating enzyme heterodimer SAE1/SAE2 (AOS1/UBA2),
an E2 conjugating enzyme Ubc9 (ubiquitin-like protein SUMO-
1 conjugating enzyme 9), and an E3 ligase, which is believed
to provide speciﬁcity within the sumoylation pathway (Geiss-
Friedlander and Melchior, 2007). Sumoylation is a highly dynamic
process, and its outcomes are very diverse, ranging from changes in
subcellular localization to altered activity and, in some cases, sta-
bility of the modiﬁed protein. The underlying principle of sumoy-
lation is the alteration of inter- or intra-molecular interactions of
the modiﬁed substrate (Prudden et al., 2007; Uzunova et al., 2007;
Xie et al., 2007). For DNA tumor viruses, the immediate-early and
early gene products, which are transcriptional factors, are often
sumoylated. Examples include IE1 (immediate-early 1 protein)
and IE2 (immediate-early 2 protein) of cytomegalovirus (CMV;
Hofmann et al., 2000; Spengler et al., 2002; Hsu et al., 2004), E1 and
E2 of human papillomavirus (HPV; Rosas-Acosta et al., 2005; Wu
et al., 2007), BZLF1 of EBV (Adamson and Kenney, 2001), K-bZIP,
and LANA2 of KSHV (Izumiya et al., 2005; Marcos-Villar et al.,
2009). Viral proteins are also known to modulate the sumoylation

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 2

Campbell and Izumiya

Post modiﬁcations of KSHV proteins

of speciﬁc cellular proteins. For example, HPV E7 protein and
adenovirus E1A protein block sumoylation of RB (Ledl et al.,
2005) and KSHV vPK inhibits the sumoylation of KAP-1 (Chang
et al., 2009). Viruses can also affect global sumoylation of cellu-
lar proteins by directly modulating the SUMO machinery. Avian
Adenovirus Gam1 is known to inhibit the SUMO E1 activating
enzyme by targeting the SAE1/SAE2 (AOS1/UBA2) heterodimer
to cullin RING ligases (CRLs) and promoting SAE1 ubiquitylation
and degradation (Colombo et al., 2002; Boggio et al., 2007).

The repressive activity of K-bZIP requires sumoylation at
lysine-158 and an intact leucine zipper region. Sumoylation at
this site is required for the association of K-bZIP with the cellular
E2 SUMO conjugation enzyme Ubc9. Both SUMO-1 and SUMO-
2/3 were found conjugated to a signiﬁcant fraction (∼10%) of
endogenous K-bZIP in BCBL-1 cells. Mutation of lysine-158 to
arginine eliminated SUMO-modiﬁcation of K-bZIP in vivo with
a concomitant loss of the majority of K-bZIP repressive func-
tion. Although SUMO-modiﬁcation of K-bZIP may inﬂuence its
repressive function through several mechanisms, including effects
on the physical interaction between K-bZIP and K-Rta, it is likely
that a major effect of SUMO is mediated by its ability to recruit
Ubc9 to K-bZIP target promoters. Ubc9 binding to K-bZIP, as
well as co-occupancy of K-bZIP, K-Rta, and SUMO at target viral
promoters has been observed. Based on these results, we predicted
that K-bZIP may function as a SUMO E3 ligase or SUMO adaptor
which functions to deliver Ubc9 to potential substrates (Izumiya
et al., 2005). In addition to lysine-158, Lefort et al. (2010) have also
identiﬁed a previously unrecognized sumoylation site in a K-bZIP
splice variant (K207).

Subsequently, Chang et al. (2010) have conﬁrmed that K-bZIP
functions as the prototypical viral SUMO E3 ligase. K-bZIP was
found to be a SIM-containing poly-SUMO-speciﬁc E3 ligase with
speciﬁcity for SUMO-2/3. As discussed above, K-bZIP had been
previously known to associate with Ubc9 (Izumiya et al., 2005),
Chang et al. further demonstrated that K-bZIP bound SUMO-2
and SUMO-3, but not SUMO-1. K-bZIP was found to contain a
SIM at amino acid residues 72 to 76, which was identical to that
of the cellular SUMO-ligases, PIAS1, and PIASx. The sumoylation

activity of K-bZIP was dependent on an intact SIM, and K-bZIP
could catalyze its auto-sumoylation and the sumoylation of two
K-bZIP-interacting proteins, p53 and RB. In contrast, Lefort et al.
(2010) have reported that K-bZIP repression of interferon-α sig-
naling was SIM-independent but was dependent on K-bZIP K158
sumoylation site, a Ubc9 consensus binding site. As described
more detail below, K-Rta preferentially degrades SUMO-modiﬁed
proteins, similar to an activity ascribed to HSV-1 ICP0 (Boutell
et al., 2011). This suggests that a balance between sumoylation
and SUMO-dependent degradation may be important for the
KSHV life cycle. As the assembly and disassembly of Promyelo-
cytic leukemia (PML; ND10) bodies at herpesvirus replication
complexes are SUMO-dependent, modulation of the SUMO envi-
ronment by K-bZIP and K-Rta during lytic replication cycle may
help dictate whether viral replication will proceed or if latency will
be established. Another potential role of K-bZIP may be to mark
proteins that are destined to be targeted by the SUMO-targeting
ubiquitin ligase (STUbL) activity of K-Rta (see below). Although
not fully established, this idea is supported by the report that KSHV
LANA2 increases PML sumoylation, which facilitates its degrada-
tion by a cellular ubiquitin ligase (Marcos-Villar et al., 2009).

K-RTA
K-Rta is essential and sufﬁcient to induce lytic reactivation of the
latent KSHV genome in the BCBL-1 cell line model as well as
de novo infection model (Lukac et al., 1998, 1999; Sun et al., 1998;
Nakamura et al., 2003; Xu et al., 2005). K-Rta is a potent transcrip-
tion factor, with an N-terminal putative DNA binding domain and
a C-terminal transactivation domain (Lukac et al., 1999; West and
Wood, 2003). K-Rta possesses broad target sequence speciﬁcity,
and various K-Rta responsive promoter elements have been iden-
tiﬁed (Lukac et al., 1999; Chang et al., 2002; Deng et al., 2002;
Song et al., 2002; West and Wood, 2003). K-Rta has been reported
to be phosphorylated (Lukac et al., 1999; Gwack et al., 2003),
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated (Gwack et al., 2003), and ubiquitylated (Yu
et al., 2005). A schematic diagram of K-Rta modiﬁcation sites is
presented in Figure 2, and the consequences of these modiﬁcations
will be discussed.

FIGURE 2 | Schematic representation of KSHV K-Rta. K-Rta
protein and its post-translational modiﬁcation sites as discussed in
the text are depicted. Phosphorylation (Phospho) site numbering
and PARylation (PAR) site localization of Gwack et al. (2003) is

utilized. The K-Rta nuclear localization signals (NLS-1 and NLS-2),
ring-ﬁnger like domain, SUMO interaction motifs (SIMs), and
serine/threonine (S/T) rich regions are also indicated. Numbers
indicate amino acid position.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 3

Campbell and Izumiya

Post modiﬁcations of KSHV proteins

FIGURE 3 | SUMO-targeting ubiquitin ligase activity of KSHV K-Rta.
(A) 293T cells were co-transfected with his-tagged SUMO-2 and the indicated
K-Rta expression vector. Forty-eight hours later cellular lysates were prepared
and analyzed by immunoblotting using the indicated antibodies. (H145L,
ring-ﬁnger like domain mutant; ΔSIM, SIM deletion mutant). (B) In vitro
ubiquitin conjugation reactions were reconstituted using puriﬁed components
(E1, Ube1, 25 nM; E2, Ubc H5a, 50 nM; E3, K-Rta, 150 nM). Reaction

products were probed by immunoblotting. In the presence of K-Rta,
GST–SUMO was conjugated with ubiquitin. (C) KSHV promoter reporter assay.
293T cells were co-transfected with K-Rta wt or mutant and the indicated
KSHV promoter luciferase reporter. Forty eight hour later cellular lysates were
prepared and assayed for luciferase activity. Values represent the mean fold
induction (mean± SD, n = 3 determinations) relative to the value derived from
reporter+ empty vector set as= 1 (K-Rta wt, blue; H145L, red; ΔSIM, yellow).

PHOSPHORYLATION
As part of an initial characterization of various aspects of ORF50
RNA and protein expression, structure, and function, K-Rta was
found to be highly phosphorylated in mammalian cells (Lukac
et al., 1999). By immunoblot analysis, K-Rta protein migrated with
an apparent molecular mass of ∼110 kDa, greater than the pre-
dicted value of 74 kDa. Analysis of the K-Rta primary amino acid
sequence revealed several potential phosphorylation sites includ-
ing a C-terminal S/T-rich region, as well as additional consensus
phosphorylation sites for the cellular serine/threonine kinases
casein kinase-II and protein kinase C (PKC). Phosphatase treat-
ment of K-Rta protein partially reduced the slower electrophoretic
mobility of K-Rta suggesting that phosphorylation accounted for
most of the anomalous migration observed during SDS-PAGE
analysis of K-Rta. Subsequently, Gwack et al. (2003) identiﬁed
the Ste20-like kinase hKFC and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
1 (PARP-1, see below) as proteins that speciﬁcally interact with
the S/T-rich region of K-Rta. There are greater than 30 different
Ste20-related kinases in humans and three members of a novel
subfamily exhibit a high degree of homology to a Ste-like kinase
originally isolated from chick cells (Yustein et al., 2000, 2003).
hKFC is identical to JIK (Tassi et al., 1999), a kinase reported
to be negatively regulated by upstream tyrosine kinase receptors.
hKFC was shown to directly interact with K-Rta and phosphory-
late at serine (S505) and threonine (T506, T510, T515, and T516)
of K-Rta. Together with poly(ADP-ribosylation), phosphorylation

inactivates K-Rta transcriptional activity and was hypothesized to
serve as a contributor to the maintenance of KSHV latency. As
hKFC has been shown to localize to the cytoplasm (Yustein et al.,
2003), whereas K-Rta is primarily nuclear (Lukac et al., 1998),
the interaction and phosphorylation by hKFC was proposed to
potentially affect K-Rta localization.

POLYADP-RIBOSYLATION (PARYLATION)
Although the historical focus of PARP-1 has been its role in the cel-
lular DNA damage response, studies have also revealed important
roles for PARP-1 in transcriptional regulation. Poly-ADP-ribose
(PAR) is a large negatively charged polymer that functions in
both its free form or in the context of protein post-translational
modiﬁcations. In mammalian cells, the majority of PAR pro-
duction is catalyzed by PARP-1 and targets of PARP-1 catalytic
activity include histones, transcription factors, nuclear enzymes,
and nuclear structural components (see Krishnakumar and Kraus,
2010; for a recent review). Similar to hKFC described above, PARP-
1 was identiﬁed by mass spectrometry as a protein that interacted
with the S/T-rich region of K-Rta (Gwack et al., 2003). The interac-
tion was mapped to the NAD
binding domain of PARP-1 and this
interaction mediated the PARylation of K-Rta. Synergistic effects
between PARP-1 and hKFC on K-Rta binding and its subsequent
modiﬁcation were observed. The in vitro interaction between
K-Rta and PARP-1 was increased by the addition of hKFC and
conversely, in vitro interaction between K-Rta and hKFC was also

+

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 4

Campbell and Izumiya

Post modiﬁcations of KSHV proteins

increased with the addition of PARP-1. The reciprocal increases
in binding were accompanied by enhanced phosphorylation and
PARylation of K-Rta by hKFC and PARP-1, respectively. Moreover,
PARP-1 and hKFC were found to act as repressors of K-Rta activ-
ity in reporter assays and in the efﬁciency of K-Rta-mediated viral
reactivation. A combination of K-Rta mutational analysis, ChIP
assays, and reporter activity measurements in PARP-1 knockout
cells suggested a model in which PARP-1 and hKFC, acting as cellu-
lar sensors of herpesvirus infection, interfere directly or indirectly
with the recruitment of K-Rta onto target promoters, leading to
a decrease in K-Rta-mediated transcriptional activation (Gwack
et al., 2003).

SUMOYLATION
Herpesvirus infections are controlled by acquired and innate
defenses involving cellular, humoral, and cytokine-mediated
responses. In recent years, a concept of intrinsic antiviral resis-
tance has emerged as an additional antiviral defense mechanism
that operates within individual cells. Unlike cytokine-mediated
responses, intrinsic antiviral resistance involves the actions of pre-
existing cellular proteins that, in the case of herpesviruses, act to
repress viral transcription. PML nuclear bodies (ND10 or PML–
NBs) have been identiﬁed as an important factor of intrinsic
antiviral resistance against herpesvirus. Components of PML–NBs
are recruited to sites associated with the viral chromosome soon
after genomes enter the nucleus. Both SUMO-modiﬁcation and
SIMs of PML are required for formation of PML–NBs as well
as recruitment to the viral genome. Viral gene expression is
silenced by PML–NBs through deacetylation of local histones,
which inhibits viral replication. Importantly, herpesvirus infection
often disrupts PML–NBs, resulting in antagonism of both innate
and intrinsic immune responses in early infection (Everett et al.,
2006, 2008; Lukashchuk et al., 2006; Tavalai et al., 2006; Boutell
et al., 2011).

Promyelocytic leukemia–NBs are mobile organelles that form
distinct sub-compartments in the cell nucleus as described in a
number of reviews (Bernardi and Pandolﬁ, 2007; Borden, 2008;
Nagai et al., 2011). Assembly of PML–NBs, “storage” sites for
SUMO, depends on the sumoylation of PML and other com-
ponents such as Daxx, SP-100, and ATRX (Ishov et al., 1999;
Zhong et al., 2000; Seeler et al., 2001; Fu et al., 2005). In addition,
chromatin can be an integral part of PML–NBs. For example, a
particular class of PML–NBs exists in tumor cells that maintain
their telomeres in the absence of telomerase activity by a process
referred to as alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT). Recent
studies identiﬁed that ALT is caused by the genomic mutations
in Daxx or ATRX, both of which are localized in PML–NBs in a
SUMO- and SIM-dependent manner (Lin et al., 2006; Berube et al.,
2008; Heaphy et al., 2011). Interestingly, an ATRX–Daxx complex
was recently identiﬁed as a histone chaperone, which speciﬁcally
deposits the histone H3 variant, H3.3 (Drane et al., 2010; Gold-
berg et al., 2010; Lewis et al., 2010), leading to a possibility that
PML–NBs function as a center of epigenetic gene regulation.

Like HSV-1 ICP0, our recent studies identiﬁed that K-Rta
contained multiple SIMs and bound to SUMO in vitro. In
co-transfection experiments with SUMO-2, K-Rta was found to
markedly decrease the level of total cellular SUMO-2 modiﬁed

proteins and mutations in the K-Rta SIM or ring-ﬁnger like
domain signiﬁcantly impaired this activity (Figure 3A). Using
puriﬁed components, K-Rta was shown to conjugate ubiquitin
to SUMO and SUMO-chains (Figure 3B). In addition, K-Rta
preferentially targets SUMO-modiﬁed proteins for ubiquitylation;
thus K-Rta is able to function as a STUbL which is capable of ubiq-
uitylation of SUMO and SUMO conjugates in vitro and in vivo
(Figures 3A,B; Izumiya et al., unpublished). The prototypical
STUbL, cellular RNF4, was ﬁrst identiﬁed as a ubiquitin ligase
that functions to maintain genomic stability, and was recently
reported to be a ubiquitin ligase targeting SUMO-containing pro-
teins, including sumoylated PML (Sun et al., 2007; Tatham et al.,
2008). Members of this ubiquitin ligase family include mammalian
RNF4 and the heterodimers Hex3–Slx8 and Rfp1–Slx8 in S. cere-
visiae and S. pombe, respectively (Uzunova et al., 2007; Xie et al.,
2007). Similar to HSV-1 ICP0 and cellular RNF4, KSHV K-Rta dis-
rupts the PML body in ubiquitin ligase dependent fashion (data
not shown). Sumoylation is often linked to gene repression due
to its ability to serve as a platform to recruit strong co-repressors
such as SETDB1, HDAC1, and HDAC2 via SUMO-SIM interac-
tions. Accordingly, K-Rta’s ability to remove SUMO is relevant
to its transactivation functions. Mutations in SIM or ring-ﬁnger
like domain signiﬁcantly impaired K-Rta transactivation activity.
We observed that the K-bZIP promoter, a well recognized pro-
moter transactivated by K-Rta, is activated by wild-type K-Rta,
but not by H145L (ring-ﬁnger) mutant or a K-Rta SIM mutant
(Figure 3C). Interestingly, the K12 (Figure 3C) or PAN promoter
(not shown) were relatively unaffected. Thus, it is likely that there
are SUMO-dependent and SUMO-independent promoters, which
may depend on local chromatin structure and mode of K-Rta
recruitment. These results suggest that K-Rta, in addition to being
a strong transactivator, has an ability to regulate the local SUMO
environment; the latter may contribute to its former functions
through disassembly of SIM-containing co-repressors.

UBIQUITYLATION
K-Rta was found to contain an E3 ubiquitin ligase activity which
was associated with the regulation of the cellular levels of inter-
feron regulatory factor 7 (IRF7; Yu et al., 2005). During the char-
acterization of this activity, it was determined that that K-Rta was
subjected to self-ubiquitylation. Three residues were identiﬁed in
the Cys/His-rich region of K-Rta which was found to be critical
for both K-Rta auto-ubiquitylation and for degradation of IRF7.
These residues, Cys131, Cys141, and His145 were proposed to be
part of a novel Cys-rich domain extending from K-Rta amino
acids 118–207 (C3HC3). However, this ring-ﬁnger like domain
shows no signiﬁcant homology with any previously described
sequences conserved among E3 ligases. Based on analogy to other
transcriptional activators, the K-Rta auto-ubiquitylation function
may serve as a “degron” to activate gene expression (Muratani
and Tansey, 2003; Kodadek et al., 2006). Indeed, K-Rta mutants
that harbor a mutation in ring-ﬁnger like domain are more sta-
ble than K-Rta Wt. This stability is associated with a concomitant
loss of transactivation function (Figure 3C). Further studies are
required to dissect the contribution of K-Rta auto-ubiquitylation
and repressor degradation activity to K-Rta transactivation (Yang
et al., 2008).

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 5

Campbell and Izumiya

Post modiﬁcations of KSHV proteins

LANA
KSHV (LANA/ORF73) is key regulatory protein that is essential
for the establishment and maintenance of viral latency. LANA is a
DNA binding protein that is a functional homolog of EBV EBNA1.
LANA binds to the viral latent origin of replication, located at
the terminal repeat (TR) sequence of the KSHV genome, and is
highly expressed in all KSHV-associated disorders (Kedes et al.,
1997; Schulz, 2001; Hu et al., 2002; Komatsu et al., 2004; Verma
et al., 2007; Kelley-Clarke et al., 2009; Ganem, 2010; Mesri et al.,
2010). LANA functions as both a transcriptional activator and
a repressor depending on the context of promoters and cell line
interrogated (An et al., 2005; Kelley-Clarke et al., 2009). Accord-
ingly, LANA has been shown to associate with a broad range of
transcriptional regulators such as RBP-Jκ, CBP, Daxx, BRD2, RB,
p53, and Sp-1 (Friborg et al., 1999; Platt et al., 1999; Radkov et al.,
2000; Lim et al., 2001;Verma et al., 2004; Lan et al., 2005; Murakami
et al., 2006). LANA function is regulated and/or mediated by pro-
tein partner interaction. In addition, LANA activity is regulated
by post-translational modiﬁcations, including phosphorylation
(Platt et al., 1999; Fujimuro et al., 2005; Bajaj et al., 2006; Varjosalo
et al., 2008; Cheng et al., 2009; Cha et al., 2010), acetylation (Lu
et al., 2006), PARylation (Ohsaki et al., 2004), sumoylation (Izu-
miya et al., unpublished), and arginine methylation (Campbell
et al., 2011). These modiﬁcation sites are depicted in Figure 4.

PHOSPHORYLATION
Latency-associated nuclear antigen interacts with and is phospho-
rylated by several kinases including glycogen synthase kinase 3
(GSK-3; Fujimuro and Hayward, 2003; Fujimuro et al., 2005; Liu
et al., 2007), Pim-1 and Pim-3 (Bajaj et al., 2006; Varjosalo et al.,
2008; Cheng et al., 2009), and DNA-PK/Ku (Cha et al., 2010).
LANA is also phosphorylated by an unidentiﬁed kinase medi-
ated through an interaction of LANA with RING3 (Platt et al.,
1999). In studies designed to characterize the interaction of LANA
with RING3, Platt et al. (1999) ﬁrst described phosphorylation
of LANA in vitro. The interaction between RING3 and LANA
resulted in serine/threonine phosphorylation of LANA on residues
located between LANA amino acids 951 and 1107, and binding of

RING3 to LANA facilitated the phosphorylation of LANA via an
unknown co-immunoprecipitating kinase. However, the identity
of the kinase and its role in the KSHV life cycle remains to be
determined.

Using yeast two-hybrid screening with LANA as the bait pro-
tein, GSK-3 was shown to interact with LANA and through co-
immunoprecipitation LANA interacted with both GSK-3α and
GSK-3β in transfected cells. This interaction resulted in increased
nuclear accumulation of GSK-3β (Fujimuro and Hayward, 2003).
Fujimuro et al. (2005) further showed that GSK-3β phosphory-
lated multiple N-terminal residues of LANA in vitro and in KSHV
infected PEL cells. Phosphorylation of LANA by GSK-3β was nec-
essary for the LANA/GSK-3β interaction. GSK-3β predominantly
phosphorylates pre-phosphorylated (primed) substrates that con-
tain the motif S/TxxxS/Tp, where the +4 position S or T residue
has prior phosphorylation mediated by another priming kinase
(reviewed in Forde and Dale, 2007). LANA was found to require
priming phosphorylation in vitro in order to serve as a GSK-3β
substrate; mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and casein
kinase-I (CK-I) could function as priming kinases, while CK-II
could not. Subsequently ERK1/2 was also found to phosphorylate
and prime LANA for subsequent GSK-3β phosphorylation (Liu
et al., 2007). A GSK-3β priming pocket mutant (R96A) could not
bind to LANA. Interestingly, in co-transfection experiments, GSK-
3β present in a LANA–GSK-3β complex was unable to phospho-
rylate a primed peptide substrate. These results were interpreted
to suggest that GSK-3β phosphorylation sites on LANA function
to increase the afﬁnity of LANA binding to GSK-3β and simul-
taneously provide a competitive substrate that minimizes poten-
tial phosphorylation events on other non-complexed substrates
(Fujimuro et al., 2005). Taken together, these results suggested a
model in which LANA sequesters GSK-3β in the nucleus leading
to dysregulation of the kinase function in both the cytoplasmic
(β-catenin stability) and nuclear (gene reprogramming) com-
partments (Fujimuro and Hayward, 2003; Fujimuro et al., 2005;
Liu et al., 2007). Aspects of this model have been challenged
by a report, in which LANA overexpression showed no effect
on endogenous β-catenin levels (Hagen, 2009);
this report

FIGURE 4 | Schematic representation of KSHV LANA. LANA protein and
its post-translational modiﬁcation sites as discussed in the text are depicted.
Phosphorylation (Phospho) sites and the arginine methylation (Me) site are

shown. The N-terminal histone binding domain, nuclear localization signal
(NLS) and SUMO interaction motif (SIM) are also indicated. Numbers indicate
amino acid position.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 6

Campbell and Izumiya

Post modiﬁcations of KSHV proteins

demonstrates the complexity of the interaction and its context
dependence.

Bajaj et al. (2006) identiﬁed LANA as a substrate for Pim-1
kinase. The Pim-1 gene was ﬁrst identiﬁed as a common provi-
ral insertion site of the Moloney murine leukemia virus (proviral
insertion site MuLV; Cuypers et al., 1984). Pim-1 encodes a Ser/Thr
kinase, which belongs to the group of calcium/calmodulin-
regulated kinases. This gene is expressed primarily in B-lymphoid
and myeloid cell lines, and is overexpressed in hematopoietic
malignancies. Pim-1 plays a role in signal transduction in blood
cells, contributing to cell growth and survival, and thus may
provide a selective advantage in tumorigenesis (Bachmann and
Moroy, 2005). Pim-1 was shown to bind to the C-terminus of
LANA and to phosphorylate LANA at its N-terminus, speciﬁcally
serine residues 205 and 206. Using human kinome expression
screening, Varjosalo et al. (2008) conﬁrmed that Pim-1 could
phosphorylate LANA and augment viral reactivation primed
by low levels of K-Rta. Cheng et al. (2009) further showed
that another Pim family kinase member, namely Pim-3, could
also phosphorylate LANA at serines 205 and 206. Moreover,
ectopic expression of Pim-1 or Pim-3 in rKSHV.219-infected
Vero cells enhanced the level of reactivation when co-expressed
with low levels of exogenous K-Rta. Mechanistically, Pim-1
and Pim-3 phosphorylation of LANA was shown to antagonize
LANA-dependent transcriptional repression of a synthetic TR
reporter as well as decrease the ability of LANA to inhibit K-
Rta auto-activation of its own promoter. As Pim-1 and Pim-3
are up-regulated during viral reactivation (Cheng et al., 2009) a
model was proposed in which these kinases participate in reac-
tivation by negative modulation of LANA function via direct
phosphorylation.

Latency-associated nuclear antigen-dependent latent episomal
replication is also regulated by phosphorylation. The DNA-PK/Ku
complex bound and phosphorylated LANA (Cha et al., 2010).
Uninfected B cell extracts were fractionated over a GST afﬁn-
ity resin containing LANA amino acids 1–52. Among the pro-
teins found to interact with this LANA fragment were DNA-
dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) catalytic subunit (DNA-
PKcs), Ku70, and Ku86. In agreement with Ohsaki et al., 2004;
see below), Cha et al. also identiﬁed PARP-1 as a LANA interact-
ing protein. The phosphorylation of LANA by the DNA-PK/Ku
complex was wortmannin-sensitive and mapping data suggested
that LANA was phosphorylated at multiple positions. Inter-
estingly, transient replication of a TR-containing plasmid was
reduced when a phosphorylation-competent N-terminal LANA
fragment was fused to a C-terminal LANA fragment that sup-
ported TR-dependent replication. Two similarly designed mutants
that were not phosphorylated by DNA-PK/Ku were not defective
in this assay. Overexpression of Ku70 also impaired transient TR-
dependent replication in co-transfection assays conducted in 293T
cells. Although overexpression of Ku86 did not affect transient
replication assays set up in 293T cells, the authors noted an increase
in TR-dependent replication when the assays were conducted in
Ku86 heterozygous HCT116 Ku86+/− cells when compared to
a HCT116 Ku86+/+ background. Taken together, these results
suggest that the DNA-PK/Ku complex negatively regulates latent
episomal replication.

ACETYLATION
Latency-associated nuclear antigen was reported to be lysine acety-
lated in response to sodium butyrate or trichostatin A-mediated
reactivation (Lu et al., 2006). Although the site(s) of lysine acetyla-
tion on LANA were not mapped, LANA acetylation was observed
in the presence of HDAC inhibition using either ectopic LANA
expression or endogenous LANA in BCBL-1 cells as substrate.
LANA acetylation was observed in HDAC inhibitor-treated cells
using immunological detection with antibodies speciﬁc for acetyl
lysine or by metabolic labeling of cells with [14C]-sodium acetate
followed by ﬂuorography. LANA acetylation occurred during reac-
tivation and this was accompanied by disruption of the inter-
action between LANA and the cellular proteins Sp-1 and his-
tone H2B. ChIP analysis of HDAC inhibitor-treated BCBL-1 cells
also revealed a loss of LANA from the K-Rta promoter region
that occurred within the same time frame as LANA acetylation.
Together, these results suggest that LANA acetylation contributes
to the ORF50 transcriptional de-repression during the early stage
of KSHV lytic cycle reactivation.

PARYLATION
As mentioned previously, PARP has been historically studied in
the context of the DNA damage response, but PARP-1 has more
recently been linked to the regulation of transcription and chro-
matin structure. PARP-1 binds to a variety of DNA structures,
nucleosomes, and chromatin-associated proteins (Krishnakumar
and Kraus, 2010). Ohsaki et al. (2004) reported that LANA was
a target of PARP-1 and was poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated. Using a TR
afﬁnity column and BC3 cell extracts, PARP-1 was isolated as a
TR interacting protein. TR binding by PARP-1 was independent
of LANA and was also observed with BJAB cell extracts; how-
ever the afﬁnity column elution proﬁles of PARP-1 and LANA
were similar. In addition, PARP-1 was found to co-localize with
LANA in the nucleus, suggesting that LANA may be a poten-
tial PARP-1 substrate. A small fraction of LANA present in BC3
anti-LANA immunoprecipitates was found to react with anti-PAR
antibody. Moreover, when LANA immunoprecipitates were incu-
bated with puriﬁed human PARP-1 and NAD in vitro, a species
consistent with NAD-incorporated LANA was observed. Intrigu-
ingly, PARP-1 activity appeared to control viral copy number in
infected cells. When BC3 cells were treated with hydroxyurea,
a compound that elevates PARP activity, a ∼4-fold decrease in
KSHV copy number was observed over the course of a 5-day
treatment period. Conversely, when cells were similarly treated
with compounds that decreased PARP activity (niacinamide and
3-aminobenzamide), KSHV copy numbers increased ∼8-fold.
Interestingly, for hydroxyurea-treated cells, the decrease in viral
copy number was accompanied by an increase in the PARylation
signal detected in LANA immunoprecipitates. Although mecha-
nistic details remain to be elucidated, these results suggest that
the viral replication and/or episome partitioning functions of
LANA may be inﬂuenced by cellular PARylation activity. Similar
results were reported for EBV EBNA1, which was found inter-
act with both PARP-1 (Deng et al., 2002; Tempera et al., 2010)
and telomere-associated PARPs, Tankyrases-1 and -2 (Deng et al.,
2002, 2005). Both PARP-1 and Tankyrase-1 were found to catalyze
PARylation of EBNA1 and negatively regulate EBNA1 origin of

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 7

Campbell and Izumiya

Post modiﬁcations of KSHV proteins

FIGURE 5 | Latency-associated nuclear antigen enhances histone
sumoylation in vitro and in vivo. (A) LANA enhances histone H2A and
H2B SUMO-modiﬁcation in vitro. The in vitro SUMO conjugation reaction
was performed with puriﬁed histone octamer (5 μg; Roche) as a substrate.
SAE1/2 (E1, 50 nM), Ubc9 (E2, 50 nM), and HA-SUMO-2 (50 μM) were
incubated in reaction buffer containing 1 mM ATP and MgCl2 with or without
a catalytic amount of LANA (50 nM). In the presence of LANA, H2A, and
H2B SUMO-modiﬁcation is enhanced. The arrows indicate SUMO-modiﬁed
histones, which were increased in SUMO-reaction mixtures supplemented
with LANA (three lanes from left). Full-length LANA Wt and mutant proteins
were prepared with recombinant baculoviruses (B) and used as an E3
SUMO-ligase for in vitro SUMO conjugation reactions. CBB, Coomassie
brilliant blue. (C) Histone binding domain and SUMO-interacting motif of
LANA are necessary for its SUMO-ligase function. LANA Wt but neither a
histone binding mutant (HB Mut) or SUMO-binding mutant (SIM Mut) can
catalyze SUMO-modiﬁcation of histones. The corresponding number of
SUMO-chains is indicated on the right (20 kDa increments). LANA ring-ﬁnger

like domain is dispensable for LANA-mediated SUMO conjugation of
histones (Ring Mut). (D) Correlation between LANA recruitment sites and
SUMO-enriched loci on the latent KSHV genome. ChIP analyses were
performed with anti-LANA or anti-SUMO-2 antibodies using latent BCBL-1
cells. ChIP with LANA antibody was hybridized with custom-made KSHV
tiling arrays and SUMO-ChIP was directly analyzed by sequencing
(ChIP-seq). Enrichment over input DNA is shown (upper panel). Counts and
position of sequence reads of SUMO-ChIP are shown in the bottom panel.
SUMO-2 is enriched where LANA is recruited. Annotation of the KSHV
genome is shown in the middle panel. The KSHV terminal repeat region is
located at the extreme right of the annotated genome. (E) cDNA microarray
analyses. RNA was prepared from indicated LANA stable cells or vector
control stable cells and hybridized to Affymetrix human whole genome U133
plus 2.0 arrays. Raw data was subjected to baseline transformation and
analyzed by hierarchical clustering using GeneSpring GX11 software. Genes
highly repressed by LANA wt but not mutants are indicated by blue vertical
lines to the right.

plasmid replication (OriP) activity in a PAR-dependent manner.
Although the effects of the cellular DNA damage response on viral

replication and gene expression are multi-faceted and enigmatic
(Lilley et al., 2007; Weitzman et al., 2010) these result suggest that

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 8

Campbell and Izumiya

Post modiﬁcations of KSHV proteins

current PARP-1 inhibitors (see Rouleau et al., 2010; for a recent
review) under evaluation for treatment of certain malignancies
might be worth examining for their efﬁcacy as a treatment for
KSHV infected individuals.

ARGININE METHYLATION
Our lab has determined that LANA is a substrate for protein argi-
nine methyltransferase (PRMT)-1 in vitro and in vivo, and the
major methylation site was mapped to the N-terminus of LANA
(Arg 20; Campbell et al., 2011). Although, there was no effect
of methylation on LANA nuclear localization or nuclear matrix
association, methylation at this position did affect the interaction
of LANA with histone octamers in vitro and with KSHV chro-
matin in vivo. In vitro, the histone octamer-LANA interaction was
strengthened when the R20 site was replaced with a methyl-mimic
residue, phenylalanine (R20F). Similarly, using LANA ChIP analy-
sis, consistently higher amounts of KSHV DNA could be recovered
from cells harboring latent KSHV bacmids containing the LANA
R20F mutant. These results suggest that arginine methylation at
position R20 may potentially inﬂuence a sub-population of LANA
protein within infected cells resulting in increased interaction of
LANA with KSHV-associated chromatin.

SUMOYLATION
Sumoylation-modiﬁcation plays important roles in assembling
protein complexes to regulate gene expression. Recent studies
support a model in which the SUMO-modiﬁcation has a signif-
icant impact on heterochromatin formation by recruiting SIM-
containing co-repressors (Uchimura et al., 2006; Stielow et al.,

FIGURE 6 | KSHV SUMO-dependent balance. The outcome of the KSHV
life cycle is depicted as a balance between the functions of the viral factors
LANA, K-Rta, and K-bZIP which are mediated through their
SUMO-dependent activities. The SUMO E3 ligase activities of K-bZIP and
LANA and the STUbL activity of K-Rta are shown (see text for details).

2008). Accordingly, our lab has found that LANA is both heav-
ily sumoylated and binds SUMO. By creating a SUMO-rich
environment on local chromatin, we propose LANA may be able
to condense chromatin, which leads to gene silencing mediated
through its SIM domain. Interestingly, when we searched the
LANA protein sequence for the SUMO-modiﬁcation consensus
motif (V/I/L-K-x-E), which is a well-established Ubc9 recogni-
tion sequence, there was no such motif. This observation indicates
that LANA itself may bind SUMO to recruit Ubc9. Since LANA
is heavily modiﬁed by SUMO in the absence of an E3 SUMO-
ligase in vitro, LANA is likely to bind to the SUMO–Ubc9 com-
plex (“active-SUMO”) directly for its own SUMO-modiﬁcation.
Further detailed SUMO-binding analyses with a panel of GST–
LANA deletion proteins conﬁrmed that LANA possesses a SIM
domain at its C-terminus. These result prompted us to investigate
if LANA functions as an E3 SUMO-ligase, because the recruitment
of SUMO–Ubc9 complex (active-SUMO) is one of the mecha-
nisms for catalyzing the conjugation of SUMO. Although LANA
associates with multiple proteins, we decided to focus on chro-
matin components and histone modifying enzymes involved in
epigenetic gene regulation. We chose to use histone octamers as
substrates, because LANA has been shown to associate with his-
tones at the H2A–H2B acidic patch (Barbera et al., 2006). In
addition, SUMO-modiﬁcation of histones, especially histone H2B,
is linked to chromatin condensation (Nathan et al., 2006). Our
results conﬁrmed that LANA can enhance SUMO-modiﬁcation
of histones in vitro (Figure 5A). The puriﬁed proteins that were
used in the in vitro SUMO-reactions are shown in Figure 5B.
Sumoylation reactions using two LANA mutants clearly show that
both a histone binding mutation and SIM mutation signiﬁcantly
diminished histone targeting SUMO-ligase activity, supporting the
idea that LANA needs to bind both substrate and SUMO for the
activity (Figure 5C). Our results demonstrate for the ﬁrst time
that a viral protein acts as an E3 SUMO-ligase to increase SUMO-
modiﬁcation of histones, and which is likely to be involved in the
formation of localized SUMO-rich chromatin. Next, we examined
the distribution of SUMO and LANA across the latent KSHV epi-
some. Comparison of the SUMO-ChIP assay with KSHV tiling
array data indicated that the overlap of local SUMO occupancy
with LANA binding sites within the KSHV genome was exten-
sive (Figure 5D). Together, these experiments show that LANA
can increase the content of histone SUMO-modiﬁcation in vitro
(isolated system without other proteins), and in vivo at the local
chromatin level. Based on these data, we propose that LANA
increases local SUMO-modiﬁcation, and thus impacts and initi-
ates epigenetic changes at these sites. These epigenetic changes may
causally associate with the observed silencing of both the KSHV
genome and at speciﬁc genomic loci of the host cell. We therefore
examined whether assembly of a SUMO-mediated complex would
translate into gene repression. If LANA SUMO-ligase function is
important for such a complex formation, the LANA SUMO-ligase
mutants [SUMO-binding mutant (ΔSIM) and histone binding
mutant (HBM)] should have impaired gene repression func-
tion. To answer this question, cDNA microarray analyses were
employed to probe the signiﬁcance of histone targeting SUMO-
ligase function in gene regulation. LANA wild-type and ΔSIM
and HBM mutant stable SLK cells were generated. These cells

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 9

Campbell and Izumiya

Post modiﬁcations of KSHV proteins

lines expressed equivalent amounts of LANA or mutant LANA
proteins when examined by western blotting with anti-Flag anti-
body. As shown in Figure 5E, both ΔSIM and HBM mutants had
signiﬁcantly impaired gene repression activity relative to wild-type
LANA cells; these two cell lines showed gene expression patterns
very similar to vector control SLK cells. Taken together, these
results demonstrate that LANA recruits SUMO–Ubc9 complexes
through SUMO-binding, and facilitates local histone SUMO-
modiﬁcation. Importantly, enrichment of SUMO at LANA bind-
ing sites may also prepare the KSHV genome for reactivation by
generating a suitable target for K-Rta. Obviously, further studies
are required to test this possibility. A putative SUMO-mediated
KSHV latency-reactivation model is depicted in Figure 6.

SUMMARY
Although there are numerous studies describing post-translational
modiﬁcations of several KSHV regulatory factors, there appears to
be a fundamental gap in our knowledge as to precisely how, where

and when these modiﬁcations affect the regulatory functions
associated with each protein. These are very difﬁcult questions to
address for several reasons. The modiﬁcations affect only a small
percentage of the total pool of a particular molecule, are transient
in nature, and, in many cases, detection is technically demanding.
Nevertheless, this area of herpesvirus research should be fruitful in
yielding novel insights into both virus-host interactions and basic
cellular signaling pathways. The recent advancement of proteomic
approaches will certainly help to answer these questions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank our collaborators Pei-Ching Chang, Ryan
Davis, and Clifford G. Tepper for their technical assistance. We also
would like to thank Dr. Hsing-Jien Kung for his generous support.
We apologize to those authors whose work was not cited due to
space limitations. This work was supported by grants from the
National Institutes of Health (R01-CA147791 and P01-DE19085
to Yoshihiro Izumiya).

REFERENCES
Adamson, A. L., and Kenney, S. (2001).
Epstein-Barr virus immediate-early
protein BZLF1 is SUMO-1 mod-
iﬁed and disrupts promyelocytic
leukemia bodies.
75,
2388–2399.

J. Virol.

An, F. Q., Compitello, N., Horwitz,
E., Sramkoski, M., Knudsen, E.
S., and Renne, R.
(2005). The
latency-associated nuclear antigen
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus modulates cellular gene
expression and protects lymphoid
cells from p16 INK4A-induced cell
cycle arrest.
J. Biol. Chem. 280,
3862–3874.

Bachmann, M., and Moroy, T. (2005).
The serine/threonine kinase Pim-
1. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 37,
726–730.

Bajaj, B. G., Verma, S. C., Lan, K., Cotter,
M. A., Woodman, Z. L., and Robert-
son, E. S. (2006). KSHV encoded
LANA upregulates Pim-1 and is a
substrate for its kinase activity. Virol-
ogy 351, 18–28.

Barbera, A. J., Chodaparambil, J. V.,
Kelley-Clarke, B., Joukov, V., Wal-
ter, J. C., Luger, K., and Kaye, K.
M. (2006). The nucleosomal sur-
face as a docking station for Kaposi’s
sarcoma herpesvirus LANA. Science
311, 856–861.

Bernardi, R., and Pandolﬁ, P. P. (2007).
Structure, dynamics and functions
of promyelocytic leukaemia nuclear
bodies. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8,
1006–1016.

Berube, N. G., Healy, J., Medina, C. F.,
Wu, S., Hodgson, T., Jagla, M., and
Picketts, D. J. (2008). Patient muta-
tions alter ATRX targeting to PML
nuclear bodies. Eur. J. Hum. Genet.
16, 192–201.

Boggio, R., Passafaro, A., and Chiocca,
S. (2007). Targeting SUMO E1 to

ubiquitin ligases: a viral strategy
to counteract sumoylation. J. Biol.
Chem. 282, 15376–15382.

Borden, K. L.

leukemia)
can we ﬁt

(2008). Pondering
the puzzle of PML (promye-
locytic
nuclear
bodies:
the pieces
together using
an RNA regu-
lon? Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1783,
2145–2154.

Bossis, G., Malnou, C. E., Far-
ras, R., Andermarcher, E., Hip-
skind, R., Rodriguez, M., Schmidt,
D., Muller, S., Jariel-Encontre, I.,
and Piechaczyk, M. (2005). Down-
regulation of
c-Fos/c-Jun AP-1
dimer activity by sumoylation. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 25, 6964–6979.

Boutell, C., Cuchet-Lourenco, D.,
Vanni, E., Orr, A., Glass, M.,
McFarlane, S., and Everett, R. D.
(2011). A viral ubiquitin ligase
has substrate preferential SUMO
targeted ubiquitin ligase activity
that counteracts intrinsic antiviral
defence. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002245.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002245

Campbell, M., Chang, P.-C., Huerta,
S., Izumiya, C., Davis, R., Tepper,
C. G., Kim, K. Y., Shevchenko, B.,
Wang, D.-H., Jung, J. U., Luciw, P. A.,
Kung, H.-J., and Izumiya, Y. (2011).
Protein arginine methyltransferase
1-directed methylation of Kaposi
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
latency-associated nuclear antigen.
J. Biol. Chem. doi: 10.1074/jbcM111.
289496

Cha, S., Lim, C., Lee, J. Y., Song,
Y.-J., Park, J., Choe, J., and Seo,
T.
(2010). DNA-PK/Ku complex
binds to latency-associated nuclear
antigen and negatively regulates
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus latent replication. Biochem.
Biophys.
394,
934–939.

Commun.

Res.

Chang, P. C., Fitzgerald, L. D., van
Geelan, A., Izumiya, Y., Ellison, T. J.,
Wang, D.-H., Ann, D. K., Luciw, P.
A., and Kung, H. J. (2009). Kruppel-
associated box domain-associated
protein-1 as a latency regulator
for Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus and its modulation by the
viral protein kinase. Cancer Res. 69,
5681–5689.
Chang, P. C.,

Izumiya, Y., Wu, C.
Y., Fitzgerald, L. D., Campbell, M.,
Ellison, T. J., Lam, K. S., Luciw,
P. A., and Kung, H.
J. (2010).
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus (KSHV) encodes a SUMO
E3 ligase that is SIM-dependent and
SUMO-2/3-speciﬁc. J. Biol. Chem.
285, 5266–5273.

Chang, P. J., Shedd, D., Gradoville,
L., Cho, M. S., Chen, L. W.,
Chang, J., and Miller, G. (2002).
Open reading frame 50 protein
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus directly activates the viral
PAN and K12 genes by binding to
related response elements. J. Virol.
76, 3168–3178.

Cheng, F., Weidner-Glunde, M., Var-
josalo, M., Rainio, E. M., Lehto-
nen, A., Schulz, T. F., Koski-
nen, P. J., Taipale, J., and Ojala,
P. M. (2009). KSHV reactivation
from latency requires Pim-1 and
Pim-3 kinases
to inactivate the
latency-associated nuclear antigen
LANA. PLoS Pathog. 5, e1000324.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000324

Colombo, R., Boggio, R., Seiser, C.,
Draetta, G. F., and Chiocca, S.
(2002). The adenovirus protein
Gam1 interferes with sumoylation of
histone deacetylase 1. EMBO Rep. 3,
1062–1068.

Cuypers, H. T., Selten, G., Quint,
W., Zijlstra, M., Maandag, E. R.,
Boelens, W., van Wezenbeek, P.,

Melief, C., and Berns, A. (1984).
Murine leukemia virus-induced T-
cell
lymphogenesis: integration of
proviruses in a distinct chromoso-
mal region. Cell 37, 141–150.

Daniel, A. R., Faivre, E. J., and Lange,
C. A.
(2007). Phosphorylation-
dependent antagonism of sumoyla-
tion derepresses progesterone recep-
tor action in breast cancer cells. Mol.
Endocrinol. 21, 2890–2906.

Daniel, A. R., and Lange, C. A.
(2009). Protein kinases mediate
ligand-independent
derepres-
sumoylated progesterone
sion of
receptors
in breast cancer cells.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106,
14287–14292.

Deng, H., Song, M. J., Chu, J. T., and
Sun, R. (2002). Transcriptional reg-
ulation of the interleukin-6 gene
of human herpesvirus 8 (Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus). J.
Virol. 76, 8252–8264.

Deng, Z., Atanasiu, C., Zhao, K., Mar-
morstein, R., Sbodio, J. I., Chi, N. W.,
and Lieberman, P. M. (2005). Inhi-
bition of Epstein-Barr virus OriP
function by tankyrase, a telomere-
associated poly-ADP ribose poly-
merase that binds and modiﬁes
EBNA1. J. Virol. 79, 4640–4650.

Drane, P., Ouararhni, K., Depaux,
A., Shuaib, M., and Hamiche, A.
(2010). The death-associated pro-
tein DAXX is a novel histone chap-
erone involved in the replication-
independent deposition of H3.3.
Genes Dev. 24, 1253–1265.

Ellison, T.

J., Izumiya, Y., Izumiya,
C., Luciw, P. A., and Kung, H. J.
(2009). A comprehensive analysis
of recruitment and transactivation
potential of K-Rta and K-bZIP dur-
ing reactivation of Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus. Virology 387,
76–88.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 10

Campbell and Izumiya

Post modiﬁcations of KSHV proteins

Everett, R. D., Parada, C., Gripon, P.,
Sirma, H., and Orr, A. (2008). repli-
cation of ICP0-null mutant herpes
simplex virus type 1 is restricted by
both PML and sp100. J. Virol. 82,
2661–2672.

Everett, R. D., Rechter, S., Papior, P.,
Tavalai, N., Stamminger, T., and Orr,
A. (2006). PML contributes to a cel-
lular mechanism of repression of
herpes simplex virus type 1 infection
that is inactivated by ICP0. J. Virol.
80, 7995–8005.

Forde, J. E., and Dale, T. C. (2007).
Glycogen synthase kinase 3: a key
regulator of cellular fate. Cell. Mol.
Life Sci. 64, 1930–1944.

Friborg, J., Kong, W., Hottiger, M. O.,
and Nabel, G. J. (1999). p53 inhibi-
tion by the LANA protein of KSHV
protects against cell death. Nature
402, 889–894.

Fu, C., Ahmed, K., Ding, H., Ding,
X., Lan, J., Yang, Z., Miao, Y., Zhu,
Y., Shi, Y., Zhu, J., Huang, H., and
Yao, X. (2005). Stabilization of PML
nuclear localization by conjugation
and oligomerization of SUMO-3.
Oncogene 24, 5401–5413.

Fujimuro, M., and Hayward, S. D.
latency-associated
The
(2003).
Kaposi’s
nuclear
antigen
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
manipulates the activity of glycogen
synthase kinase-3 beta. J. Virol. 77,
8019–8030.

of

Fujimuro, M., Liu, J., Zhu, J., Yokosawa,
H., and Hayward, S. D. (2005). Reg-
ulation of the interaction between
glycogen synthase kinase 3 and
the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus latency-associated nuclear
antigen. J. Virol. 79, 10429–10441.

Ganem, D. (2010). KSHV and the
pathogenesis of Kaposi sarcoma: lis-
tening to human biology and medi-
cine. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 939–949.

Geiss-Friedlander, R., and Melchior, F.
(2007). Concepts in sumoylation: a
decade on. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
8, 947–956.

Girdwood, D., Bumpass, D., Vaughan,
O. A., Thain, A., Anderson, L. A.,
Snowden, A. W., Garcia-Wilson, E.,
Perkins, N. D., and Hay, R. T. (2003).
P300 transcriptional repression is
mediated by SUMO modiﬁcation.
Mol. Cell 11, 1043–1054.

Goldberg,A. D., Banaszynski, L. A., Noh,
K. M., Lewis, P. W., Elsaesser, S. J.,
Stadler, S., Dewell, S., Law, M., Guo,
X., Li, X., Wen, D., Chapgier, A.,
DeKelver, R. C., Miller, J. C., Lee, Y.
L., Boydston, E. A., Holmes, M. C.,
Gregory, P. D., Greally, J. M., Raﬁi, S.,
Yang, C., Scambler, P. J., Garrick, D.,
Gibbons, R. J., Higgs, D. R., Cristea,
I. M., Urnov, F. D., Zheng, D., and

Allis, C. D. (2010). Distinct factors
control histone variant H3.3 local-
ization at speciﬁc genomic regions.
Cell 140, 678–691.

Goodarzi, A. A., Kurka, T., and Jeggo,
P. A. (2011). KAP-1 phosphoryla-
tion regulates CHD3 nucleosome
remodeling during DNA double-
strand break response. Nat. Struct.
Mol. Biol. 18, 831–839.

Gwack, Y., Nakamura, H., Lee, S. W.,
Souvis, J., Yustein, J. T., Gyri, S.,
Kung, H. J., and Jung, J. U. (2003).
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 and
Ste20-like kinase hKFC act as tran-
scriptional repressors for gamma-
2 herpesvirus lytic replication. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 23, 8282–8294.

Hagen, T. (2009). Characterization of
the interaction between latency-
associated nuclear
antigen and
glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta. J.
Virol. 83, 6312–6317.

Heaphy, C. M., de Wilde, R. F., Jiao, Y.,
Klein, A. P., Edil, B. H., Shi, C., Bette-
gowda, C., Rodriguez, F. J., Eberhart,
C. G., Hebbar, S., Offerhaus, G. J.,
McLendon, R., Rasheed, B. A., He, Y.,
Yan, H., Bigner, D. D., Oba-Shinjo, S.
M., Marie, S. K., Riggins, G. J., Kin-
zler, K. W., Vogelstein, B., Hruban,
R. H., Maitra, A., Papadopoulos, N.,
and Meeker, A. K. (2011). Altered
telomeres in tumors with ATRX
and DAXX mutations. Science 333,
425.

Hofmann, H., Floss, S., and Stam-
minger, T. (2000). Covalent modiﬁ-
cation of the transactivator protein
IE2-p86 of human cytomegalovirus
by conjugation to the ubiquitin-
homologous proteins SUMO-1 and
hSMT3b. J. Virol. 74, 2510–2524.

Hsu, C. H., Chang, M. D., Tai, K. Y.,
Yang, Y. T., Wang, P. S., Chen, C. J.,
Wang, Y. H., Lee, S. C., Wu, C. W.,
and Juan, L. J. (2004). HCMV IE2-
mediated inhibition of HAT activity
downregulates p53 function. EMBO
J. 23, 2269–2280.

Hu,

J., Garber, A. C., and Renne,
R. (2002). The latency-associated
nuclear antigen of Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated
supports
latent DNA replication in dividing
cells. J. Virol. 76, 11677–11687.

herpesvirus

Hwang, S., Gwack, Y., Byun, H.,
Lim, C., and Choe, J. (2001). The
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus K8 protein interacts with
CREB-binding protein (CBP) and
represses CBP-mediated transcrip-
tion. J. Virol. 75, 9509–9516.

Ishov, A. M., Sotnikov, A. G., Negorev,
D., Vladimirova, O. V., Neff, N.,
Kamitani, T., Yeh, E. T., Strauss, J. F.,
3rd, and Maul, G. G. (1999). PML
is critical for ND10 formation and

recruits the PML-interacting protein
Daxx to this nuclear structure when
modiﬁed by SUMO-1. J. Cell Biol.
147, 221–234.

Izumiya, Y., Ellison, T. J., Yeh, E. T., Jung,
J. U., Luciw, P. A., and Kung, H. J.
(2005). Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus K-bZIP represses gene
transcription via SUMO modiﬁca-
tion. J. Virol. 79, 9912–9925.

Izumiya, Y., Izumiya, C., Van Gee-
len, A., Wang, D. H., Lam, K.
S., Luciw, P. A., and Kung, H. J.
(2007). Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus-encoded protein kinase
and its interaction with K-bZIP. J.
Virol. 81, 1072–1082.

Kedes, D. H., Lagunoff, M., Renne, R.,
and Ganem, D. (1997). Identiﬁca-
tion of the gene encoding the major
latency-associated nuclear antigen
of the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus.
Invest. 100,
2606–2610.

J. Clin.

Kelley-Clarke, B., De Leon-Vazquez, E.,
Slain, K., Barbera, A. J., and Kaye,
K. M. (2009). Role of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus C-
terminal LANA chromosome bind-
ing in episome persistence. J. Virol.
83, 4326–4337.

Kodadek, T., Sikder, D., and Nalley,
K. (2006). Keeping transcriptional
activators under control. Cell 127,
261–264.

Komatsu, T., Ballestas, M. E., Bar-
bera, A. J., Kelley-Clarke, B., and
Kaye, K. M. (2004). KSHV LANA1
binds DNA as an oligmer and
residues N-terminal to the oligomer-
ization domain are essential
for
DNA binding, replication, and epi-
some persistence. Virology
319,
225–336.

Krishnakumar, R., and Kraus, W. L.
(2010). The PARP side of
the
nucleus: molecular actions, physio-
logical outcomes, and clinical tar-
gets. Mol. Cell 39, 8–24.

(2005). Kaposi’s

Lan, K., Kuppers, D. A., and Robertson,
E. S.
sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus reactivation
interaction of
is
regulated by
latency-associated
nuclear
anti-
gen with recombination signal
sequence-binding protein J-kappa,
the major downstream effector of
the Notch signaling pathway.
J.
Virol. 79, 3468–3478.

Ledl, A., Schmidt, D., and Muller,
S. (2005). Viral oncoproteins E1A
and E7 and cellular LxCxE proteins
repress SUMO modiﬁcation of the
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor.
Oncogene 24, 3810–3818.

Lefort, S., Gravel, A., and Flamand,
L. (2010). Repression of interferon-
alpha stimulated genes expression

by Kaposi’s sarcoma-assocaited her-
pesvirus K-bZIP protein. Virology
408, 14–30.

Lewis, P. W., Elsaesser, S. J., Noh, K.
M., Stadler, S. C., and Allis, C. D.
(2010). Daxx is an H3.3-speciﬁc his-
tone chaperone and cooperates with
ATRX in replication-independent
chromatin assembly at telomeres.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
14075–14080.

Lilley, C. E., Schwartz, R. A., and Weitz-
man, M. D. (2007). Using or abusing:
viruses and the cellular DNA dam-
age response. Trends Microbiol. 15,
119–126.

Lim, C., Gwack, Y., Hwang, S., Kim,
S., and Choe, J. (2001). The tran-
scriptional activity of cAMP rsponse
element-binding protein is mod-
ulated by the latency associated
nuclear antigen of Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus. J. Biol. Chem.
276, 31016–31022.

Lin, D. Y., Huang, Y. S., Jeng, J. C., Kuo,
H. Y., Chang, C. C., Chao, T. T., Ho,
C. C., Chen, Y. C., Lin, T. P., Fang, H.
I., Hung, C. C., Suen, C. S., Hwang,
M. J., Chang, K. S., Maul, G. G., and
Shih, H. M. (2006). Role of SUMO-
interacting motif in Daxx SUMO
modiﬁcation, subnuclear localiza-
tion, and repression of sumoylated
transcription factors. Mol. Cell 24,
341–354.

J.

and Kung, H.

Lin, S. F., Robinson, D. R., Miller,
(1999).
G.,
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus encodes a bZIP protein with
homology to BZLF1 of Epstein-Barr
virus. J. Virol. 73, 1909–1917.

Liu,

J., Martin, H., Shamay, M.,
Woodard, C., Tang, Q.-Q., and
Hayward, S. D. (2007). Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
LANA
downregulates
nuclear glycogen synthase kinase
3
consequently
blocks differentiation. J. Virol. 81,
4722–4731.

protein

activity

and

Lu, F., Day, L., Gao, S.

the

J., and
Lieberman, P. M. (2006). Acety-
lation of
latency-associated
nuclear antigen regulates repression
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus lytic transcription. J. Virol.
80, 5273–5282.

Lukac, D. M., Kirshner, J. R., and
Ganem, D. (1999). Transcriptional
activation by the product of open
reading
50 of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus is
required for lytic viral reactivation
in B cells. J. Virol. 73, 9348–9361.

frame

Lukac, D. M., Renne, R., Kirshner, J.
R., and Ganem, D. (1998). Reactiva-
tion of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus infection from latency

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 11

Campbell and Izumiya

Post modiﬁcations of KSHV proteins

by expression of the ORF 50 trans-
activator, a homolog of the EBV R
protein. Virology 252, 304–312.

Lukashchuk, V., McFarlane, S., Everett,
R. D., and Preston, C. M. (2006).
Human cytomegalovirus protein
pp71 displaces
chromatin-
associated factor ATRX from nuclear
domain 10 at early stages of infec-
tion. J. Virol. 82, 12543–12554.

the

Marcos-Villar,

L.,

Lopitz-Otsoa,
F., Gallego, P., Munoz-Fontela, C.,
Gonzalez-Santamaria, J., Campagna,
M., Shou-Jiang, G., Rodriguez, M.
S., and Rivas, C. (2009). Kaposi’s
herpesvirus
sarcoma-associated
protein LANA2
disrupts PML
oncogenic domains and inhibits
PML-mediated
transcriptional
repression of the survivin gene. J.
Virol. 83, 8849–8858.

Mesri, E. A., Cesarman, E., and Boshoff,
C. (2010). Kaposi’s sarcoma and
its associated herpesvirus. Nat. Rev.
Cancer 10, 707–719.

vascular

endothelial

Murakami, Y., Yamagoe, S., Noguchi,
K., Takebe, Y., Takahashi, N.,
Uehara, Y.,
and Fukazawa, H.
(2006). Ets-1-dependent expression
growth
of
factor
is activated by
latency-associated nuclear antigen
of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
through interaction
herpesvirus
with Daxx.
J. Biol. Chem. 281,
28113–28121.

receptors

Muratani, M., and Tansey, W. P. (2003).
How the ubiquitin-proteasome sys-
tem controls transcription. Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 4, 192–201.

Nagai, S., Davoodi, N., and Gasser, S.
M. (2011). Nuclear organization in
genome stability: SUMO connec-
tions. Cell Res. 21, 474–485.

Nakamura, H., Lu, M., Gwack, Y., Sou-
vlis, J., Zeichner, S. L., and Jung,
J. U. (2003). Global changes in
Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated virus
gene expression patterns
follow-
ing expression of a tetracycline-
inducible Rta transactivator. J. Virol.
77, 4205–4220.

Nathan, D., Ingvarsdottir, K., Sterner, D.
E., Bylebyl, G. R., Dokmanovic, M.,
Dorsey, J. A., Whelan, K. A., Krs-
manovic, M., Lane, W. S., Meluh,
P. B., Johnson, E. S., and Berger,
S. L. (2006). Histone sumoylation
is a negative regulator
in Sac-
charomyces
cerevisiae and shows
dynamic interplay with positive-
acting histone modiﬁcations. Genes
Dev. 20, 966–976.

Ohsaki, E., Ueda, K., Sakakibara,
S., Do, E., Yada, K., and Yaman-
ishi, K. (2004). Poly(ADP-ribose)
to Kaposi’s
polymerase 1 binds
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus

(KSHV) terminal repeat sequence
and modulates KSHV replication in
latency. J. Virol. 78, 9936–9946.

Platt, G. M., Simpson, G. R., Mittnacht,
S., and Schulz, T. F. (1999). Latent
nuclear antigen of Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus interacts with
RING3, a homolog of the Drosophila
female sterile homeotic (fsh) gene. J.
Virol. 73, 9789–9795.

Polson, A. G., Huang, L., Lukac,
D. M., Blethrow,
J. D., Mor-
gan, D. O., Burlingame, A. L.,
and Ganem, D. (2001). Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus K-
bZIP protein is phosphorylated by
cyclin-dependent kinases. J. Virol.
75, 3175–3184.

Prudden, J., Pebernard, S., Raffa, G.,
Slavin, D. A., Perry, J. J., Tainer, J. A.,
McGowan, C. H., and Boddy, M. N.
(2007). SUMO-targeted ubiquitin
ligases in genome stability. EMBO J.
26, 4089–4101.

Radkov, S. A., Kellam, P., and Boshoff,
C. (2000). The latent nuclear antigen
of Kaposi sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus targets the retinoblastoma-
E2F pathway and with the oncogene
Hras transforms primary rat cells.
Nat. Med. 6, 1121–1127.

Rosas-Acosta, G., Langereis, M. A.,
Deyrieux, A., and Wilson, V. G.
(2005). Proteins of the PIAS fam-
ily enhance the sumoylation of the
papillomavirus E1 protein. Virology
331, 190–203.

Rouleau, M., Patel, A., Hendzel, M. J.,
Kaufmann, S. H., and Poirier, G.
G. (2010). PARP inhibition: PARP1
and beyond. Nat. Rev. Cancer 10,
293–301.

Schulz, T. F. (2001). KSHV/HHV8-
assoicated lymphoproliferations in
the AIDS setting. Eur. J. Cancer 37,
1217–1226.

Seeler, J. S., Marchio, A., Losson, R.,
Desterro, J. M., Hay, R. T., Cham-
bon, P., and Dejean, A. (2001).
Common properties of nuclear
body protein SP100 and TIF1alpha
chromatin factor: role of SUMO
modiﬁcation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21,
3314–3324.

Song, M. J., Li, X., Brown, H. J., and
Sun, R. (2002). Characterization of
interactions between RTA and the
promoter of polyadenylated nuclear
RNA in Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus/human herpesvirus 8. J.
Virol. 76, 5000–5013.

Spengler, M. L., Kurapatwinski, K.,
Black, A. R., and Azizkhan-Clifford,
J. (2002). SUMO-1 modiﬁcation of
human cytomegalovirus IE1/IE72. J.
Virol. 76, 2990–2996.

Stielow, B., Sapetschnig, A., Wink, C.,
Kruger, I., and Suske, G. (2008).

SUMO-modiﬁed Sp3 represses tran-
scription by provoking local hete-
rochromatic gene silencing. EMBO
Rep. 9, 899–906.

Sun, H., Leverson, J. D., and Hunter,
T. (2007). Conserved function of
RNF4 family proteins in eukary-
otes: targeting a ubiquitin ligase to
SUMOylated proteins. EMBO J. 26,
4102–4112.

Sun, R., Lin, S. F., Gradoville, L.,Yuan,Y.,
Zhu, F., and Miller, G. (1998). A viral
gene that activates lytic cycle expres-
sion of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 95, 10866–10871.

Tassi, E., Biesova, Z., Di Fiore, P. P.,
Gutkind, J. S., and Wong, W. T.
(1999). Human JIK, a novel mem-
ber of the STE20 kinas family that
inhibits JNK and is negatively regu-
lated by epidermal growth factor. J.
Biol. Chem. 274, 33287–33295.

Tatham, M. H., Geoffroy, M. C., Shen,
L., Plechanovova, A., Hattersley, N.,
Jaffray, E. G., Palvimo, J. J., and
Hay, R. T. (2008). RNF4 is a poly-
SUMO-speciﬁc E3 ubiquitin lig-
ase required for arsenic-induced
PML degradation. Nat. Cell Biol. 10,
538–546.

Tavalai, N., Papior, P., Rechter, S., Leis,
M., and Stamminger, T. (2006). Evi-
dence for a role of
the cellular
ND10 protein PML in mediating
intrinsic immunity against human
cytomegalovirus infections. J. Virol.
80, 8006–8018.

Tempera, I., Deng, Z., Atanasiu, C.,
Chen, C.-J., D’Erme, M., and Lieber-
man, P.
(2010). Regulation of
Epstein-Barr virus OriP replication
by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1.
J. Virol. 84, 4988–4997.

Uchimura, Y., Ichimura, T., Uwada, J.,
Tachibana, T., Sugahara, S., Nakao,
M., and Saitoh, H. (2006). Involve-
ment of SUMO modiﬁcation in
MBD1- and MCAF1-mediated het-
erochromatin formation.
J. Biol.
Chem. 281, 23180–23190.

Uzunova, K., Gottsche, K., Miteva,
M., Weisshaar, S. R., Glanemann,
C., Schnellhardt, M., Niessen, M.,
Scheel, H., Hofmann, K., Johnson, E.
S., Praefcke, G. J., and Dohmen, R. J.
(2007). Ubiquitin-dependent prote-
olytic control of SUMO conjugates.
J. Biol. Chem. 282, 34167–34175.

Varjosalo, M., Bjorklund, M., Cheng, F.,
Synanen, H., Kivioja, T., Kilpinen,
S., Sun, Z., Kallioniemi, O., Stun-
nenberg, H. G., He, W.-W., Ojala,
P., and Taipale, J. (2008). Applica-
tion of active and kinase-deﬁcient
kinome collection for identiﬁcation
of kinases regulating hedgehog sig-
naling. Cell 133, 537–548.

Verma, S. C., Borah, S., and Robert-
son, E. (2004). Latency-associated
nuclear antigen of Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus upregulates
transcription of human telom-
reverse
erase
transcriptase pro-
moter
through interaction with
transcription factor Sp1. J. Virol. 78,
10348–10359.

Verma, S. C., Lan, K., and Robertson,
E. (2007). Structure and function of
latency-associated nuclear antigen.
Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 312,
101–136.

West,

Weitzman, M. D., Lilley, C. E.,
and Chaurushiya, M. S. (2010).
Genomes in conﬂict: maintaining
genome integrity during virus infec-
tion. Annu. Rev. Microbiol.64, 61–81.
J. T., and Wood, C. (2003).
sarcoma-
The
herpesvirus/human
associated
herpesvirus-8 regulator of
tran-
scription activation (RTA) in control
of gene expression. Oncogene 22,
5150–5163.

role of Kaposi’s

Wu, H., Sun, L., Zhang, Y., Chen, Y., Shi,
B., Li, R., Wang, Y., Liang, J., Fan, D.,
Wu, G., Wang, D., Li, S., and Shang,
Y. (2006). Coordinated regulation
of AIB1 transcriptional activity by
sumoylation and phosphorylation.
J. Biol. Chem. 281, 21848–21856.

Wu, Y. C., Deyrieux, A. F., and Wilson, V.
G. (2007). Papillomaviruses and the
host SUMOylation system. Biochem.
Soc. Trans. 35, 1433–1435.

Xie, Y., Kerscher, O., Kroetz, M. B.,
McConchie, H. F., Sung, P., and
Hochstrasser, M. (2007). The yeast
Hex3.Slx8 heterodimer is a ubiq-
uitin ligase stimulated by substrate
sumoylation.
J. Biol. Chem. 282,
34176–34184.

Xu, Y., AuCoin, D. P., Huete, A. R.,
Cei, S. A., Hanson, L. J., and Pari,
G. S. (2005). A Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus/human her-
pesvirus 8 ORF50 deletion mutant
is defective for reactivation of latent
virus and DNA replication. J. Virol.
79, 3479–3487.

Yang, Z., Yan, Z., and Wood, C.
(2008). Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus transactivator RTA pro-
motes degradation of the repressors
to regulate viral lytic replication. J.
Virol. 82, 3590–3603.

Yu, Y., Wang, S. E., and Hayward, G.
S. (2005). The KSHV immediate-
early
transcription factor RTA
encodes ubiquitin E3 ligase activity
that targets IRF7 for proteasome-
mediated degradation. Immunity 22,
59–70.

Yustein, J. T., Li, D., Robinson, D., and
Kung, H. J. (2000). KFC, a Ste20-like
kinase with mitogenic potential and

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 12

Campbell and Izumiya

Post modiﬁcations of KSHV proteins

capability to activate the SAPK/JNK
pathway. Oncogene 19, 710–718.

Yustein, J. T., Xia, L., Kahlenburg, J.
M., Robinson, D., Templeton, D.,
and Kung, H. J. (2003). Compara-
tive studies of a new subfamily of
human Ste-20-like kinases: homod-
imerization, subcellular localization,
and selective activation of MKK3
and p38. Oncogene 22, 6129–6141.

of
SUMO-1-modiﬁed PML in
nuclear body formation. Blood 95,
2748–2752.

Zimnik, S., Gaestel, M., and Nieden-
thal, R. (2009). Mutually exclu-
sive STAT1 modiﬁcations identiﬁed
by Ubc9/substrate dimerization-
dependent SUMOylation. Nucleic
Acids Res. 37, e30.

Zhong,

S., Muller,

S., Ronchetti,
S., Freemont, P. S., Dejean, A.,
and Pandolﬁ, P. P. (2000). Role

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was

conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 22 November 2011; paper
pending published: 12 December 2011;
accepted: 18 January 2012; published
online: 14 February 2012.
Citation: Campbell M and Izumiya
Y (2012) Post-translational modiﬁca-
tions of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus regulatory proteins – SUMO

and KSHV. Front. Microbio. 3:31. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00031
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Virology, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Campbell and Izu-
miya. This is an open-access article dis-
tributed under the terms of the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution Non Com-
mercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 31 | 13

