REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 16 March 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00096

Redox transformations of iron at extremely low pH:
fundamental and applied aspects

D. Barrie Johnson*,Tadayoshi Kanao† and Sabrina Hedrich
School of Biological Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, UK

Edited by:
David Emerson, Bigelow Laboratory
for Ocean Sciences, USA
Reviewed by:
Benjamin Kocar, Stanford University,
USA
Kelly Wrighton, University of
California Berkeley, USA
*Correspondence:
D. Barrie Johnson, School of
Biological Sciences, University of
Wales, LL57 2UW Bangor, UK.
e-mail: d.b.johnson@bangor.ac.uk
†Present address:
Tadayoshi Kanao, Division of
Bioscience Graduate School of
Natural Science and Technology,
Okayama University, 3-1-1,
Tsushima-Naka, Okayama 700-8530,
Japan.

Many different species of acidophilic prokaryotes, widely distributed within the domains
Bacteria and Archaea, can catalyze the dissimilatory oxidation of ferrous iron or reduction of
ferric iron, or can do both. Microbially mediated cycling of iron in extremely acidic environ-
ments (pH < 3) is strongly inﬂuenced by the enhanced chemical stability of ferrous iron and
far greater solubility of ferric iron under such conditions. Cycling of iron has been demon-
strated in vitro using both pure and mixed cultures of acidophiles, and there is considerable
evidence that active cycling of iron occurs in acid mine drainage streams, pit lakes, and
iron-rich acidic rivers, such as the Rio Tinto. Measurements of speciﬁc rates of iron oxi-
dation and reduction by acidophilic microorganisms show that different species vary in
their capacities for iron oxido-reduction, and that this is inﬂuenced by the electron donor
provided and growth conditions used. These measurements, and comparison with corre-
sponding data for oxidation of reduced sulfur compounds, also help explain why ferrous
iron is usually used preferentially as an electron donor by acidophiles that can oxidize both
iron and sulfur, even though the energy yield from oxidizing iron is much smaller than that
available from sulfur oxidation. Iron-oxidizing acidophiles have been used in biomining (a
technology that harness their abilities to accelerate the oxidative dissolution of sulﬁdic min-
erals and thereby facilitate the extraction of precious and base metals) for several decades.
More recently they have also been used to simultaneously remediate iron-contaminated
surface and ground waters and produce a useful mineral by-product (schwertmannite).
Bioprocessing of oxidized mineral ores using acidophiles that catalyze the reductive dis-
solution of ferric iron minerals such as goethite has also recently been demonstrated, and
new biomining technologies based on this approach are being developed.

Keywords: acidophiles, iron, oxidation, reduction

ENERGETIC CONSTRAINTS ON THE OXIDO-REDUCTION OF
IRON AT LOW pH
Iron is the most abundant transition metal in the lithosphere, as
well as the most abundant element (on a weight basis) in planet
earth. In contrast, the concentration of soluble, bio-available iron
often limits the growth of primary producing organisms in many
aquatic (e.g., marine) and terrestrial (e.g., calcareous soils) envi-
ronments. However, extremely acidic (pH < 3) environments tend
to buck this trend, though there are exceptions, such as acidic
sites that develop in calcareous substrata due to the microbio-
logical oxidation of hydrogen sulﬁde (e.g., in the Frasissi cave
system, Italy; Macalady et al., 2007). There are two main rea-
sons why iron is more bio-available (often to the point at which
it becomes toxic to most life forms) at low pH: (i) extremely
acidic environments, both natural and man-made, are often asso-
ciated with the oxidative dissolution of sulﬁde minerals, many
of which contain iron (including the most abundant of all such
minerals, pyrite; FeS2), and (ii) both ionic forms of (uncom-
plexed) iron are far more soluble (especially ferric iron) at low
pH than at circum-neutral pH. Metallic (zero-valent) iron is
rare in the lithosphere, while the dominant non-complexed ionic
form of this metal in the environment is mostly dictated by its

−1 is 8.4 mg min
−7 μg min

aeration status, with ferrous iron [iron (II)] being more relatively
abundant in anoxic environments and ferric iron [iron (III)] in
aerobic sites. This is also the case in extremely acidic environ-
ments, though the causative agents of ferrous iron oxidation are
often very different in the two situations. At pH 7, the sponta-
neous (abiotic) rate of oxidation in an oxygen-saturated solution
−1, while at pH 2
containing 100 mg ferrous iron L
the corresponding rate is 8.4× 10
−1 (using the equation
described in Stumm and Morgan, 1981). Spontaneous chemi-
cal oxidation of (uncomplexed) iron can, therefore, be rapid at
circum-neutral pH, though it is much slower where oxygen con-
centrations are low, e.g., the oxidation rate of the same hypothetical
−1) is much
solution (pH 7, containing 100 mg ferrous iron L
−1) when the dissolved oxygen concentration
slower (0.47 mg min
−1. An important consequence
is 0.5 mg L
of this is that acidophilic iron-oxidizing bacteria and archaea
can exploit ferrous iron as a resource in oxygen-saturated waters
where, in contrast to their neutrophilic counterparts, abiotic iron
oxidation is not competitive.

−1, as opposed to 9 mg L

The greatly enhanced solubility of ferric iron at low pH
derives chieﬂy from the fact that ferric (oxy-)hydroxide phases
have very small solubility products. For example, the log K sp of

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 1

Johnson et al.

Iron cycling in acidic environments

−1, compared to 140 ng L

Fe(OH)3 is −38.6 at 25˚C (Monhemius, 1977) so that the the-
oretical maximum concentrations of non-complexed ferric iron
−1 at pH 4 and
at pH 2 is 140 mg L
−1 at pH 7. However, the most signiﬁcant ferric iron
0.14 fg L
mineral phases that form in sulfate-containing low pH environ-
ments are jarosites [e.g., KFe3(SO4)2(OH)6] and schwertmannite
[ideal formula Fe8O8(OH)6SO4; Bigham et al., 1996] the solubility
products of which have not been determined. Schwertmannite is
metastable with respect to goethite (α-FeO.OH) and recrystallizes
to the latter in an acid-generating reaction:

Fe8O8(OH)6SO4 + 2 H2O → 8 FeO.OH + SO2−

4

+ 2H

+

−

+

+

(Welham et al.,

and Fe(SO4)

rather than uncomplexed Fe3+

At very low pH values, and in the presence of monovalent
cations, schwertmannite is also metastable with respect to jarosite
(Regenspurg et al., 2004). In addition, ferric iron forms complexes
with both sulfate and hydroxyl ions, and the dominant soluble
−
forms of this ionic species in acidic, sulfate liquors are Fe(SO4)2
and Fe(SO4)
2000), which inﬂuences its solubility.
The standard redox potential of the ferrous/ferric couple at pH
2 is generally quoted as +770 mV. However, the fact that ferric
iron is complexed by sulfate ions in most natural and man-made
extremely acidic environments inﬂuences this value, and the stan-
/Fe2+
dard redox couples of both the Fe(SO4)2
couples are more electronegative than that of the uncomplexed
metal. In sulfate solutions at pH 1, the standard potential of the
ferrous/ferric couples has been calculated to be+697 mV (Welham
et al., 2000), and it is slightly more electropositive (∼+ 720 mV) at
pH 3 (O’Hara and Johnson, unpublished data). Although signiﬁ-
cant, these more electronegative redox potentials do still not allow
the oxidation of iron to be coupled, at low pH, to potential alterna-
tive electron acceptors to oxygen, such as nitrate (the redox poten-
tial of the nitrate/nitrite couple is +430 mV). This bioenergetic
constraint is one of the factors that differentiates the metabolic
diversities of acidophilic and neutrophilic iron-oxidizing bacteria
(Hedrich et al., 2011). However, the more electronegative redox
potential of the ferrous/ferric sulfate complex couple, together
with the more electropositive potential of the oxygen/water couple
in acidic liquors (1.12 V at pH 2) than at pH 7 (+820 mV), means
that the net potential difference between ferrous iron as electron
donor and oxygen as electron acceptor is ∼420 mV at pH 2, which
is far greater than values (50–350 mV) that are often quoted.

BIODIVERSITY OF PROKARYOTES THAT CATALYZE REDOX
TRANSFORMATIONS OF Fe AT LOW pH
Acidophilic microorganisms, as a generic group, have wide meta-
bolic diversities, including the abilities to use solar and chemical
(organic and inorganic) sources of energy, a variety of elec-
tron acceptors, and to use both inorganic and organic sources
of carbon (and, in some cases, both). In phylogenetic terms,
iron-metabolizing acidophiles are highly diverse, occurring in
the domain Bacteria within the Proteobacteria (alpha-, beta-, and
gamma-classes), Nitrospirae, Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Aci-
dobacteria phyla, and in the domain Archaea within the Crenar-
chaeota and Euryarchaeota phyla. They also vary in their response
to temperature, and include species that are psychrotolerant

(e.g., Acidithiobacillus ferrivorans), mesophilic (e.g., Ferrimi-
crobium acidiphilum), thermotolerant/moderately thermophilic
(e.g., Sulfobacillus acidophilus), and extremely thermophilic (e.g.,
Sulfolobus metallicus).

Chemolithotrophy (using inorganic chemicals as sole or major
electron donors) is a particularly widespread and much stud-
ied trait among acidophilic bacteria and archaea (Johnson and
Hallberg, 2009). Reduced forms of sulfur (including elemental
sulfur) are used by diverse genera of acidophilic bacteria (e.g.,
Acidithiobacillus spp.) and archaea (e.g., Sulfolobus spp.), and some
species of acidophiles can also use hydrogen as an energy source
(e.g., Drobner et al., 1990). The ﬁrst ferrous iron-oxidizing aci-
dophile to be characterized was Acidithiobacillus (At.) ferrooxidans
(strains variously named at the time as Thiobacillus ferrooxidans,
Ferrobacillus ferrooxidans, and Ferrobacillus sulfooxidans). These
were all described as chemo-autotrophic bacteria that appeared
to vary in their capacities for oxidizing reduced sulfur. Subse-
quently, many different species of acidophilic bacteria, though
fewer acidophilic archaea, have also been shown to be able to uti-
lize the energy derived from oxidizing ferrous iron to support
their growth, including species that are obligate and facultative
heterotrophs, as well as other autotrophic species.

In contrast to iron oxidation at low pH, the ability of aci-
dophiles to grow via the dissimilatory reduction of ferric iron
was only discovered in the late 1980s/early 1990s, with this trait
being ﬁrst reported for an autotrophic bacterium (At. ferrooxi-
dans; Pronk et al., 1991) and heterotrophic bacteria (Acidiphilium
spp.; Johnson and McGinness, 1991). Currently, all acidophiles
that are known to use ferric as an electron acceptor to support
their growth are facultative reducers, in that all of them can also
reduce molecular oxygen. Electron donors that are coupled to
iron reduction are inorganic (sulfur or hydrogen) in the case
of chemolithotrophic acidophiles such as At. ferrooxidans, and
organic (e.g., glucose or glycerol) in the case of heterotrophic
acidophiles, such as Acidiphilium spp.

Table 1 groups acidophiles that catalyze the dissimilatory redox
transformations of iron into three categories, based in their abil-
ities to oxidize ferrous iron, to reduce ferric iron or (depending
on environmental conditions) to do both. One interesting fact is
that the majority of iron-oxidizing bacteria can also reduce ferric
iron and, in cases where this has been examined, use the latter
to support their growth. Exceptions to this include Leptospirillum
spp. and “Ferrovum (Fv.) myxofaciens,” though this is explained
by the fact that these two genera are known to use only ferrous
iron as an electron donor, thereby restricting them to an aero-
bic life-style and negating the possibility that they can grow by
ferric iron respiration. In the case of the currently mis-named aci-
dophile “Thiobacillus (T.) prosperous” (proposed to be re-classiﬁed
as “Acidihalobacter prosperous”; Nicolle et al., 2009) there are cur-
rently no published data showing that this salt-tolerant acidophilic
iron- and sulfur-oxidizer can grow anaerobically using sulfur as
electron donor and ferric iron as electron acceptor. For all other
iron-oxidizing acidophilic bacteria, the co-existence of iron oxi-
dation and iron reduction capabilities suggests that the electron
shuttle pathways involved might have some components in com-
mon. This, however, is patently not the case for heterotrophic
acidophiles, such as Acidiphilium spp., that catalyze iron reduction

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 2

Johnson et al.

Iron cycling in acidic environments

Table 1 | Acidophilic bacteria and archaea that have been reported to
catalyze the dissimilatory oxidation of ferrous iron or reduction of
ferric iron.

Iron-oxidizing
acidophiles

Iron-reducing
acidophiles

Iron-oxidizing/reducing
acidophiles

BACTERIA
Leptospirillum (L.)1
L. ferrooxidans
L. ferriphilum
“L. ferrodiazotro-
phum”
“Ferrovum
myxofaciens”1
“Thiobacillus
prosperous”1

Acidiphilium (A.)2/3
A. cryptum2
A. acidophilum3
A. angustum/rubrum2

A. organovorum2

A. multivorum2

Acidocella (Ac.)2
Ac. facilis
“Ac aromatica”
Acidobacterium2
Acb. capsulatum
Acidobacterium spp.

ARCHAEA
Sulfolobus (S.)
S. metallicus
S. tokodaii
Metallosphaera
sedula

Acidithiobacillus (At.)1
At. ferrooxidans
At. ferrivorans
Acidiferrobacter
thiooxydans1
Ferrimicrobium
acidiphilum2
Acidimicrobium
ferrooxidans3
Ferrithrix thermotolerans2
Sulfobacillus (Sb.)3
Sb. acidophilus
Sb. thermosulﬁdooxidans
Sb. benefaciens
Alicyclobacillus (Alb.)
Alb. tolerans
Alb. ferrooxydans
Alb. aeris
Alb. pohliae
Alicyclobacillus sp. GSM

Ferroplasma (Fp.) spp.
Fp. acidiphilum
“Fp. acidarmanus”
Acidiplasma (Ap.)
Ap. cupricumulans
Ap. aeolicum

1Obligate autotrophs; 2obligate heterotrophs; 3facultative autotrophs.

but not iron oxidation. Also, Ohmura et al. (2002) found that
At. ferrooxidans grown anaerobically using ferric iron as elec-
tron donor synthesized large amounts of an acid-stable c-type
cytochrome whose reduced form was re-oxidized by ferric iron.
Interestingly, neither species of Acidithiobacillus that oxidizes sul-
fur but not ferrous iron (At. thiooxidans and At. caldus) can
grow anaerobically by ferric iron respiration. Although Brock and
Gustafson (1976) had reported that At. thiooxidans can reduce
ferric iron, Hallberg et al. (2001) showed that this only occurred
in cell suspensions that were incubated aerobically, and that there
was no corresponding increase in cell numbers. This suggests that
iron reduction may have been mediated abiotically by a metabo-
lite produced during sulfur oxidation and that At. thiooxidans
cannot grow by ferric iron respiration. Interestingly, the situa-
tion with iron-oxidizing archaea is less clear, though it appears
that the ability to couple the oxidation of sulfur to the reduction
of ferric iron is commonplace among the Sulfolobales (Paul Nor-
ris, Warwick University, unpublished data). Brock and Gustafson
(1976) also reported that a Sulfolobus sp. [quoted to be Sul-
folobus (S.) acidocaldarius, though this is unlikely as this archaeon

does not grow autotrophically as described in the paper] coupled
sulfur oxidation to ferric iron reduction. Both classiﬁed genera of
iron-oxidizing euryarchaeotes (Ferroplasma and Acidiplasma) can
also reduce ferric iron, though the electron donor here is organic
(e.g., yeast extract) rather than elemental sulfur (Dopson et al.,
2004; Golyshina et al., 2009).

New insights into the nature of iron-oxidizing acidophiles and
how they interact with each other and with other acidophilic
microorganisms have arisen from the detailed microbiological and
molecular studies carried out at the abandoned Richmond mine
at Iron Mountain, California (e.g., Denef et al., 2010). Among
other things, this research has highlighted the important role of
the iron-oxidizing/reducing archaeon “Ferroplasma (Fp.) acidar-
manus” in the dissolution of sulﬁde minerals in extremely acidic
(pH < 1) moderately thermal (∼40˚C) environments, and iden-
tiﬁed very small (<0.45 μm diameter) pleomorphic cells within
acidic bioﬁlms as novel archaeal lineages (designated “ARMAN”:
Archaeal Richmond Mine Acidophilic Nanoorganisms; Baker
et al., 2006).

BIOCHEMICAL MECHANISMS OF DISSIMILATORY
OXIDATION AND REDUCTION OF Fe AT LOW pH
The pathway of dissimilatory iron oxidation has been elucidated
for At. ferrooxidans, and genomic and proteomic studies have
provided revealing insights of how this is mediated in other aci-
dophiles (reviewed in Bonnefoy and Holmes, 2011). By maintain-
ing a near-neutral cytoplasmic pH and living in acidic solutions,
acidophiles have a “ready-made” trans-membrane pH gradient for
generating ATP. However, continued inﬂux of protons would lead
to severe acidiﬁcation of the cytoplasm and cell death if this was
not counterbalanced by equivalent amounts of negatively charged
ions or particles. Electrons derived from the oxidation of ferrous
iron satisfy this requirement, and the reduction of molecular oxy-
gen completes the energy-synthesizing (“downhill electron ﬂow”)
pathway (Figure 1). Electrons derived from ferrous iron are also
used to generate reducing equivalents (e.g., NADH) but since the
redox potential of the ferrous/ferric couple is far more electropos-
/NADH (−320 mV), energy is required
itive than that of NAD
to fuel this reaction (“uphill electron ﬂow”) which is thought
to derive from the proton motive force (Bonnefoy and Holmes,
2011). For mixotrophic and heterotrophic iron-oxidizers, the latter
appears not to be the case as reducing equivalents can be generated
from the oxidation of organic carbon.

+

The “uphill” and “downhill” electron transport pathways run
concurrently in all iron-oxidizing chemoautotrophs, but the mol-
ecular complexes involved are often quite different, suggesting that
iron oxidation in acidophiles has evolved independently on sev-
eral occasions (Bonnefoy and Holmes, 2011). For example, the
rus operon, which contains genes coding for the blue copper
protein rusticyanin and several cytochromes, mediates ferrous oxi-
dation in iron-oxidizing acidithiobacilli and, seemingly, in the salt-
tolerant gammaproteobacterium “T. prosperous” (Nicolle et al.,
2009). The role of another high potential iron-sulfur protein found
in At. ferrivorans (at least one strain of which does not appear to
contain rusticyanin) encoded by the iro gene, has yet to be resolved
(Amouric et al., 2011). Interestingly, Ferroplasma spp. also contain
a blue copper protein (sulfocyanin) which is also thought to be

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 3

Johnson et al.

Iron cycling in acidic environments

reported that one strain [Acidiphilium (A.) cryptum JF-5] could
reduce ferric iron in oxygen-saturated media. Johnson and Bridge
(2002) showed that ferric iron reduction was constitutive in oblig-
ately heterotrophic Acidiphilium SJH (also identiﬁed as a strain
of A. cryptum) but was inducible in the facultative autotroph A.
acidophilum. Low oxygen concentrations, rather than ferric iron,
appeared to induce a putative “iron reductase” in A. acidophilum.
Whole cell protein proﬁles of Acidiphilium SJH were similar for
cells grown under oxygen-saturated or micro-aerobic conditions,
while in contrast three additional proteins were detected in SDS-
PAGE proﬁles of A. acidophilum cells that could reduce ferric iron
compared to those where iron reduction had not been induced. A.
organovorum and A. multivorum were also reported to have consti-
tutive iron reduction systems, while iron reduction appeared to be
inducible in A. rubrum. Interestingly, Küsel et al. (2002) reported
that the ferric iron reduction enzyme(s) were not constitutive in A.
cryptum JF-5, a strain that is closely related to Acidiphilium SJH.
Recent annotation of the draft genome of another Acidiphilium
strain (PM) has failed to identify a putative iron reductase gene
(San Martin-Uriz et al., 2011). Elsewhere, an outer membrane
cytochrome c has been implicated as having a role in ferric iron
reduction by A. cryptum JF-5 (Magnuson et al., 2010), which is
intriguing in the light of the induced production of an acid-stable
c-type cytochrome by At. ferrooxidans when respiring on ferric
iron (Ohmura et al., 2002). Whether c-type cytochromes are also
involved in iron reduction by other species of heterotrophic bac-
teria that are known to reduce ferric iron (e.g., Acidocella and
Acidobacterium; Coupland and Johnson, 2008) is unknown.

MEASUREMENT AND INTERPRETATION OF SPECIFIC RATES
OF IRON OXIDATION AND IRON REDUCTION IN ACIDOPHILES
Determining speciﬁc rates of iron oxidation and iron reduction
by acidophilic microorganisms is a relatively simple procedure.
The data obtained illustrate how different species vary in their
capacities for iron oxido-reduction, and how this is inﬂuenced by
growth histories and environmental parameters. Such information
is also of fundamental importance for the design of biotechnolog-
ical processes that utilize microbial iron oxidation or reduction
in low pH liquids (see following sections). The technique involves
growing biomass under controlled conditions, harvesting and con-
centrating cells and assaying their abilities to either oxidize ferrous
iron or reduce ferric iron (typically 1 mM of either) under suitable
conditions, e.g., in the presence of a suitable electron donor, and
under anoxic conditions, for iron reduction (Figure 2). Biomass
measurements are simultaneously carried out on sub-samples of
the concentrated cells. Usually, this involves determination of pro-
tein contents using, for example, the Bradford assay (Bradford,
1976) but measurements of active biomass (e.g., of ATP; Okibe
and Johnson, 2011) are more relevant where the total biomass
includes a signiﬁcant proportion of dead or moribund cells. The
time taken to determine rates of iron oxidation and reduction is
also important and needs to be much smaller than the culture
doubling time of the organism being assayed in order for there
to be no signiﬁcant increase in biomass during the assay period.
Typically, 20 min to 2 h provides sufﬁcient time to allow sufﬁcient
iron oxidation or reduction by cell suspensions while avoiding sig-
niﬁcant biomass perturbations (acidophiles generally have culture

FIGURE 1 | Schematic representation of ferrous iron oxidation by the
Gram-negative autotrophic acidophile, At. ferrooxidans. Controlled
inﬂux of protons is used to generate ATP via the membrane-bound ATP
synthetase complex (ATPase). Iron oxidation is mediated by a cytochrome
located on the outer membrane and electrons transferred via periplasmic
cytochromes and rusticyanin either to a terminal oxidase (“downhill
pathway,” indicated in brown text and by **) where they are used to reduce
oxygen, or used to reduce NAD+ (“uphill pathway,” indicated red text and
by *) in a reaction also driven by the proton motive force across the inner
membrane (Bonnefoy and Holmes, 2011).

involved in iron oxidation in this euryarchaeote (Bonnefoy and
Holmes, 2011). In contrast, rusticyanin/sulfocyanin has not been
detected in Leptospirillum spp., where the electron shuttle pathway
is thought to involve four or ﬁve different cytochromes (Bonnefoy
and Holmes, 2011). In the iron-oxidizing crenarchaeotes [S. metal-
licus, S. tokodaii, and Metallosphaera (M.) sedula], the fox [Fe(II)
oxidation] cluster, which houses genes coding for cytochrome b,
electron transporters, and a terminal oxidase, appears to have an
analogous role to the rus operon in At. ferrooxidans, an hypothesis
strengthened by the fact that this cluster has not been found in
Sulfolobus spp. (e.g., S. acidocaldarius) that do not oxidize ferrous
iron.

Relatively little is known about how prokaryotes catalyze ferric
iron reduction at low pH, for example whether this is medi-
ated enzymatically (via “iron reductases”), indirectly via metabolic
intermediates, or both. All Acidiphilium spp. are known to reduce
ferric iron, though most strains do not grow under strictly anoxic
conditions in the presence of ferric iron, (Johnson and McGin-
ness, 1991; Bridge and Johnson, 2000) and growth coupled to
ferric iron reduction is most readily observed in cultures inocu-
lated under micro-aerobic conditions (Johnson and McGinness,
1991; Bridge and Johnson, 2000). However, Küsel et al. (2002)

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 4

Johnson et al.

Iron cycling in acidic environments

doubling times varying between 6 and 12 h). Details of the method
used to determine speciﬁc rates of ferrous iron oxidation are given
in Hallberg et al. (2011a). Speciﬁc rates of ferric iron reduction
referred to in Table 2 were measured using a similar protocol,
with nitrogen replacing air (to create anoxic conditions in the cell
suspensions) and a suitable electron donor (organic or inorganic)
supplied in stoichiometric excess to ferric iron.

FIGURE 2 | Typical protocol used for determining speciﬁc rates of
ferrous iron oxidation and ferric iron reduction by acidophilic
prokaryotes (*Bradford, 1976; **Okibe and Johnson, 2011; *** e.g.,
using the ferrozine assay, Lovley and Phillips, 1987).

Table 2 | Speciﬁc rates of ferrous iron oxidation determined for
different species of acidophilic bacteria and the archaeon
Ferroplasma.

Acidophile

Fe2+ oxidation
(mg min−1 g protein−1)

(I) AUTOTROPHIC SPECIES
Iron-oxidizing acidithiobacilli
Group I (At. ferrooxidansT)
Group II (ATCC 33020)
Group III (At. ferrivoransT)
Group IV (JCM 7812)
Leptospirillum spp.
L. ferrooxidansT
L. ferriphilumT*
Others
Acd. thiooxidansT
“Fv. myxofaciens”T
(II) MIXOTROPHIC/HETEROTROPHIC SPECIES
Ferrimicrobium acidiphilum
(25 mM Fe2+/100 μM glycerol)
(100 μM Fe2+/5 mM glycerol)
Sulfobacillus spp.*
Sb. thermosulﬁdooxidans
Sb. acidophilus
Sb. benefaciens
Ferroplasma acidiphilum*

484± 3.3
440± 11.5
192± 14
446± 6.8
426± 6.5
484± 88
457± 20
532± 23

191± 7.5
7.7± 0.14
449± 4.0
236± 11
341± 16
371± 4.0

(i) All speciﬁc iron oxidation rates were determined at 30˚C (except those indicated
*, which were determined at 37˚C); (ii) all prokaryotes were grown in 25 mM fer-
rous iron medium, supplemented (for mixotrophs and heterotrophs) with 0.02%
(w/v) yeast extract (the media used for Fm. acidophilum were as indicated in the
Table).

−1 g protein

−1 g protein

Table 2 shows speciﬁc rates of iron oxidation by different
species of autotrophic acidophiles, and facultatively and oblig-
ately heterotrophic species, using this approach. Most of the
autotrophic species show similar speciﬁc rates of oxidation, vary-
ing between mean values of 428 and 484 mg ferrous iron oxi-
−1. The two outliers in Table 2 are At.
dized min
ferrivorans and the betaproteobacterium “Fv. myxofaciens.” Two
other strains of At. ferrivorans (Peru6 and CF27) also displayed
lower rates (236± 2.4 and 312± 6.6 mg ferrous iron oxidized
−1, respectively) than the other three “Groups” of
min
iron-oxidizing acidithiobacilli (based on the delineation described
by Amouric et al., 2011) suggesting that this is a species-speciﬁc
trait. “Fv. myxofaciens” displayed the fastest speciﬁc rate of iron
oxidation of all bacteria (and the sole archaeon) examined, but
since the isolate tested (P3G; the nominated type strain of the
species) is the only strain currently available in pure culture, the
question of whether this is a genus- or species-speciﬁc charac-
teristic remains to be veriﬁed. All of the mixotrophic and het-
erotrophic prokaryotes tested, with the exception of Sulfobacillus
(Sb.) thermosulﬁdooxidans, displayed signiﬁcantly lower speciﬁc
rates of iron oxidation than the mean value found with autotrophic
species, even though these assays were carried out at 37˚C rather
than at 30˚C [as for all of the autotrophic strains, except Leptospir-
illum (L.) ferriphilum], since most mixotrophic iron-oxidizing
acidophilic bacteria are thermotolerant or moderate thermophiles.
In the case of the mesophilic heterotroph Fm. acidiphilum which
was, like the autotrophic strains, assayed at 30˚C, the speciﬁc rate
of iron oxidation was very much dictated by the growth medium
used, in particular the ratio of ferrous iron to organic carbon
source (Table 2).

Speciﬁc rates of ferric iron reduction by the heterotroph
Acidiphilium SJH and two autotrophic Acidithiobacillus spp. (At.
ferrooxidansT, and Acidithiobacillus sp ATCC 33020, the proposed
type strain of “Group II” iron-oxidizing acidithiobacilli), again
using the approach described above, are shown in Table 3. These
were much smaller (by about one order of magnitude) than typ-
ical rates of iron oxidation found in acidophiles. Data obtained
for Acidiphilium SJH suggested that the electron donor had little

Table 3 | Speciﬁc rates of ferric iron reduction by heterotrophic
(Acidiphilium) and autotrophic (Acidithiobacillus spp.) acidophiles.

Bacterium

A. cryptum SJH

At. ferrooxidansT

Acidithiobacillus
sp. ATCC 33020

Growth conditions
(incubation time)
Glycerol/Fe3+
Galactose/Fe3+
H2/O2 (7 days)
H2/O2 (21 days)
H2/Fe3+* (5 days)
H2/O2 (7 days)
H2/O2 (21 days)
H2/Fe3+* (5 days)

Fe3+ reduction
(mg min-1 g protein−1)
32± 3.7
40± 8.0
46± 10
23± 5.0
84± 2.3
63± 7.3
53± 1.9
76± 2.1

*Cultures grown under anoxic conditions; the electron donors used to grow
the acidophiles (glycerol, galactose, or hydrogen) were also those used for the
measurements of speciﬁc rates of ferric iron reduction.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 5

Johnson et al.

Iron cycling in acidic environments

inﬂuence on the speciﬁc rate of ferric iron reduction, with the value
being similar when either glycerol or galactose was supplied. Ferric
iron reduction data shown in Table 3 for the two iron-oxidizing
Acidithiobacillus spp. are for hydrogen-grown cultures grown
either aerobically, or under anoxic conditions with ferric iron as
electron acceptor. There was evidence of suppression of the poten-
tial for ferric iron reduction by At. ferrooxidansT with protracted
aerobic growth on hydrogen, and the reverse when it was grown
anaerobically on hydrogen and ferric iron. While similar tends
were apparent for Acidithiobacillus spp. ATCC 33020, differences
in speciﬁc rates of iron reduction were far less pronounced.

after ∼5 days) from cultures grown in 5 mM S4O2−

The effect of growing iron-oxidizing acidithiobacilli on alter-
native electron donors to ferrous iron on the speciﬁc rates of iron
oxidation is shown in Table 4. Data shown for tetrathionate-grown
cultures are of cells harvested at early stationary phase (generally
6 with varying
concentrations of ferrous iron, while for both elemental sulfur and
hydrogen more protracted growth was possible by providing excess
elemental sulfur or by continuously replenishing the hydrogen
supply. These results showed that speciﬁc rates of iron oxida-
tion were lower for both At. ferrooxidansT and Acidithiobacillus
sp. ATCC 33020 when grown on electron donors other than fer-
rous iron, though this varied with the electron donor used and

Table 4 | Effects of different electron donors and culture conditions on
the speciﬁc rates of ferrous iron oxidation by Acidithiobacillus spp.

Bacterium and culture medium

AT. FERROOXIDANST
(i) S4O2−
6 -grown cultures
+0 Fe2+
+10 μM Fe2+
+100 μM Fe2+
+1000 μM Fe2+
(ii) S0-grown cultures
+0 Fe2+; 10 days
+10 μM Fe2+; 10 days
+100 μM Fe2+; 10 days
+1000 μM Fe2+; 10 days
+0 Fe2+; 21 days
(iii) H2-grown cultures
7 days
21 days
+25 mM Fe3+; 5 days*
ACIDITHIOBACILLUS SP. ATCC 33020
(i) S4O2−
+100 μM Fe2+
(ii) H2-grown cultures
7 days
21 days
+25 mM Fe3+; 5 days*
+25 mM Fe3+; 14 days*

6 -grown culture

Fe2+ oxidation
(mg min−1 g protein-1)

69± 1.0
219± 2.0
210± 4.0
190± 7.5
44± 8.0
24± 0.6
38± 0.95
32± 1.5
<0.01
149± 2.0
210± 3.1
178± 8.3

45± 2.0
132± 4.8
225± 7.5
139± 12
130± 7.0

incubation period. In the case of At. ferrooxidansT, the speciﬁc
rate of iron oxidation for sulfur-grown cells was about 10% of
that of iron-grown cells after 10 days, and was not detectable after
3 weeks of growth on this electron donor. In contrast, the spe-
ciﬁc rate of ferrous iron oxidation by cells grown aerobically on
hydrogen for 3 weeks was still about 50% of that of ferrous iron-
grown cells. Ferrous iron has been reported to induce expression
of the rus operon in At. ferrooxidans (Amouric et al., 2009), and
the lack of ferrous oxidation ability in sulfur-grown cultures can
be explained by the ferrous iron originally present in the cul-
tures being rapidly oxidized (within 1 day) to ferric. However, the
same would have been true for hydrogen-grown biomass grown
with excess oxygen, so why the rus operon was still apparently
being expressed in these cultures is unclear. Similar results were
obtained for Acidithiobacillus sp. ATCC 33020 (Table 4). Both
Acidithiobacillus spp. displayed signiﬁcant rates of iron oxidation
when grown anaerobically on hydrogen (even after 14 days, in
the case of Acidithiobacillus sp. ATCC 33020) though this can be
explained that ferrous iron would have accumulated in these cul-
tures as a result of dissimilatory reduction of ferric iron, causing
the rus operon to be expressed.

In natural and man-made (biomining) environments, pyrite is
a major energy resource for chemo-autotrophic acidophiles. Ferric
iron attack on this mineral releases both ferrous iron and soluble
reduced sulfur species (Rohwerder et al., 2003) so that bacteria that
can use both as electron donors, such as At. ferrooxidans, may use
one or the other in preference, or both simultaneously. Compari-
son of speciﬁc rates of iron oxidation of bacteria grown on pyrite
with those of the same strain grown on ferrous iron or reduced
sulfur can provide insights into what substrate is being utilized.
Results for the type strains of At. ferrooxidans and L. ferrooxi-
dans grown in pure culture in 1% (w/v) pyrite liquid medium,
in which planktonic-phase cells and those attached to the min-
eral were harvested separately using the protocol described by
Okibe and Johnson (2004), are shown in Table 5. After 1 week
of incubation, the speciﬁc rates of ferrous iron oxidation by
planktonic-phase cells of both acidophiles were actually some-
what greater than those of ferrous iron-grown cells, and much
greater than of those of sulfur-grown cells, implying that both

Table 5 | Speciﬁc rates of ferrous iron oxidation by the type strains of
L. ferrooxidans and At. ferrooxidans grown on pyrite.

Bacterium

Fe2+ oxidation
(mg min−1 g−1 protein)

RLU*
(μg protein−1)

L. FERROOXIDANS (PYRITE; PLANKTONIC CELLS)
Week 1
Week 2
AT. FERROOXIDANS (PYRITE; PLANKTONIC CELLS)
Week 1
Week 2
At. ferrooxidans: pyrite
Planktonic cells
Attached cells

527± 7.8
283± 6.1
562± 1.0
240± 1.0
224± 1.0
307± 1.0

5,112
2,291

5,486
2,444

n.d.
n.d.

All cultures were grown aerobically, except those indicated by *, which were
grown under anoxic conditions.

*Relative light units (measurement of ATP concentration).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 6

Johnson et al.

Iron cycling in acidic environments

bacteria were oxidizing ferrous iron rather than reduced sulfur
species. However, by week 2, corresponding values of both had
fallen by about 50%. While this might suggest a switch from iron
to sulfur oxidation, this could not be the case for L. ferrooxidans
which does not use reduced sulfur as an electron donor. Measure-
ments of ATP concentrations in harvested cells showed that these
had also fallen by about 50% from week 1 to 2 relative to pro-
tein contents, implying that much of the bacterial populations
in these cultures had become moribund or had died. Indexed
relative to ATP concentrations, speciﬁc rates of ferrous iron oxida-
tion were similar on weeks 1 and 2, suggesting that both bacteria
were continuing to use ferrous iron as their preferred electron
donor. The speciﬁc rates of iron oxidation by planktonic-phase
and attached cells of At. ferrooxidans sampled at the same time
were found to be similar, suggestion that bacteria attached to the
mineral phase were also using ferrous iron as their major energy
source.

The conclusion that bacteria such as At. ferrooxidans use fer-
rous iron in preference to reduced sulfur when oxidizing pyrite
correlates with similar observations reported when these bacteria
are grown in liquid or on solid media that contain both fer-
rous iron and a soluble (usually tetrathionate) sulfur oxy-anion
(Johnson, 1995; Yarzábal et al., 2004). Using ferrous iron in prefer-
ence to reduced sulfur would appear not to make thermodynamic
sense, given that the free energies (ΔG values) of elemental sul-
fur and tetrathionate (−507 and −1225 kJ mol
−1, respectively)
far exceed that of ferrous iron (−30 kJ mol
−1; Kelly, 1978). How-
ever, the speciﬁc rates of tetrathionate oxidation tend to be much
slower than ferrous iron oxidation for the acidithiobacilli (Table 6;
data for Acidithiobacillus sp. ATCC 33020) so that the rates at
which these bacteria can generate energy by oxidizing ferrous
iron or tetrathionate are very similar. In addition, whereas fer-
rous iron oxidation by At. ferrooxidans involves a relatively short
electron transport chain (comprising three cytochromes and rus-
ticyanin), tetrathionate metabolism by this acidophile requires
the synthesis of several enzymes (tetrathionate hydrolase, sul-
fur dioxygenase, thiosulfate quinone oxidoreductase, sulﬁte oxi-
doreductase, and rhodanese; Kanao et al., 2007), in addition
to trans-membrane electron transport proteins. The additional
energy expenditure required to synthesize these enzymes cou-
pled with the fact that energy yields in unit time are similar
for both tetrathionate and ferrous iron oxidation help explain
why ferrous iron is used as a preferential electron donor by
Acidithiobacillus spp. Additional supporting evidence for ferrous
iron being the preferred electron donor for At. ferrooxidans comes
from the observation that the rus operon is not repressed by

Table 6 | Comparison of the speciﬁc rates of ferrous iron and
tetrathionate oxidation by Acidithiobacillus sp. ATCC 33020, and
conversion of these into speciﬁc rates of energy generation in unit
time.

Electron
donor
Fe2+
S4O2−

6

Oxidation rate
(mmol min−1 g protein−1)
7.9± 0.21
0.21± 0.027

Energy generation
(J min−1 g protein−1)
237± 6
260± 33

elemental sulfur when ferrous iron is present (Amouric et al.,
2009).

ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS OF OXIDO-REDUCTION OF IRON
IN LOW pH ENVIRONMENTS
One of the ﬁrst reports of active iron cycling in an acidic environ-
ment was by Johnson et al. (1993) who noted that 30 cm deep acid
streamer growths found within an abandoned pyrite mine were
stratiﬁed in terms of their color and consistency, and that these
correlated with variations in concentrations of dissolved oxygen
and redox potentials, the latter reﬂecting relative concentrations of
ferrous and ferric iron (Table 7). Later work identiﬁed the major
iron-oxidizing acidophile in the surface streamers as “Fv. myxofa-
ciens,” while iron-reducing Acidiphilium spp. and novel Firmicutes
were more abundant in the lower depths of the streamer growths
(Kimura et al., 2011). Johnson et al. (1993) also demonstrated
that iron cycling by a mixed bioreactor culture of At. ferrooxidans
and Acidiphilium SJH could be controlled by varying concentra-
tions of dissolved oxygen (Figure 3). Pure cultures of moderate
thermophiles [Sulfobacillus spp. and Acidimicrobium (Am.) fer-
rooxidans] also displayed iron cycling in vitro (Figure 4). Stratiﬁed
acid streamer/mat growths have also been reported in an adit
draining an abandoned small-scale copper mine (Cantareras) in
Spain (Figure 5). Fragments of acid streamers from the site were
shown to both oxidize and reduce iron in vitro, and acidophiles
known to catalyze the oxido-reduction of iron were identiﬁed
by molecular techniques and isolated from the streamer growths
(Rowe et al., 2007). The Cantareras streamers have also been mate-
rials from which acidophilic sulfate-reducing bacteria have been
isolated. The latter can also mediate ferric iron reduction in acidic
environments indirectly via the hydrogen sulﬁde they generate as a
) and possibly
also directly, using ferric iron as an alternative electron acceptor to
sulfate.

waste product (H2S+ 2 Fe3+ → S0 + 2 Fe2+ + 2H

+

The Rio Tinto is a 100 km long river located in south-west
Spain, characterized by being extremely acidic (pH 1.5–3.1)
throughout its length and containing elevated concentrations of
soluble iron (both ferrous and ferric, the latter conferring the
characteristic burgundy red color of the river). The microbiol-
ogy of this extensive extreme environment has been researched in
depth by Ricardo Amils and colleagues at the Centro de Astro-
biologia/Universidad Autonoma in Madrid. They found that the
dominant bacteria in the Tinto river were the iron-metabolizing
acidophiles At. ferrooxidans, L. ferrooxidans, and Acidiphilium spp.,
and that other prokaryotes that also catalyze the oxido-reduction
of iron at low pH (Ferrimicrobium and Ferroplasma spp.) were
present in smaller numbers (González-Toril et al., 2003). Iron
cycling, involving ferrous iron oxidation mediated primarily by
At. ferrooxidans and L. ferrooxidans in the oxic zones of the river
and ferric iron reduction by Acidiphilium spp. and At. ferrooxidans
in the anoxic zones, maintain the iron dynamics of the river from
its source at the Peña de Hierro in the Iberian Pyrite Belt to Huelva,
where it enters the Atlantic Ocean. Since the oxidation of ferrous
to (soluble) ferric iron is a proton-consuming reaction, while the
reverse reaction (as well as ferric iron hydrolysis) generates pro-
tons, the net effect of ongoing oxido-reduction of iron is to main-
tain the extremely low pH of the Tinto river throughout its length.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 7

Johnson et al.

Iron cycling in acidic environments

Table 7 | Depth-related chemical changes in acid streamer growths found within the abandoned Cae Coch pyrite mine.

Streamer depth (cm)

0–10
10–20
20–30

pH

2.35
2.40
2.45

DO2 (% of ambient)

82
10
<0.1

E h (mV)
+734
+634
+484

Fe2+ (g L−1)

Fe3+ (g L−1)

2− (g L−1)

SO4

0.25
1.21
2.16

1.15
0.39
<0.01

5.9
6.0
5.2

Johnson et al. (1993), Kimura et al. (2011).

FIGURE 3 | Cycling of iron by a mixed culture of At. ferrooxidans and
Acidiphilium SJH. The culture medium (pH 2.0) contained (initially) 25 mM
ferrous sulfate and 10 mM glycerol, and was maintained at 30˚C under
controlled aeration. Ferrous iron concentrations are shown in red and
concentrations of dissolved oxygen in blue (modiﬁed from Johnson et al.,
1993).

Extensive opencast mining of lignite in Lusatia and other
regions of Germany has left a legacy of a large number of aban-
doned and ﬂooded sites (“pit lakes”), many of which are moder-
ately or extremely acidic and contain elevated concentrations of
soluble iron and sulfate, resulting from the oxidation of pyrite and
other minerals present in the disturbed substrata (Geller et al.,
1998). Microbially mediated cycling of both iron and sulfur has
been described in these pit lakes (Küsel, 2003; Meier et al., 2004).
Oxidation of reduced sulfur and of ferrous iron (coupled with
hydrolysis of ferric iron) in oxic surface waters causes these to
be acidic (pH as low as 2.0) whereas the reductive dissolution of
schwertmannite and microbial sulﬁdogenesis in the anoxic lake
sediments generates net alkalinity, results in these zones having
higher pH values (typically about 5.5; Küsel et al., 1999). The major
iron-oxidizing bacteria identiﬁed in the lignite pit lakes are the
acidophiles At. ferrooxidans, L. ferrooxidans, and Ferrimicrobium
(Küsel, 2003; Lu et al., 2010) whereas the neutrophile Geobacter as
well as acidophilic species (Acidiphilium, Acidobacteria, Acidocella,
and Acidithiobacillus) have been implicated in mediating ferric
iron reduction in these ecosystems (Lu et al., 2010).

Ferrous iron oxidation is an exergonic reaction, but for cycling
of iron to perpetuate in acidic streams, rivers and lakes, energy is
required to fuel the reduction of ferric iron, which may be micro-
bially mediated or an abiotic process. Both organic and inorganic

FIGURE 4 | Iron cycling by pure cultures of moderately thermophilic
acidophilus (strain THWX), -•- Acidimicrobium sp. (strain HPTH; all cultures
acidophiles. (Top) -(cid:2)- Sb. thermosulﬁdooxidans (strain TH1), -(cid:3)- Sb.

grown in pH 2.0 medium containing 25 mM ferrous sulfate, 10 mM glucose
and 0.02% yeast extract; no aeration control); (bottom) the effect of
controlling concentrations of dissolved oxygen iron cycling by Sb.
acidophilus (strain THWX) grown at pH 2.0 in a medium containing 25 mM
ferrous sulfate, 10 mM glycerol and 0.02% yeast extract; ferrous iron
concentrations are shown in red and concentrations of dissolved oxygen in
blue (modiﬁed from Johnson et al., 1993).

electron donors can be used by iron-reducing acidophiles. The
latter may arise from extraneous sources (e.g., leaf detritus in sur-
face waters) or derive from the indigenous primary producers
present. These include chemautotrophic bacteria such as Lep-
tospirillum and Acidithiobacillus spp., and photoautotrophic aci-
dophiles, which are predominantly eukaryotic micro-algae (Gross,
2000). A proportion of the inorganic carbon ﬁxed by both groups
is released into the environments as organic compounds (cell

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 8

Johnson et al.

Iron cycling in acidic environments

FIGURE 5 | Redox transformations of iron and sulfur in stratiﬁed
streamer/mat growths found in a channel draining ad abandoned
copper mine (Cantareras, Spain). The differently colored streamer/mat
layers are indicated in the top diagram, and shown (as L1, L2 etc.) in the
lower photographs.

exudates and lysates) that can be utilized by heterotrophic and
mixotrophic iron-reducing prokaryotes. The nature and com-
position of organic exudates arising from acidophilic primary
producers varies from species to species, however, and this impacts
their potential utilization by organotrophic acidophiles. For exam-
ple, glycolic acid was identiﬁed by ˇNancucheo and Johnson (2010)
as a signiﬁcant exudate (accounting for up to 24% of total dis-
solved organic carbon) in cultures of iron- and sulfur-oxidizing
acidophiles but was shown to be utilized by relatively few species
(mostly Firmicutes) of organotrophic acidophiles. In contrast,
monosaccharides (fructose, glucose and mannitol) identiﬁed in
exudates of the acidophilic algae Euglena mutabilis and Chlorella
protothecoides var. acidicola were found to support the growth of
both iron-reducing and sulfate-reducing acidophiles ( ˇNancucheo
and Johnson, 2011). These ﬁndings suggest that reduction of both
ferric iron and sulfate can be more active processes in surface
acidic environments where acidophilic algae are active (such as at
Cantareras) than in subterranean sites like the Cae Coch mine.
Reduced sulfur and hydrogen can also act as inorganic electron
donors for iron reduction by some species of acidophiles (John-
son and Hallberg, 2009). The former can arise by a variety of routes
in extremely acidic environments. For example, elemental sulfur
and sulfur oxy-anions are formed as by-products of the abiotic
oxidation of pyrite and other sulﬁde minerals by (microbially gen-
erated) ferric iron (Rohwerder et al., 2003), and hydrogen sulﬁde
may be generated by sulfur- and sulfate-reducing prokaryotes in
anaerobic sediments in acid lakes and streams. However, dissimila-
tory sulfur- and sulfate-reduction also requires a suitable electron
donor, which may again be either organic or inorganic (hydro-
gen). Hydrogen, therefore, has a potentially important (though
currently unknown) role in fueling ferric iron reduction (directly
or indirectly) in acidic environments, where it may be formed via
the acid dissolution of metals (e.g., relics of mining activities) and
some minerals.

FIGURE 6 | Schematic of the different microbial and abiotic routes of
ferric iron reduction in an acidic (pH < 3) stream, river, or pit lake.
Abiotic iron oxidation proceeds slowly in these environments, and is
primarily mediated by prokaryotic microorganisms.

Ferric iron reduction in acidic waters can also, however, be
mediated by solar energy. Diez Ercilla et al. (2009) showed that
solar radiation was a major driver of diel changes in ferrous iron
concentrations (10–90 μM) recorded in an acidic (pH 2.8) pit lake
in the Iberian pyrite belt. The kinetics of photo-reduction of iron
were shown to be zero-order and to be a function of tempera-
ture and the intensity of solar radiation, but were found to be
independent of ferric iron concentration. Wavelengths within the
UV-A spectrum and part of the visible spectrum (400–700 nm)
were both shown to be active in iron reduction in the acidic lake.
This is a particularly signiﬁcant observation as it explains how
iron cycling can perpetuate in acidic waters, such as acid mine
drainage streams and pit lakes, in the absence of either inorganic
or organic reductants, or of iron-reducing and sulfate-reducing
bacteria. In addition, photochemical regeneration of ferrous iron
explains why numbers of iron-oxidizing acidophiles can be main-
tained or even increase when their primary energy source (e.g.,
pyrite) is exhausted.

Iron cycling in acidic waters, highlighting the various possible
routes of ferric iron reduction, is summarized schematically in
Figure 6.

TECHNOLOGICAL APPLICATIONS OF MICROBIAL IRON
OXIDO-REDUCTION AT LOW pH
Acidophilic iron-metabolizing prokaryotes are increasingly used
in biotechnologies, the longest established of which is“biomining.”

TECHNOLOGIES UTILIZING ACIDOPHILIC IRON-OXIDIZERS
The discovery of the ﬁrst bacterium (At. ferrooxidans) shown, in
the late 1940s, to oxidize iron in acidic liquors and, several years

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 9

Johnson et al.

Iron cycling in acidic environments

later, demonstrated to accelerate the oxidative dissolution of pyrite
and other sulﬁde minerals, was relatively quickly followed up by
the ﬁrst full-scale industrial application that used this acidophile
(a dump copper leaching operation in Utah, in the mid-1960s).
In reality, human civilisations had been exploiting the abilities of
acidophiles to solubilize metals from ores for many years, recover-
ing bioleached metals (chieﬂy copper, via cementation) from mine
waters at the Rio Tinto mine in Spain, Mynydd Parys in Wales, the
Song Guo Mountain and other locations in China, and probably
elsewhere in the world. Since the 1960s there have been many
developments and reﬁnements in both the engineering design
and in understanding the mineral bioprocessing. Biomining tech-
nologies have also diversiﬁed into recovering metals other than
copper, including gold, uranium, nickel, cobalt and zinc. More
details accounts of biomining can be found in Rawlings (2002);
Rawlings and Johnson (2007a); and Johnson (2010).

Ferric iron is a powerful oxidizing agent in aqueous solutions,
and can degrade a variety of minerals, including metal sulﬁdes.
It follows, therefore, that any prokaryote that can oxidize ferrous
iron in an extremely acidic (pH < 3) medium should, in theory, be
able to accelerate the dissolution of such minerals. This indeed has
proven to be the case, with all of the iron-oxidizing bacteria listed
in Table 1 having been reported to also oxidize pyrite, though
some (e.g., Fm. acidiphilum) only do this when supplied with
organic carbon, which may originate from an extraneous source
(e.g., added yeast extract) or from a sulfur-oxidizing autotroph
in a mixed culture. The most numerous iron-oxidizing prokary-
otes in commercial operations tend, however, to be autotrophs.
For example L. ferriphilum, has frequently been reported to be
the major primary mineral-degrader in stirred tanks that operate
between 35˚ and 45˚C. Although iron-oxidizing prokaryotes are
the major players in the bioprocessing of sulﬁde ores and concen-
trates, these are members of microbial consortia in commercial
operations. These consortia include “secondary” sulfur-oxidizing
(acid-generating) prokaryotes, and “tertiary” heterotrophic or
mixotrophic acidophiles that degrade the small molecular weight
organic compounds, such as glycolic acid, that are excreted by
autotrophic iron- and sulfur-oxidizers and which could otherwise
accumulate to inhibitory concentrations, especially in tank leach-
ing operations, as well as the “primary” iron-oxidizers (Rawlings
and Johnson, 2007b). Some acidophiles can assume more than one
role in such consortia, for example the heterotrophic iron-oxidizer
Ferroplasma (Figure 7). Although, as also indicated in Figure 7,
dissolution of sulﬁde minerals by ferric iron does not involve mol-
ecular oxygen, the process does not continue unless the ferrous
iron generated by this reaction is re-oxidized to ferric. This micro-
bially catalyzed reaction requires molecular oxygen, and oxygen is
also consumed during the oxidation of reduced sulfur interme-
diates and the catabolism of organic materials, and therefore the
process is described as “oxidative mineral dissolution.”

The concept of using iron-oxidizing acidophiles to remediate
mine waters has a long history, but only recently has such a sys-
tem been demonstrated at pilot-scale level. Many streams and
ground waters associated with the mining of coals and metals
are enriched with soluble ferrous iron. The most effective way
of removing soluble iron is ﬁrst to oxidize ferrous iron to fer-
ric, thereby facilitating the formation of ferric minerals such as

FIGURE 7 | The oxidative dissolution of pyrite in acidic liquors,
showing the major microorganisms identiﬁed in the biooxidation of
refractory gold concentrates and the bioleaching of a cobaltiferous
pyrite concentrate processed at ca. 40˚C. Those reactions that consume
oxygen are indicated; “DOC” is dissolved organic carbon.

schwertmannite and ferrihydrite, which may require some addi-
tional input of alkaline materials. As noted previously, abiotic rates
of ferrous iron oxidation in low pH waters tend to be very slow,
but can be greatly accelerated by iron-oxidizing acidophiles. Since
autotrophic species use the energy from ferrous iron oxidation to
support their growth and have minimal nutritional requirements,
the use of these acidophiles to remediate iron-contaminated waters
is particularly attractive. Speciﬁc rates of iron oxidation (previous
section) can provide important fundamental data when determin-
ing the size of a reactor required for this purpose. The maximum
rate of iron oxidation by a mesophilic bacterium such as At. fer-
rooxidans is ∼5× 10
−1 (based on data shown in
−1 and contain-
Table 2). Acidic mine water discharged at 10 L s
−1 would require a reactor containing
ing 500 mg ferrous iron L
∼6× 1015 iron-oxidizing bacteria. Cell numbers of autotrophic
iron-oxidizers are typically ∼5× 107 mL
−1 in media containing
−1, so that a minimum bioreactor volume of just
500 mg iron L
over 10 m3 would be required to oxidize all of the iron present.
In reality, a much larger reactor would be required as the bacteria
would need to be immobilized on a support material to prevent
them being washed out, in a continuous ﬂow system.

−8 μg cell

−1 min

A pilot-scale (10 m3 reactor volume) system in Nochten, east-
ern Germany, is being used to oxidize ferrous iron and precipitate
schwertmannite from acidic (pH 5.3) ground water containing,
−1 with a ﬂow rate of 2,500 L h
−1
typically, 350 mg ferrous iron L
(Janneck et al., 2010). The iron oxidation efﬁciency is ∼70%, which
is partly due to the temperature at which the system operates (rang-
ing from 12 to 18˚C). In addition, hydrolysis of ferric iron causes
the pH of the oxidized groundwater to fall to 3.0, which results
in a considerable proportion of the ferric iron being retained
in solution. The Nochten plant was originally inoculated with
At. ferrooxidans and L. ferrooxidans, but analysis of the indige-
nous microbial population several months after the plant was

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 10

Johnson et al.

Iron cycling in acidic environments

commissioned revealed that these bacteria were not detectable,
but that another iron-oxidizing acidophile (“Fv. myxofaciens”) and
bacteria related to the neutrophilic iron-oxidizer Gallionella, were
the dominant bacteria present (Heinzel et al., 2009). “Fv. myxofa-
ciens” has also been used in laboratory-scale systems to remediate
mine waters (Rowe and Johnson, 2008; Hedrich and Johnson,
2012). Besides its fast speciﬁc rate of iron oxidation (Table 2),
“Fv. myxofaciens” also has the important advantage of producing
copious amounts of extracellular polymeric substances, by which
it attaches to a variety of materials (including glass, plastics, metals,
and minerals) and causing it to grow as long macroscopic stream-
ers in ﬂowing waters. This obviates the need of an inert support
material for these bacteria and maximizes the biovolume of an
operating reactor. A modular system for remediating acidic iron-
rich mine waters using “Fv. myxofaciens” to oxidize ferrous iron
and controlled pH adjustment to precipitate schwertmannite has
recently been described by Hedrich and Johnson (2012). The sys-
tem was shown to be highly efﬁcient (an equivalent 10 m3 primary
reactor was calculated to be able to process ∼2.7 L pH 2 mine water
−1) and produced pure-grade
containing 250 mg L
schwertmannite from mine water containing elevated concentra-
tions of copper, zinc, aluminum, and manganese, in addition to
−1
iron. Concentrations of soluble iron were lowered from 250 g L
in the untreated water to <1 mg L

−1 in the processed water.

−1 ferrous iron s

TECHNOLOGIES UTILIZING ACIDOPHILIC IRON-REDUCERS
Development of technologies that use iron-reducing acidophiles
has lagged well behind those that use iron-oxidizers. However,
there has been at least one recent report that has demonstrated the
potential for utilizing acidophilic iron-reducing bacteria to extract
metals from mineral reserves. Not all metals occur exclusively as
oxidized ores. Nickel is found within sulﬁde minerals (such as
pentlandite) in, for example, reduced black shales, but is more
abundant in the lithosphere in oxidized lateritic ores (∼73% of
estimated global reserves). In the case of limonitic laterites, nickel
is intimately associated with ferric oxyhydroxide minerals such
as goethite (FeOOH). Using an oxidative dissolution approach
to process such ores is obviously not viable, whereas a reductive

approach is feasible. By coupling the oxidation of an organic or
an inorganic substrate to the reduction of ferric iron within the
goethite lattice, the oxidized mineral is destroyed and the asso-
ciated nickel liberated. When the reaction occurs in an acidic
medium, both the iron and nickel that are solubilized remain in
solution.

Bridge and Johnson (2000) showed that a variety of ferric
iron minerals, including goethite, could be solubilized by the het-
erotrophic acidophilic iron-reducer Acidiphilium sp. SJH. In terms
of an industrial process, however, elemental sulfur has several
advantages (including cost) over an organic electron donor, and
Hallberg et al. (2011b) elected to use At. ferrooxidans to demon-
strate the bioleaching of a nickel limonite by reductive dissolution,
using the reaction shown in the equation below:
S0 + 6FeOOH + 11H

+ 6Fe2+ + 8H2O.

+ → HSO
−
4

Over 80% of the nickel present in a test ore was shown to
be recovered when processed in this way, in a bioreactor main-
tained at 30°C and pH 1.8. Currently, similar ores are processed
by high pressure acid leaching at elevated temperatures (in excess
of 250°C). The bioreductive technology appears to have generic
application for oxidized ores (e.g., of manganese, as well as iron)
and bioprocessing of nickel laterites using this approach has been
integrated into a full cycle operation (the “Ferredox” process; du
Plessis et al., 2011). This recent development suggests that har-
nessing the potential of iron-metabolizing prokaryotes in new
and emerging technologies could expand signiﬁcantly in the near
future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Part of this work was carried out in the frame of ProMinE (Euro-
pean project contract NMP-2008-LARGE-2:# 228559; DBJ and
SH acknowledge the ﬁnancial support given to this project by the
European Commission under the Seventh Framework Program
for Research and Development. Tadayoshi Kanao would like to
thank the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science
and Technology for providing ﬁnancial support for his research.

REFERENCES
Amouric, A., Appia-Ayme, C., Yarzabal,
A., and Bonnefoy, V. (2009). Reg-
ulation of the iron and sulfur oxi-
dation pathways in the acidophilic
Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. Adv.
Mat. Res. 71–73; 163–166.

Amouric, A., Brochier-Armanet, C.,
Johnson, D. B., Bonnefoy, V., and
Hallberg, K. B. (2011). Phylogenetic
and genetic variation among Fe(II)-
oxidizing acidithiobacilli supports
the view that these comprise mul-
tiple species with different ferrous
iron oxidation pathways. Microbiol-
ogy 157, 111–122.

Baker, B. J., Tyson, G. W., Webb, R. I.,
Flanagan, J., Hugenholtz, P., Allen,
E. E., and Banﬁeld, J. F. (2006). Lin-
eages of acidophilic archaea revealed

by community genomic analysis.
Science 314, 1933–1935.

Bigham, J. M., Schwertmann, U., Traina,
S. J., Winland, R. L., and Wolf,
M. (1996). Schwertmannite and the
chemical modeling of iron in acid
sulfate waters. Geochim. Cosmochim.
Acta 60, 2111–2121.

insights

Bonnefoy, V., and Holmes, D. S.
(2011). Genomic
into
microbial iron oxidation and iron
uptake strategies in extremely acidic
environments. Environ. Microbiol.
doi:10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02626.x

Bradford, M. M. (1976). A rapid and
sensitive method for the quantiﬁ-
cation of microgram quantities of
protein utilizing the principle of
protein-dye binding. Anal. Biochem.
72, 248–254.

Bridge, T. A. M., and Johnson, D. B.
(2000). Reductive dissolution of fer-
ric iron minerals by Acidiphilium
SJH. Geomicrobiol. J. 17, 193–206.

Brock, T. D., and Gustafson, J. (1976).
Ferric iron reduction by sulfur- and
iron-oxidizing bacteria. Appl. Envi-
ron. Microbiol. 32, 567–571.

Coupland, K., and Johnson, D. B.
(2008). Evidence that the poten-
tial
for dissimilatory ferric iron
reduction is widespread among
acidophilic heterotrophic bacteria.
FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 279, 30–35.

Denef, V. J., Mueller, R. S., and Ban-
ﬁeld, J. F. (2010). AMD bioﬁlms:
using model communities to study
microbial evolution and ecological
complexity in nature. ISME J. 4,
599–610.

Diez Ercilla, M., López Pamo, E., and
Sánchez España, J. (2009). Pho-
toreduction of Fe(III) in the acidic
mine pit lake of San Telmo (Iber-
ian Pyrite Belt): ﬁeld and experi-
mental work. Aquat. Geochem. 15,
391–419.

Dopson, M., Baker-Austin, C., Hind,
A., Bowman, J. P., and Bond, P.
L. (2004). Characterization of Fer-
roplasma isolates and Ferroplasma
acidarmanus sp. nov., extreme aci-
dophiles from acid mine drainage
and industrial bioleaching environ-
ments. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70,
2079–2088.

Drobner, E., Huber, H., and Stetter, K.
O. (1990). Thiobacillus ferrooxidans,
a facultative hydrogen oxidizer. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 56, 2922–2923.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 11

Johnson et al.

Iron cycling in acidic environments

du Plessis, C. A., Slabbert, W., Hall-
berg, K. B., and Johnson, D. B.
(2011). Ferredox: a biohydromet-
allurgical processing concept
for
limonitic nickel laterites. Hydromet-
allurgy 109, 221–229.

(eds).

Geller, W., Klapper, H., and Salomons,
(1998). Acid Mining
W.
Lakes
– Acid Mine Drainage,
Limnology and Reclamation. Envi-
ronmental Science Series. Berlin,
Springer.

Golyshina, O. V., Yakimov, M. M., Lüns-
dorf, H., Ferrer, M., Nimtz, M.,
Timmis, K. N., Wray, V., Tindall,
B. J., and Golyshin, P. N. (2009).
Acidiplasma aeolicum gen. nov., sp.
nov., a euryarchaeon of the fam-
ily Ferroplasmaceae isolated from
a hydrothermal pool, and trans-
fer of Ferroplasma cupricumulans
to Acidiplasma cupricumulans comb.
nov. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 59,
2815–2823.

González-Toril, E., Llobet-Brossa, E.,
Casamayor, E. O., Amman, R., and
Amils, R. (2003). Microbial ecol-
ogy of an extreme acidic environ-
ment, the Tinto river. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 69, 4853–4865.

Gross, W.

(2000).

Ecophysiology
of algae living in highly acidic
environments. Hydrobiology 433,
31–37.

Hallberg, K. B., Hedrich, S., and John-
son, D. B. (2011a). Acidiferribacter
thiooxydans, gen. nov. sp. nov.; an
acidophilic, thermo-tolerant, facul-
tatively anaerobic iron- and sulfur-
oxidizer of
family Ectoth-
iorhodospiraceae. Extremophiles 15,
271–279.

the

and

Hallberg, K. B., Grail, B. M., du
Johnson, D.
Plessis, C.,
(2011b). Reductive dissolu-
B.
tion of
ferric iron minerals: a
new approach for bioprocessing
nickel
laterites. Miner. Eng. 24,
620–624.

Hallberg, K. B., Thomson, H. E. C.,
Boeselt,
I., and Johnson, D. B.
(2001). “Aerobic and anaerobic sul-
fur metabolism by acidophilic bac-
teria,” in Biohydrometallurgy: Fun-
damentals, Technology and Sustain-
able Development, Process Metallurgy
11A, eds V. S. T. Ciminelli and
O. Garcia Jr. (Amsterdam: Elsevier),
423–431.
Hedrich, S.,

and Johnson, D. B.
(2012). A modular
continuous
ﬂow reactor system for the selec-
tive bio-oxidation and precipita-
tion of
iron in mine-impacted
waters. Bioresour. Technol. 106,
44–49.

Hedrich, S., Schlömann, M., and John-
son, D. B. (2011). The iron-oxidizing

proteobacteria. Microbiology 157,
1551–1564.

Heinzel, E., Hedrich, S., Janneck, E.,
Glombitza, F., Seifert, J., and Schlö-
mann, M. (2009). Bacterial diver-
sity in a mine water treatment
plant. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75,
858–861.

Janneck, E., Arnold, I., Koch, T., Meyer,
J., Burghard, D., Ehinger, S. (2010).
“Microbial synthesis of schwertman-
nite from lignite mine water and
its utilization for removal of arsenic
from mine waters and for produc-
tion of iron pigments,”in Proceedings
of the International Mine Water Asso-
ciation Symposium 2010: Mine Water
and Innovative Thinking, eds C.
Wolkersdorfer and A. Freund (Syd-
ney: Cape Breton University Press),
131–134.

Johnson, D. B.

(1995).

Selective
and
bac-
J. Microbiol. Methods 23,

for
acidophilic

isolating

solid media
enumerating
teria.
205–218.

Johnson, D. B. (2010). “The biogeo-
chemistry of biomining,” in Geomi-
crobiology: Molecular and Environ-
mental Perspective, eds L. Barton and
M. Mandl (Dordrecht: Springer),
401–426.

(2002). Reduction of

Johnson, D. B., and Bridge, T. A.
ferric
M.
iron by acidophilic heterotrophic
bacteria: evidence for constitutive
and inducible enzyme systems in
Acidiphilium spp. J. Appl. Microbiol.
92, 315–321.

Johnson, D. B., and Hallberg, K. B.
(2009). Carbon,
iron and sulfur
metabolism in acidophilic microor-
ganisms. Adv. Microb. Physiol. 54,
202–256.

Johnson, D. B., and McGinness, S.
(1991). Ferric iron reduction by
acidophilic heterotrophic bacte-
ria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 57,
207–211.

Johnson, D. B., McGinness, S., and
Ghauri, M. A. (1993). Biogeochem-
ical cycling of
iron and sulfur
in leaching environments. FEMS
Microbiol. Rev.11, 63–70.

Kanao, T., Kamimura, K., and Sugio,
T. (2007). Identiﬁcation of a gene
encoding a tetrathionate hydrolase
in Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. J.
Biotechnol. 132, 16–22.

Kelly, D. P.

chemolithotrophic

(1978). “Bioenergetics
of
bacteria,”
in Companion to Microbiology;
Selected Topics
for Further Dis-
cussion, eds A. T. Bull and P. M.
Meadow
Longman),
363–386.

(London:

Kimura, S., Bryan, C. G., Hallberg,
K. B., and Johnson, D. B. (2011).

Biodiversity and geochemistry of
an extremely acidic,
low temper-
subterranean environment
ature
chemolithotro-
sustained
phy.
13,
2092–2104.

Environ. Microbiol.

by

Küsel, K. (2003). Microbial cycling of
iron and sulfur in acidic coal mining
lake sediments. Water Air Soil Pollut.
3, 67–90.

Stackebrandt,

E.
reduction of

Küsel, K., Dorsch, T., Acker, G.,
(1999).
and
Fe(III)
Microbial
in acidic sediments:
isolation of
Acidiphilium cryptum JF-5 capa-
ble of coupling the reduction of
Fe(III) to the oxidation of glu-
cose. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65,
3633–3640.

Küsel, K., Roth, U.,

(2002). Microbial

and Drake,
reduc-
in the presence
low pH con-
4,

Environ. Microbiol.

H.
tion of Fe(III)
of oxygen under
ditions.
414–421.

Lovley, D. R., and Phillips, E. J. P.
(1987). Rapid assay for microbially
reducible ferric iron in aquatic sed-
iments. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 53,
1536–1540.

Lu, S., Gischkat, S., Reiche, M., Akob,
D. M., Hallberg, K. B., and Küsel,
K. (2010). Ecophysiology of Fe-
cycling bacteria in acidic
sedi-
ments. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76,
8174–8183.

Macalady, J. L., Jones, D. S., and Lyon,
E. H. (2007). Extremely acidic, pen-
dulous cave wall bioﬁlms from the
Frasassi cave system, Italy. Environ.
Microbiol. 9, 1402–1414.

E.

(2010).

Magnuson, T. S., Swenson, M. W.,
J., Deobald, L.
Paszczynski, A.
and Cummings,
A., Kerk, D.,
Proteogenomic
D.
and functional analysis of chro-
reduction in Acidiphilium
mate
cryptum
Fe(III)-
respiring acidophile. Biometals 23,
1129–1138.

JF-5,

an

Meier,

J., Babenzien, H. D., and
Wendt-Potthoff, K. (2004). Micro-
bial cycling of iron and sulfur in
sediments of acidic and pH-neutral
mining lakes in Lusatia (Branden-
burg, Germany). Biogeochemistry
67, 135–156.

Monhemius, A. J. (1977). Precipita-
tion diagrams for metal hydroxides,
sulﬁdes, arsenates and phosphates.
Trans. Inst. Min. Metall. 86, C202–
C206.

ˇNancucheo, I., and Johnson, D. B.
(2010). Production of glycolic acid
by chemolithotrophic iron- and
sulfur-oxidizing bacteria and its role
in delineating and sustaining aci-
dophilic sulﬁde mineral-oxidizing

consortia. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
76, 461–467.

ˇNancucheo, I., and Johnson, D. B.
(2011). Safeguarding reactive mine
tailings by
engineer-
signiﬁcance of micro-
ing:
bial
and interac-
tions. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77,
8201–8208.

the
communities

ecological

Nicolle, J. L. C., Simmons, S., Bathe,
S., and Norris, P. R. (2009). Ferrous
iron oxidation and rusticyanin in
halotolerant, acidophilic“Thiobacil-
lus prosperous.” Microbiology 155,
1302–1309.

Ohmura, N., Sasaki, K., Matsumoto,
N., and Saiki, H. (2002). Anaerobic
respiration using Fe3+, S0 and H2
in the chemolithotrophic bacterium
Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. J. Bac-
teriol. 184, 2081–2087.

cultures

Okibe, N., and Johnson, D. B. (2004).
Biooxidation of pyrite by deﬁned
mixed
of moderately
in
thermophilic
the
pH-controlled
inter-
signiﬁcance of microbial
actions. Biotechnol. Bioeng.
87,
574–583.

acidophiles
bioreactors:

Okibe, N., and Johnson, D. B. (2011).
A rapid ATP-based method for
microbial
determining
leach
populations
in mineral
liquors. Hydrometallurgy
108,
195–198.

active

Pronk, J. T., Liem, K., Bos, P., and
Kuenen, J. G. (1991). Energy trans-
duction by anaerobic ferric iron
reduction in Thiobacillus ferrooxi-
dans. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 57,
2063–2068.

Rawlings, D. E. (2002). Heavy metal
mining using microbes. Annu. Rev.
Microbiol. 56, 65–91.

Rawlings, D. E., and Johnson, D. B.
(eds). (2007a). Biomining. Heidel-
berg: Springer-Verlag.

Rawlings, D. E., and Johnson, D. B.
(2007b). The microbiology of bio-
mining: development and optimiza-
tion of mineral-oxidizing micro-
bial consortia. Microbiology 153,
315–324.

Regenspurg, S., Brand, A., and Peiffer,
S. (2004). Formation and stability
of schwertmannite in acidic mining
lakes. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 68,
1185–1197.

Rohwerder, T., Gehrke, T., Kinzler, K.,
and Sand, W. (2003). Bioleaching
review part A: progress in bioleach-
ing: fundamentals and mechanisms
of bacterial metal
suﬁde oxida-
tion. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 63,
239–248.

Rowe, O. F., and Johnson, D. B.
(2008). Comparison of ferric iron
generation by different species of

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 12

Johnson et al.

Iron cycling in acidic environments

acidophilic bacteria immobilised in
packed-bed reactors. Syst. Appl.
Microbiol. 31, 68–77.

Rowe, O. F., Sánchez-España, J., Hall-
berg, K. B.,
and Johnson, D.
B. (2007). Microbial communities
and geochemical dynamics in an
extremely acidic, metal-rich stream
at
an abandoned sulﬁde mine
(Huelva, Spain) underpinned by
two functional primary produc-
tion systems. Environ. Microbiol. 9,
1761–1771.

San Martin-Uriz, P., Gomez, M. J.,
Arcas, A., Bargiela, R., and Amils,
R. (2011). Draft genome Sequence

of the electricigen Acidiphilium sp.
strain PM (DSM 24941). J. Bacteriol.
193, 5585–5586.

Stumm, W., and Morgan, J. J. (1981).
Aquatic Chemistry: An Introduction
Emphasizing Chemical Equilibria in
Natural Waters. New York: Wiley.

Welham, N.

J., Malatt, K. A., and
(2000). The effect
Vukcevic, S.
solution speciation on iron-
of
sulfur-arsenic-chloride
systems
at 298 K. Hydrometallurgy 57,
209–223.

Yarzábal, A., Appia-Ayme, C., Ratouch-
niak, J., and Bonnefoy, V. (2004).
Regulation of the expression of the

ferrooxidans

Acidithiobacillus
rus
operon encoding two cytochromes
c,
and
rusticyanin. Microbiology
150,
2113–2123.

cytochrome oxidase

a

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 31 October 2011; accepted:
27 February 2012; published online: 16
March 2012.

Citation: Johnson DB, Kanao T and
Hedrich S (2012) Redox transformations
of iron at extremely low pH: fundamental
and applied aspects. Front. Microbio.
3:96. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00096
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Microbiological Chemistry, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Johnson, Kanao and
Hedrich. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution Non Com-
mercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 96 | 13

