REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 23 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00148

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron: commensal
hospital dweller turned pan-drug-resistant menace

Ignasi Roca, Paula Espinal , Xavier Vila-Farrés and Jordi Vila*

Department of Clinical Microbiology, School of Medicine, IDIBAPS and Barcelona Centre for International Health Research, Hospital Clínic-Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain

Edited by:
Stefania Stefani, University of
Catania, Italy
Reviewed by:
Ilda Santos Sanches,
Universidade nova de Lisboa, Portugal
Paolo Visca, University Roma Tre, Italy
*Correspondence:
Jordi Vila, Department of Clinical
Microbiology, Hospital Clinic of
Barcelona, Villarroel, 170, 08036
Barcelona, Spain.
e-mail: jvila@ub.edu

During the past few decades Acinetobacter baumannii has evolved from being a com-
mensal dweller of health-care facilities to constitute one of the most annoying pathogens
responsible for hospitalary outbreaks and it is currently considered one of the most impor-
tant nosocomial pathogens. In a prevalence study of infections in intensive care units
conducted among 75 countries of the ﬁve continents, this microorganism was found to
be the ﬁfth most common pathogen. Two main features contribute to the success of A.
baumannii: (i) A. baumannii exhibits an outstanding ability to accumulate a great variety
of resistance mechanisms acquired by different mechanisms, either mutations or acqui-
sition of genetic elements such as plasmids, integrons, transposons, or resistant islands,
making this microorganism multi- or pan-drug-resistant and (ii) The ability to survive in the
environment during prolonged periods of time which, combined with its innate resistance
to desiccation and disinfectants, makes A. baumannii almost impossible to eradicate from
the clinical setting. In addition, its ability to produce bioﬁlm greatly contributes to both
persistence and resistance. In this review, the pathogenesis of the infections caused by
this microorganism as well as the molecular bases of antibacterial resistance and clinical
aspects such as treatment and potential future therapeutic strategies are discussed in
depth.

Keywords: Acinetobacter baumannii, antimicrobial resistance, pathogenesis, bioﬁlm, antimicrobial peptides

genus

INTRODUCTION
The Acinetobacter
comprises Gram-negative non-
fermenting coccobacilli with 25 validly named species and 9
genomic species deﬁned by genomic DNA–DNA hybridization
(Espinal et al., 2011b). Although Acinetobacter pittii and Acine-
tobacter nosocomialis (formerly Acinetobacter genomic species 3
and gen. sp. 13TU, respectively (Nemec et al., 2011) are emerg-
ing as important pathogens and have been involved in a number
of outbreaks in intensive care units, Acinetobacter baumannii is,
undoubtedly the species showing the highest clinical relevance,
mainly in the nosocomial setting. In fact, the three clinically impor-
tant members of this group, also known as the A. baumannii (Ab)
group (Peleg et al., 2008), are phenotypically related and can-
not be differentiated by currently available identiﬁcation systems.
Indeed, A. pittii and A. nosocomialis are often erroneously iden-
tiﬁed as A. baumannii by routine commercial systems (Bernards
et al., 1996). In a recent report byEspinal et al. (2011c) the use of
MALDI–TOF mass spectrometry to differentiate the three species
was analyzed, showing that A. nosocomialis was misidentiﬁed as A.
baumannii. Inclusion of speciﬁc signature proﬁles for A. nosocomi-
alis within the Bruker database allowed the correct identiﬁcation
of this genomic species, thus, MALDI–TOF MS spectra can be
used as a fast, simple, and reliable method to identify members
of the Ab group. Two main features contribute to the success
of A. baumannii: (i) They normally exhibit multidrug resistance
(MDR), acquired by different mechanisms, either mutations or
acquisition of genetic elements such as plasmids, transposons, or

resistant islands, and (ii) The ability to survive in the environ-
ment, in which, the production of bioﬁlm plays an important role
(discussed below). Several reviews dealing with the taxonomy, epi-
demiology, and infection of A. baumannii have been published on
recent years (Dijkshoorn et al., 2007; Peleg et al., 2008; Towner,
2009; Visca et al., 2011). The review presented here provides an
updated overview of the clinical and treatment aspects as well as
the pathogenesis of antimicrobial resistance in A. baumannii. In
addition, future potential therapeutic alternatives are discussed.

PATHOGENESIS AND VIRULENCE FACTORS OF
ACINETOBACTER BAUMANNII
Multiple bacterial virulence factors are required for the pathogen-
esis of infections caused by A. baumannii. These factors enable
microorganisms to colonize/infect the host efﬁciently. However,
very little information is known about the virulence factors in A.
baumannii and host responses to infection (Cerqueira and Peleg,
2011). Considering that A. baumannii is a multidrug-resistant
microorganism, identiﬁcation of the virulence factors, and the
pathogenicity mechanisms could contribute to the development
of novel therapeutic alternatives for the control of Acinetobacter
infections.

MOTILITY AND ADHERENCE
Acinetobacter baumannii, has been described as non-motile
(Tomaras et al., 2003). Its name is derived from the Greek“akineto,”
which means motionless or non-motile and was given due to

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 1

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

the lack of ﬂagella (McBride, 2010). Analysis of new A. bauman-
nii genome sequences has revealed an absence of ﬂagellar genes,
therefore swarming, which is mediated by ﬂagella (Clemmer et al.,
2011), is unlikely in this microorganism. However, A. baumannii
spreads rapidly over surfaces probably as the result of twitching
motility, a form of surface translocation previously described in
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus (Henrichsen and Blom, 1975). Twitch-
ing motility mediated by the extension and retraction of type IV
pili is controlled by a large number of genes, some involved in
the assembly of type IV pili (pilA, pilB, pilC, pilF, pilM, pilN, pilO,
pilP, pilQ, pilZ, pilW ), twitching (pilR, pilS, pilT, pilU ), and the
pilin ﬁlament (pilA; Mattick, 2002; Jarrell and McBride, 2008).
Although there is no current experimental evidence of the actual
involvement of type IV pili in A. baumannii motility, a recent
publication by Eijkelkamp et al. (2011) has shown the presence
of several genes associated with the synthesis of type IV pili in
the genomes of fully sequenced A. baumannii strains. The authors
have also demonstrated a positive correlation between the degree
of sequence conservation of the gene encoding the pilin subunit
PilA and the twitching phenotype exhibited. Moreover, type IV pili
has also been related to twitching motility in other non-ﬂagellated
gamma-proteobacteria (De La Fuente et al., 2007).

Twitching motility is also controlled by a range of signal trans-
duction systems, including two-component sensor-regulators and
a complex chemosensory system (Mattick, 2002). In a recent study,
Clemmer et al. (2011) found that the motility exhibited by A. bau-
mannii was partially dependent on a functional pilT gene. The loss
of this gene in the A. baumannii M2 strain resulted in a 54% reduc-
tion in motility, suggesting that twitching represents a signiﬁcant
component of the overall motility in A. baumannii.

BIOFILM
Adherence to host cells represents the initial step of coloniza-
tion or infection. During colonization, bacteria may form micro-
colonies which result in a highly structured microbial com-
munity, called bioﬁlm. Bioﬁlm constitutes a structural com-
munity of multiple bacterial cells associated with a biotic or
abiotic surface, enclosed in a polymeric matrix (comprised
of carbohydrates, nucleic acids, proteins, and other macro-
molecules; Costerton, 1995), constituting a protective mecha-
nism to survive in harsh environments and during host infec-
tion. These bacteria become more resistant to antimicrobial
stressors, antibiotics, or cleaning than their planktonic coun-
terparts and therefore the ability to generate bioﬁlms rep-
resents an important virulence factor (Donlan, 2002; Wrob-
lewska et al., 2008; de Breij et al., 2009; Gaddy and Actis,
2009).

Bioﬁlm can be inﬂuenced by common factors such as nutrient
availability, bacterial appendages, bacterial surface components,
quorum sensing (QS), macromolecular secretions (Irie and Parsek,
2008; Gaddy and Actis, 2009; Bhargava et al., 2010), and complex
regulatory networks including two-component regulatory systems
and transcriptional regulators which are related to the expression
of bioﬁlm-associated gene products in response to environmen-
tal signals (Stanley and Lazazzera, 2004). Tomaras et al. (2003)
demonstrated that the ability of A. baumannii strain ATCC 19606T
to form pili and to adhere and form bioﬁlm on abiotic surfaces

depends on the expression of the csuE gene, which is a component
of the CsuA/BABCDE chaperone-usher complex important for the
assembly and production of pili involved in adhesion to surfaces.
Inactivation of csuE results in the abolition of pili production and
bioﬁlm formation suggesting that CsuA/BABCDE-mediated pili
play a role in the initial steps of bioﬁlm formation. The expression
of this operon is controlled by a two-component regulatory system
including a sensor kinase encoded by bfmS and a response regu-
lator encoded by bfmR. Inactivation of bfmR results in a loss of
expression of the csu operon and, therefore, abolition of pili pro-
duction and bioﬁlm formation on abiotic surfaces. Additionally,
the coupling of pili to host cell receptors may induce the produc-
tion of inﬂammatory mediators such as chemokines and cytokines
(Sauer et al., 2000).

In addition to the CsuA/BABCDE-mediated pili, de Breij
et al. (2009) found that A. baumannii ATCC19606T produces a
CsuA/BABCDE-independent short pilus, which may be involved
in the adherence of the bacteria to biotic surfaces, such as human
respiratory cells.

For the development of mature bioﬁlm structures, an ortholog
of a staphylococcal bioﬁlm-associated protein (Bap) was found
in A. baumannii strain 307-0294. Transposon inactivation of this
protein involved in cell–cell interactions resulted in destabilization
of the mature bioﬁlm on abiotic or biotic surfaces (Loehfelm et al.,
2008).

Several studies have shown that some A. baumannii strains can
adhere to human cells and form bioﬁlm on abiotic surfaces. A. bau-
mannii survives on ﬁngertips and inanimate objects such as glass,
plastic, and other environmental surfaces, even after exposure to
dry conditions and nutrient starvation during extended periods of
time (Jawad et al., 1996; Wendt et al., 1997; Lee et al., 2006b; de Breij
et al., 2009; Espinal et al., 2012). The survival of A. baumannii has
also been attributed to resistance of this microorganism to antimi-
crobial drugs and desiccation (Jawad et al., 1998; Tomaras et al.,
2003). Since A. baumannii can produce bioﬁlm, the resistance phe-
notype could be attributed to the ability of A. baumannii clinical
strains to form bioﬁlms on abiotic surfaces, particularly in strains
isolated from catheter-related urinary tract or bloodstream infec-
tions or even from a case of shunt-related meningitis (Tomaras
et al., 2003; Rodríguez-Baño et al., 2008; Gaddy and Actis, 2009).
In a recent study, Espinal et al. (2012) performed survival assays
with bioﬁlm- and non-bioﬁlm-forming strains on glass coverslips
in a desiccated environment. The survival times for the bioﬁlm-
forming strains were longer than for the non-bioﬁlm-forming
strains (36 versus 15 days, respectively, P < 0.001), demonstrat-
ing that A. baumannii strains can attach to glass coverslips and
also form bioﬁlm, allowing their survival under dry conditions
for much longer lengths of time than non-bioﬁlm-forming strains
and may contribute to its persistence in the hospital environment,
increasing the probability of causing nosocomial infections and
outbreaks. A few previous reports have described the ability of clin-
ical isolates of A. baumannii to attach to and form bioﬁlms on glass
surfaces comprising an amorphous material similar to exopolysac-
charide (Vidal et al., 1996; Tomaras et al., 2003; Espinal et al., 2012).
Scanning and transmission electron microscopy (Figure 1) studies
have shown appendages and a polysaccharide layer covering the
cells only in bioﬁlm-forming strains (Espinal et al., 2012). This

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 2

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

FIGURE 1 | Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (A–C). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (D–F) of an A. baumannii bioﬁlm-forming strain in liquid
medium. Black arrow speciﬁes appendage structures (pili or ﬁmbriae), and white arrow the thick exopolysaccharide layer. All electron microscopy images are
derived from the work by Espinal et al. (unpublished data)

highly hydrated layer may prevent lethal desiccation and, thus,
protect against variations in humidity as well as contribute to
mechanical stability, longer survival, and antimicrobial resistance
(Sutherland, 2001; Donlan, 2002).

SURFACE POLYSACCHARIDES
Surface polysaccharide, such as capsule, is considered an impor-
tant virulence trait in Gram-negative bacteria, but its role in the
pathogenesis of A. baumannii is non-existent. Russo et al. (2010)

obtained mutants from the A. baumannii strain AB307-0294 and
identiﬁed two genes: ptk, that was predicted to be required for
capsule polymerization and encodes a putative protein tyrosine
kinase (PTK), and epsA, required for assembly and encoding a
putative polysaccharide export outer membrane protein (EpsA).
These genes are required for a capsule-positive phenotype and
describe the participation of capsule in the pathogenesis of A.
baumannii. This study demonstrated that the K1 capsule from
the A. baumannii strain AB307-0294 was necessary for optimal

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 3

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

growth in human ascitic ﬂuid and survival in human serum as
well as in a rat tissue infection model. The active protection of the
capsule allows bacterial resistance to the bactericidal activity of the
complement.

On the other hand, the potential of PtK and EpsA as drug tar-
gets was observed when the loss of PTK or EpsA resulted in a
complete and durable killing of AB307-0294 in vivo.

Other important extracellular polysaccharide is the poly-β-
(1-6)-N -acetyl glucosamine (PNAG) described as a major com-
ponent of bioﬁlms in Staphylococcus epidermidis and S. aureus
(Kropec et al., 2005). In A. baumannii clinical
isolates the
pgaABCD locus, encoding proteins for the synthesis of PNAG,
has been proved critical for bioﬁlm development (Choi et al.,
2009). Besides the role in surface and cell-to-cell adherence, PNAG
has been described as a virulence factor that also protects bacte-
ria against innate host defenses. Although PNAG is not essential
for bioﬁlm formation under static conditions, it is required for
maintaining the integrity of A. baumannii bioﬁlms in dynamic
and stressful environments. Indeed, PNAG has shown a role in
the pathogenesis of A. baumannii and is a candidate vaccine
against this pathogen (Choi et al., 2009; Cerqueira and Peleg,
2011).

LPS structures containing long O-speciﬁc sugar chains (smooth
or S-type LPS) have been associated with virulence, and previous
studies have shown that nosocomial isolates of A. baumannii pro-
duce rough R- and smooth S-type LPS. The differences in the
ability of LPS from different isolates of A. baumannii to elicit
mitogenic activity could be caused by variations in the fatty acid
content of lipid A and in the O-antigens. LPS and lipid A from
Acinetobacter have exhibited lethal toxicity in mice, pyrogenicity
in rabbits, as well as complement inactivation in vitro (García et al.,
1999). Pantophlet et al. (1998) suggested an important role for the
LPS from nosocomial strains of A. baumannii as a virulence factor
in vivo and that synthesis of endotoxin could be an important fac-
tor responsible for the severity of disease observed during sepsis
by this microorganism.

Although little is known of the endotoxic potential of A. bau-
mannii LPS with respect to human cells and its ability to stimu-
late inﬂammatory signaling via human toll-like receptors (TLRs),
Erridge et al. (2007) investigated the biological activity of these
endotoxins in human monocytic THP-1 cells and in TLR-deﬁcient
HEK-293 cells transfected with human TLR2 and TLR4 constructs.
The results of this study showed that endotoxins derived from
clinical isolates of A. baumannii and one Acinetobacter genomic
species 9 are potent stimulators of inﬂammatory signaling in
human monocyte cells and the responses to these bacteria are
dependent on TLR2 and TLR4.

These results, however, are in apparent conﬂict with a recently
published study by de Breij et al. (2010) that investigated the
interplay among bioﬁlm formation, adherence, and induction
of an inﬂammatory response in human airway epithelial cells.
De Breij and co-workers concluded that clinically relevant A.
baumannii strains showing good adherence to human epithelial
cells elicit a poor inﬂammatory response, allowing Acinetobacter
strains to evade the host immune system and, therefore, explain-
ing the exceptional survival and persistence capabilities of this
microorganism.

These ﬁndings were in agreement with those reported in

Haemophilus inﬂuenzae (Bresser et al., 1997).

OUTER MEMBRANE PROTEINS
Outer membrane proteins (OMPs) of Gram-negative bacte-
ria have been related to antibiotic resistance, adaptation, and
pathogenesis in the host cells. Some OMPs of the OmpA fam-
ily have been characterized in Acinetobacter strains, and represent
one of the major OMP in the genus (Vallenet et al., 2008).

Previous studies have determined that bacterial molecules
secreted from A. baumannii are responsible for host cell death
(Lee et al., 2001). Among these molecules, OmpA from A. bau-
mannii (AbOmpA) makes up a potential virulence factor with
multiple important effects in pathogenesis and signal processing
(Perez et al., 2011). AbOmpA is the most abundant surface protein
involved in the adherence to and invasion of epithelial cells and
induces apoptosis in the early stages of A. baumannii infection
(Gaddy et al., 2009).

Acinetobacter baumannii can induce cell death (Hep-2 cells)
by means of cell surface death receptors and mitochondrial disin-
tegration. Puriﬁed AbOmpA was identiﬁed in the mitochondria,
where it induced the release of proapoptotic molecules such as
cytochrome c and apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), which medi-
ates caspase-dependent and AIF-dependent apoptosis in epithelial
cells and degrades chromosomal DNA (Choi et al., 2005). Apop-
tosis of epithelial cells can lead to the internalization of bacteria
through the disrupted mucosal lining and, therefore, the outcome
of infections caused by this microorganism depends on apoptosis
induction in the epithelial cells (Choi et al., 2005).

AbOmpA is also implicated in resistance to complement and
bioﬁlm formation (Gaddy and Actis, 2009; Kim et al., 2009). Some
A. baumannii strains are resistant to the killing activity of human
serum by means of genetic components that increase Acinetobac-
ter capabilities to cause bacteremia. The suggested serum-resistant
mechanism involves the inhibition of host complement C3 protein
cleavage and binding to the bacterial surface, which inhibit host
phagocytic cell recognition and result in a serum-resistance phe-
notype (Kim et al., 2009). In addition, the binding of complement
regulators to OMPs also plays a role in complement activation.
Kim et al. (2009) demonstrated that an alternative complement
pathway was responsible for the killing of A. baumannii in nor-
mal human serum. In vitro assays have indicated that factor H,
the main regulator of this pathway, bound to the surface of this
microorganism treated with normal human sera, may contribute
to the persistence and dissemination of Acinetobacter in the host.
Comparisons between A. baumannii ATCC19606T and isogenic
AbOmpA
mutants have shown that mutant strains lose adher-
ence and invasion capability in the host cells, demonstrating that
AbOmpA participates in the evasion of the complement attack by
interacting with factor H (Choi et al., 2008). In this sense,AbOmpA
is considered the main complement regulator-acquiring surface
protein (Choi et al., 2008) whereas secreted AbOmpA induces
apoptosis in epithelial cells (Choi et al., 2005). In view of these
results, AbOmpA stands out as an important virulence factor in
A. baumannii and could be used as a target in the development
of antibiotics and vaccines against this microorganism (Kim et al.,
2009).

−

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 4

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

OUTER MEMBRANE VESICLES
In addition to OmpA, some Gram-negative bacterial species
secrete outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) during bacterial growth.
OMVs are spherical nanovesicles with a diameter between 20
and 200 nm which are composed of lipopolysaccharides, OMPs,
lipids, and DNA or RNA (Kwon et al., 2009; Jin et al., 2011).
Secreted OMVs have been shown to participate in QS, the trans-
port of virulence factors, the inhibition of phagosome-maturation
in macrophages, bioﬁlm formation, and gene transfer (McConnell
et al., 2011b; Rumbo et al., 2011). The surface factors of OMVs
mediate adherence to host cells as well as the internalization of
vesicular components suggesting that OMVs function as a trans-
port vehicle of effector molecules into host cells (Kwon et al., 2009;
Jin et al., 2011). Kwon et al. demonstrated that A. baumannii
secretes OMVs during in vitro growth in association with some
virulence-associated proteins and immune modulators suggest-
ing that OMVs play a role in the pathogenicity of A. baumannii.
AbOmpA, mediating the adherence to and invasion of A. bauman-
nii to epithelial cells (Choi et al., 2008) was detected as a major
protein component in the OMV fraction. Packaged in OMVs,
AbOmpA induces cytotoxicity and host cell death. The results
obtained in this study revealed that AbOmpA derived from OMVs
was found in the cytoplasm of receiving cells, suggesting that
OMVs can deliver virulence factors directly to host cells in the
absence of bacteria.

Proteomic analysis of the OMVs from A. baumanii ATCC
19696T and the clinical
isolate DU202 identiﬁed more than
110 proteins derived from the outer membrane, periplas-
mic space,
inner membrane, cytosol, and other additional
undetermined sites. OMVs contained putative serine and Zn-
dependent proteases, phospholipases, bacterioferritin, catalase,
and a ferrichrome–iron receptor, as well as several proteins display-
ing secretion signals and pathogen-associated molecular patterns,
such as LPS and lipoproteins (Kwon et al., 2009; Jin et al., 2011).
Since OMVs contain multiple antigenic proteins from the bac-
terial outer membrane, they could be used as vaccine antigens.
Previous studies have shown that vaccination with OMVs resulted
in the recovery of antibodies against multiple bacterial antigens
displaying bactericidal activity and the ability to provide protec-
tion in animal models of infection (Schild et al., 2008). McConnell
et al. (2011b) evaluated the immune response elicited after immu-
nization with A. baumannii OMVs and found that the serum
recovered from vaccinated mice reacted against multiple proteins
present in the OMVs as well as against many proteins from the bac-
terial outer membrane. The robust and protective response elicited
by this serum suggests that OMVs might constitute a viable immu-
nization approach to control the infection and mortality caused
by A. baumannii.

Vesicles have also been shown to be involved in the transfer
of genetic material among similar bacterial species (Klieve et al.,
2005). Rumbo et al. (2011) have demonstrated that OMVs vehic-
ulate plasmids carrying carbapenem resistance genes such as the
blaOXA-24 gene, which can be readily transferred between different
strains of A. baumannii. In this respect, OMVs might be considered
as important virulence factors not only because they participate
in host–pathogen interactions but also by allowing the spread of
antibiotic resistance genes (such as those related to carbapenem

resistance) to surrounding bacteria. The genetic material con-
tained inside OMVs is protected from nucleases, thereby favoring
the exchange of genetic material. These results might point toward
a new mechanism for dissemination of resistance genes in addition
to conjugation, transformation, and transduction processes.

HYDROLYTIC ENZYMES
Additional proteins proposed as virulence factors in A. baumannii
also include Phospholipase D and Phospholipase C (Antunes et al.,
2011a).

Phospholipase D, which is important for human serum resis-
tance, epithelial cell invasion, and pathogenesis in a murine model
of pneumonia, also plays a role in the systemic dissemination of
bacterial pathogens within infected animals and is considered the
main virulence determinant in Corynebacterium pseudotubercu-
losis (McKean et al., 2007). Jacobs et al. (2010) characterized a
mutant A. baumannii strain harboring a transposon insertion
within a putative phospholipase D (PLD) encoding-gene. In this
study not only was phospholipase activity affected, but reduced A.
baumannii epithelial cell invasion (in vitro) and serum prolifera-
tion were also reported. As a consequence, a decrease in bacteremia
and colonization of visceral host organs was observed in a murine
infection model. As suggested with AbOmpA, phospholipase D is
an A. baumannii virulence factor that is required for wild-type lev-
els of pathogenicity and is also a potential target for the therapeutic
treatment of Acinetobacter infections (Jacobs et al., 2010).

Phospholipase C has also been shown to enhance the toxic-
ity of epithelial cells. Camarena et al. (2010) demonstrated that
an insertional mutant carrying a kanamycin cassette in the cod-
ing region of plc1 displayed a reduction in the cytotoxic effect
caused by A. baumannii on epithelial cells, thereby indicating that
phospholipase C is an important factor in cellular damage.

ETHANOL-INDUCED PATHOGENESIS
In A. baumannii, ethanol is assimilated as a carbon source and
enters the glyoxylate cycle which, in many pathogens, has been
related to virulence. Smith et al. (2004) observed that ethanol pro-
moted bacterial growth when A. baumannii was co-incubated with
yeast and also demonstrated that low concentrations of ethanol
stimulated Acinetobacter growth and contributed to endure salt
stress. To understand the virulence of A. baumannii in the presence
of ethanol, Camarena et al. (2010) characterized the transcrip-
tional proﬁle of this microorganism in the presence and absence
of ethanol. They found 70 genes whose expression was affected by
the presence of ethanol in the growth medium and suggested that
virulence of A. baumannii in the presence of ethanol was due to
increased metabolic capacity and the expression of some factors
related to stress responses.

The genes that were induced by growth in the presence of
ethanol during the exponential phase encoded proteins related
to central metabolism or ethanol/acetate assimilation, such as
ethanol dehydrogenase (AIS_2098) and aldehyde dehydrogenase
(AIS_2102), genes encoding for pta (AIS_0481; phosphate acetyl-
transferase) and ackA (AIS_0482; acetate kinase), which are related
to Acetyl-CoA synthesis.

Ethanol also induced genes involved in stress response and
pathogenesis during exponential phase. Eleven genes encoded

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 5

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

hypothetical proteins; ﬁve unique to A. baumannii ATCC 17978
and, among the remaining six,AIS_2195 was exclusive of the Acine-
tobacter genus and AIS_2509 was only present in A. baumannii
ATCC 17978 and the non-pathogenic A. baylyi ADP1. AIS_2509
was shown to contribute to ethanol stress survival together with
AIS_2510 (HSP70-like), which is mildly induced by ethanol.

Ethanol can also enhance the virulence of A. baumannii by
inducing heat-shock proteins such as Hsp90, GroEL, and Lon.
Furthermore, ethanol promotes the expression of plc1 (AIS_0043)
which encodes the A. baumannii phospholipase C.

Additional genes detected in stationary phase cultures grown
in the presence of ethanol include AIS_2381, which is required for
acinetobactin synthesis, and AIS_2566 and AIS_2578, encoding a
protein involved in siderophore synthesis and a siderophore recep-
tor, respectively, which are required for the iron-uptake systems.
Camarena et al. (2010) also demonstrated that ethanol induces a
stress response enhancing bacterial ﬁtness to survive in the host.

PENICILLIN-BINDING PROTEINS
Penicillin binding proteins (PBPs) are a family of enzymes that
share a common evolutionary origin. These enzymes catalyze the
synthesis of peptidoglycan, the primary component of the bac-
terial cell wall, and are also associated with cell morphogenesis
and cell division complexes. The inhibition of PBPs causes insta-
bility in the cell wall, resulting in growth inhibition, or cell lysis
(Cayo et al., 2011). PBPs have been classiﬁed as either high- or
low-molecular mass PBPs. High-molecular mass PBPs enable pep-
tidoglycan polymerization and insertion into the preexisting cell
wall, and low-molecular mass PBPs contribute to cell separation
and peptidoglycan remodeling (Sauvage et al., 2008). Although
little is known about low-molecular mass PBPs, the putative low-
molecular-mass penicillin-binding protein 7/8 (PBP-7/8) has been
postulated to play a role in cell wall remodeling. PBP-7/8 is a
hydrolase/endopeptidase. PBP-8 is an OmpT-mediated degrada-
tion product of PBP-7, and both PBPs stabilize and enhance solu-
ble lytic transglycosylase 70 (in vitro). Although PBP-7/8 could be
non-essential for normal elongation, it has been related to modu-
lation of cell morphology and daughter cell separation. Russo et al.
(2009) also demonstrated that a PBP-7/8-deﬁcient mutant deriva-
tive of the wild A. baumannii AB307-0394 strain contributed to the
pathogenesis of A. baumannii and participated in the growth and
survival of A. baumannii in human ascites (in vitro and in vivo) in
rat soft-tissue infection and pneumonia models. In addition, PBP-
7/8 contributed either directly or indirectly to the serum resistance
of AB307-0394.

IRON UPTAKE
Iron constitutes an important resource that it is not readily avail-
able in the human host. It is found complexed with iron-binding
molecules such as heme, lactoferrin, and transferrin. A common
alternative to more conventional human host defenses against bac-
terial infections involves the reduction of free extracellular iron
concentration by means of iron-binding proteins. However, bacte-
ria are able to survive and multiply under iron-limiting conditions
found both in natural and host environments by exploiting a
number of strategies for high-afﬁnity iron acquisition, including
production of ferric iron chelators (siderophores) that are released

outside cells, uptake of exogenous chelators, such as heme and het-
erologous siderophores, and acquisition of ferrous iron (Dorsey
et al., 2003a; Vallenet et al., 2008; Antunes et al., 2011a).

SIDEROPHORES
Siderophores are low-molecular-mass high-afﬁnity iron chelat-
ing compounds classiﬁed according to their chemical structures
(Dorsey et al., 2003a), as in catechols, high-afﬁnity iron chelat-
ing molecules containing catecholate groups which are part of the
iron-binding site.

The A. baumannii 8399 isolate, recovered during a nosoco-
mial outbreak, was shown to contain a high-afﬁnity iron-uptake
system which included a catechol siderophore capable of scaveng-
ing iron from the high-afﬁnity iron-binding proteins present in
the human host (Dorsey et al., 2003b). The latter property was
associated with the ﬁnding of dhb genes in the genome of A. bau-
mannii 8399. Genetic complementation assays have proven that
dhbA, dhbB, and dhbE genes encode active proteins that restore
enterobactin biosynthesis and iron uptake when introduced in
Escherichia coli mutants. These results demonstrated that A. bau-
mannii 8399 harbors all the genetic determinants required for the
biosynthesis of the catechol siderophore detected in iron-limited
culture supernatants of this microorganism.

Acinetobacter baumannii 8399 also contains genes encoding
proteins that are highly related to iron-transport proteins: OM73,
an iron-regulated OMP detected in iron-starved A. baumannii
8399 cells; the P45 protein, the expression of which is regulated by
both iron and Fur and could have a possible role in the secretion of
the catechol siderophore produced by A. baumannii 8399; and the
P114 protein, which may also participate in siderophore secretion
in conjunction with the P45 protein (Dorsey et al., 2003b).

The mixed catechol-hydroxamate compound known as acine-
tobactin, (structurally similar to anguibactin and vibriobactin
produced by Vibrio cholerae), was the ﬁrst siderophore to be
described in A. baumannii. Acinetobactin is produced by A. bau-
mannii ATCC 19606T and some clinical isolates (Yamamoto et al.,
1994) but is absent in the non-clinical isolate SDF (Antunes et al.,
2011b).

A comparison between the complete genomes derived from
AYE, SDF, and ACICU clinical strains has demonstrated that
AYE and ACICU express independent siderophore-mediated iron
acquisition systems together with acinetobactin and hemin iron-
capturing systems. Iron acquisition in the SDF strain, however,
depends on the expression of a hemin system rather than on
the expression of biosynthesis and transport functions for a par-
ticular siderophore. Several associated ABC transporters proba-
bly involved in the translocation of heme/hemoglobin from the
periplasm to the cytosol have also been detected in this strain
(Zimbler et al., 2009; Antunes et al., 2011a).

Furthermore, some A. baumannii-producing acinetobactin
strains utilize 30% iron-saturated transferrin and 15% iron-
saturated lactoferrin as the sole sources of iron for growth by
scavenging iron bound to these proteins. None of these strains
use heme or hemoglobin as an iron source. Insertional analysis
has demonstrated that inactivation of bauA and basD, encoding
for acinetobactin transport and biosynthesis functions, respec-
tively, affects the ability of isogenic derivatives to grow under

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 6

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

iron-limiting conditions (Mihara et al., 2004; Zimbler et al., 2009).
These ﬁndings suggest that A. baumannii is a versatile pathogen
with the ability to acquire iron and survive under iron-limiting
conditions and highlights the role of acinetobactin-mediated iron
acquisition mechanisms in the pathogenesis of A. baumannii
infections (Mihara et al., 2004; Zimbler et al., 2009).

The ferric-siderophore complex is transported inside bacte-
rial cells with the aid of speciﬁc outer-membrane receptors,
periplasmic proteins, and inner-membrane-associated proteins,
such as the iron-regulated outer membrane proteins system
(IROMPs; Dorsey et al., 2003b; Mihara et al., 2004; Vallenet et al.,
2008). In Gram-negative bacteria, these receptors are localized
on the outer membrane, where internalization of siderophores
or heme is associated with dissipation of the proton gradient
on the inner membrane and is mediated by the TonB pro-
tein complex in the periplasmic space. The TonBExbBD energy-
transducing system is required for hemin utilization in many
bacteria. Once internalized, the ferric-siderophore complexes are
reduced to release iron by an enzyme with ferric reductase activ-
ity (Vallenet et al., 2008; Zimbler et al., 2009; Antunes et al.,
2011b).

In addition to the previously mentioned acinetobactin
siderophore, Antunes et al.
(2011b) have described two
siderophore synthesis/transport gene clusters, which include genes
for putative hydroxylase and acetyltransferase enzymes, suggestive
of the synthesis of hydroxamate-type siderophores. One of these
clusters was only present in the ATCC 17978, while the other was
present in the ACICU, ATCC 17978, AYE, AB0057, AB307-294, and
ATCC 19606T A. baumannii strains, but not in the non-human
SDF isolate.

Another alternative mechanism for bacterial iron assimilation
involves the direct uptake of iron by the Feo system, a homolog
of the E. coli feoB. This system, found in ACICU, ATCC 17978,
AYE, AB0057, AB307-294, ATCC 19606T, and SDF strains, con-
sists of the cytosolic FeoA protein, the inner membrane Fe(II)
permease FeoB, and the putative transcriptional repressor FeoC
(Antunes et al., 2011b). The expression of the proteins implied
in iron acquisition systems, including siderophore biosynthetic
enzymes, depends on the transcriptional regulation of the global
iron-binding repressor protein Fur, for ferric uptake regulator
(Mihara et al., 2004; Vallenet et al., 2008), which acts as a transcrip-
tion repressor of genes involved in the siderophore/heme(globin)
systems. A bioinformatic search for Fur-binding sites revealed that
putative Fur boxes were present in the intergenic regions of the
abovementioned gene clusters, demonstrating the participation of
these clusters in iron capture.

QUORUM SENSING
Bacteria elaborate chemical signals excreted from the cells to per-
form intercellular communication and environmental adaptation.
This ability of bacteria to monitor cell density before expressing a
phenotype is known as “quorum sensing” (Whitehead et al., 2001).
QS is a widespread regulatory mechanism among Gram-negative
bacteria and often takes place with the aid of acyl-homoserine
lactone (AHL)-like signal molecules produced by the LuxI family
of AHL synthases (Sarkar and Chakraborty, 2008; González et al.,
2009). Modulation of the physiological processes controlled by

acyl HSLs and, non-acyl HSL-mediated systems occurs in a cell
density- and growth phase-dependent manner. AHLs-mediated
QS has been linked with the production of virulence factors, motil-
ity, nodulation, plasmid transfer, antibiotic production, bioemul-
san production, bioluminescence, and bioﬁlm formation (White-
head et al., 2001; Vallenet et al., 2008). These autoinducers bind to
transcriptional regulatory proteins and activate or regulate gene
expression in the organism (Bhargava et al., 2010). In a previous
study, González et al. (2001) detected QS signal molecules capa-
ble of activating AHL biosensors in A. baylyi ADP1 cultures and
in culture supernatants of some clinical Acinetobacter strains. A
common AHL system of Gram-negative bacteria is mediated by
two proteins: LuxI proteins which interact with the LuxR pro-
tein. This complex binds to a speciﬁc promoter sequence known
as lux-box, which regulates the expression of QS target genes. In
Acinetobacter, the lux-box is found upstream from the putative
ATG of abaI, representing a binding site for AbaR. AbaI protein
belongs to the LuxI family of autoinducer synthases, producing
N -(3-hydroxydodecanoyl)-l-HSL (3-hydroxy-C(12)-HSL) as the
primary signal and performing the function of signal transduction
and QS. The AbaR protein, which is an autoinducer receptor in A.
baumannii, interacts with AHL and controls gene expression (Niu
et al., 2008).

Acinetobacter quorum signals have been shown to vary in vir-
ulent and non-virulent strains, thus differentiation between them
on the basis of QS is difﬁcult. On the other hand, communi-
cation among bacteria with respect to cell density is related to
maturation of bioﬁlm. It was observed that mutations in abaI
led to a reduction in bioﬁlm production compared with the iso-
genic parental strain but the original phenotype could be restored
when a exogenous Acinetobacter AHL was added to the mutant
(Niu et al., 2008; Bhargava et al., 2010). Thus, QS signal molecules
inﬂuence bioﬁlm formation which represents an important viru-
lence factor related to the survival and antibiotic resistance of A.
baumannii (Gaddy and Actis, 2009; Bhargava et al., 2010). Kang
and Park (2010a) evaluated the effect of QS signals on hexadecane
biodegradation and bioﬁlm formation in the Acinetobacter spp.
strain DR1, and found phenotypic changes in the strain associated
with three putative QS signals that strongly indicated their relation
in bioﬁlm formation. Particularly, C12-AHL, which was a major QS
signal and controlled the bioﬁlm formation in A. baumannii M2
previously described by Niu et al. (2008). The poor biodegradabil-
ity of hydrocarbons was one of the signiﬁcant changes observed
when QS signals where eliminated, and consequently resulted in
alterations of bacterial hydrophobicity, cellular motility by ﬁm-
briae or pili, bioﬁlm formation, and other environmental factors
(Clemmer et al., 2011). Thus, in the DR1 strain, the QS system
and putative AHLs directly regulated the bioﬁlm formation and
growth on hydrocarbons. In another study, Kang and Park (2010b)
described a trade-off between antibiotic resistance and biological
ﬁtness (Kang and Park, 2010b). The biological ﬁtness of the Acine-
tobacter strain DR1 was inﬂuenced by the in situ acquisition of
antibiotic resistance, probably attributable to the reduced abil-
ity to produce QS signals, lack of motility, and reduced substrate
utilization.

As a concluding remark, it has been hypothesized that inter-
ference with bacterial virulence and/or cell-to-cell signaling

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 7

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

pathways, such as interruption of QS signals, known as quorum
quenching (QQ; Chan et al., 2011), represents an important target
for pathogenesis inhibition and development of novel therapeutics
for the treatment of bacterial infections (Whitehead et al., 2001;
Bhargava et al., 2010; Rasko and Sperandio, 2010).

PUTATIVE ALIEN ISLANDS
New insights into the pathogenesis of A. baumannii has demon-
strated that mutagenesis and genomic sequencing can uncover
and evaluate many virulence factors for a better understand-
ing of the pathogenicity of this bacterium. Smith et al. (2007)
performed a genomic analysis between A. baumannii and A.
baylyi and found 55.74% homology at the protein level. One
of the most interesting differences between both was the pres-
ence of 28 putative alien islands (pAs) in A. baumannii (Smith
et al., 2007). These islands were found to contain the major-
ity of the drug resistance and virulence factors, many acquired
from their environment, indicating their role in the pathogenicity
of A. baumannii. Some of these islands contained genes asso-
ciated with pathogenesis, encoding heavy metal resistance, iron
uptake and metabolism, ﬁmbrial genes, autoinducer processing,
and cell envelope biogenesis. Other pAs contained hypothetical
genes and mobile elements that remain uncharacterized. Thus,
gene shufﬂing mutagenesis revealed that pAs might (Camarena
et al., 2010) play an important role in the pathogenesis of A.
baumannii.

ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
While other human pathogens stand out due to their virulence
and pathogenicity, A. baumannii is not known to be particularly
virulent or to produce diffusible toxins or cytolysins, and only a
few virulence factors have been described to date (Vallenet et al.,
2008). There is, however, one feature at which this microorganism
excels, and that is antimicrobial resistance. Indeed, A. baumannii
has an outstanding ability to accumulate different resistance mech-
anisms which, together with its innate resistance to desiccation,
contribute to the survival and persistence of A. baumannii under
selective environmental pressure, making this microorganism a
phenomenal nosocomial pathogen.

Acinetobacter baumannii has become resistant to almost all
commonly used antimicrobial agents, including aminoglycosides,
quinolones and broad-spectrum β-lactams, and multidrug or pan-
drug-resistant strains are becoming a frequent problem in the
clinical setting (Livermore et al., 2008; Rossolini and Mantengoli,
2008; Morgan et al., 2009; Table 1).

Overall, antimicrobial resistance can be achieved by means
of two main mechanisms: acquisition of novel genetic informa-
tion through horizontal gene transfer and genetic modiﬁcation of
endogenous genes.

Acquisition of novel genetic determinants in A. baumannii
takes place by the combined effect of mobile genetic elements
(insertion sequences, IS and transposons), integrons, and transfer-
able plasmids, while the genetic modiﬁcation of endogenous genes
implies either spontaneous mutations that modify drug targets or
the insertion/deletion of mobile elements that alter the expres-
sion of endogenous resistance mechanisms or modify membrane
permeability.

β-LACTAMS
The mechanisms involved in resistance to β-lactams in A. bau-
mannii typically include: (i) enzymatic mechanisms or production
of β-lactam hydrolyzing enzymes (β-lactamases) and (ii) non-
enzymatic mechanisms that involve modiﬁcation of membrane
permeability by either the loss of or decrease in the expression
of OMPs or an increased expression of efﬂux pumps as well as
sequence variation of PBPs.

ENZYMATIC MECHANISMS
The main mechanism of resistance to β-lactam antibiotics in A.
baumannii lies in the production of β-lactamases encoded either
chromosomally or in plasmids. The common genome of A. bau-
mannii possesses two intrinsic β-lactam hydrolyzing enzymes;
a non-inducible cephalosporinase (AmpC; Bou and Martinez-
Beltran, 2000b) and a class D oxacillinase (OXA-51/69 variants;
Brown et al., 2005).

Chromosomal cephalosporinases (AmpC)
AmpC enzymes are class C β-lactamases responsible for resistance
to all penicillins and extended-spectrum cephalosporins, except
cefepime, as well as to β-lactam-β-lactamase inhibitor combina-
tions (Drawz et al., 2010). Several allelic variants of the AmpC
enzyme have been reported and a new designation for this fam-
ily of cephalosporinases has been deﬁned (Acinetobacter-derived
cephalosporinases, or ADC). According to sequence similarities as
well as preferred substrates, AmpCs found within Acinetobacter
have been classiﬁed in up to 56 different ADC types, with more
than 25 variants being found in A. baumannii (Hujer et al., 2005;
Zhao and Hu, 2012). Being non-inducible, the basal expression lev-
els of AmpC enzymes from A. baumannii do not signiﬁcantly alter
susceptibility to β-lactams, although the presence of an upstream
IS element (known as ISAbaI ) promotes increased expression of
blaampC and resistance to expanded-spectrum cephalosporins but
not to cefepime and carbapenems. Expression of blaampC is appar-
ently driven by promoter sequences within the ISAbaI element
(Héritier et al., 2006).

Oxacillinases
Ambler Class D enzymes, also known as oxacillinases (OXA;
Ambler, 1980), are distinguished by their ability to hydrolyze
cloxacillin and oxacillin, and some also oxyimino-β-lactams, but
not carbapenems and might be inhibited by clavulanic acid. The
oxacillinase enzymes present in Acinetobacter spp., however, con-
stitute an atypical subgroup of OXA enzymes since they present
carbapenem-hydrolyzing activities (they hydrolyze imipenem and
meropenem but not extended-spectrum cephalosporins and aztre-
onam) and, therefore, are also termed as carbapenem-hydrolyzing
class D β-lactamases (CHDLs; Poirel and Nordmann, 2006a) and
have their own group (2df) in the updated functional classiﬁcation
of β-lactamases recently published by Bush and Jacoby (2010). In
A. baumannii, ﬁve phylogenetic subgroups of class D β-lactamases
have currently been identiﬁed: the naturally occurring OXA-51/69
and four clusters of acquired CHDLs (OXA-23, OXA-24/40, OXA-
58, and OXA-143), each with a variety of enzymes that represent
different sequence substitutions.

Similar to blaampC, basal expression of the naturally occur-
ring OXA-51 oxacillinase in A. baumannii only allows for

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 8

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

Table 1 | Antimicrobial resistance mechanisms in A. baumannii .

Antimicrobial

Resistance mechanism

β-Lactams

Chromosomal
cephalosporinase
Carbapenem-hydrolyzing
class D β-lactamases

Metallo-β-lactamases

Minor relevance
β-lactamases

Decreased permeability

Class/
family

Protein

Class C AmpC

Class D OXA-51-like
OXA-23-like
OXA-24/40-like
OXA-58-like
OXA-143-like

Class B IMP
VIM
SIM-1
NDM
Class A TEM
SHV
SCO-1
CARB
PER
VEB
CTX-M
GES
KPC

Described in
association with

Selected reference

IS

Hujer et al. (2005)

IS
IS, Tn, AbaR
XerC/XerD
IS, Tn

Integron
Integron
Integron
IS, Tn
AbaR

IS, Tn, integron
IS, Tn, integron
IS, integron, AbaR
Tn
Integron

Turton et al. (2006)
Corvec et al. (2007), Adams et al. (2008)
Merino et al. (2010)
Poirel and Nordmann (2006b)
Higgins et al. (2009)
Cornaglia et al. (2011)
Cornaglia et al. (2011)
Cornaglia et al. (2011)
Espinal et al. (2011a), Pfeifer et al. (2011)
Adams et al. (2008), Shakil and Khan (2010)
Naas et al. (2007)
Poirel et al. (2007)
Potron et al. (2009), Ramírez et al. (2010b)
Poirel et al. (2005a), Bonnin et al. (2011b)
Fournier et al. (2006), Poirel et al. (2009)
Potron et al. (2011)
Moubareck et al. (2009)
Robledo et al. (2010)
Navia et al. (2002), Fournier et al. (2006),
Adams et al. (2008)
Ravasi et al. (2011)
Quale et al. (2003)
Quale et al. (2003)
Quale et al. (2003)
del Mar Tomas et al. (2005)
Bou et al. (2000a)
Gribun et al. (2003)
Fernández-Cuenca et al. (2011)
Magnet et al. (2001)
Damier-Piolle et al. (2008)
Cayo et al. (2011)

Class D OXA-2, 10, 20, 37

Integron, AbaR

CarO
47 kDa OMP
44 kDa OMP
37 kDa OMP
33–36 kDa OMP
22–33 kDa OMP
HMP-AB
43 kDa OMP
AdeABC
AdeIJK
PBP

IS

IS

Efﬂux pump

RND

Modiﬁed penicillin-binding
proteins

Aminoglycosides Aminoglycoside-modifying

enzymes

Target binding site
modiﬁcation
Efﬂux

Quinolones

Target site mutations
Efﬂux pump

Chloramphenicol

Efﬂux pump

Acetyltransferases
Nucleotidyltransferases
Phosphotransferases
16S rRNA methylases

IS, Tn, Integron,
AbaR

IS, Tn

Cho et al. (2009)
Cho et al. (2009)
Cho et al. (2009)
Doi et al. (2007)

RND
MATE

RND

MATE
SMR
RND

AdeABC
AbeM
GyrA/ParC
AdeABC
AdeIJK
AdeFGH
AbeM
AbeS
AdeABC
AdeIJK
AdeFGH

IS

IS

IS

Magnet et al. (2001)
Su et al. (2005)
Hamouda and Amyes (2004)
Magnet et al. (2001)
Damier-Piolle et al. (2008)
Coyne et al. (2010b)
Su et al. (2005)
Srinivasan et al. (2009a)
Magnet et al. (2001)
Damier-Piolle et al. (2008)
Coyne et al. (2010b)

(Continued)

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 9

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

Table 1 | Continued

Antimicrobial

Resistance mechanism

Tetracyclines

Efﬂux pump

Tigecycline

Polymyxins

Ribosomal protection
Efﬂux pump

Lipid A modiﬁcation
Loss of lipopolysaccharide
Porin loss

Class/
family

MFS

MATE
SMR
MFS

RND

Protein

CmlA
CraA
AbeM
AbeS
TetA
TetB
TetM
AdeABC
AdeIJK
PmrCAB
LpxABC

Described in
association with

AbaR

IS, Tn, AbaR

IS

IS

Selected reference

Fournier et al. (2006), Vila et al. (2007)
Roca et al. (2009)
Su et al., 2005
Srinivasan et al. (2009a)
Ribera et al. (2003a), Fournier et al. (2006)
Vila et al. (2007)
Ribera et al. (2003b)
Magnet et al. (2001)
Damier-Piolle et al. (2008)
Arroyo et al. (2011), Beceiro et al. (2011)
Moffatt et al. (2011)
Fernández-Reyes et al. (2009)

IS, Insertion sequence; Tn, transposon; AbaR, resistance island; RND, resistance–nodulation–cell division family; MFS, major facilitator superfamily; MATE, multidrug
and toxic compound extrusion family; SMR, small multidrug resistance family.

weak hydrolysis of β-lactamic substrates, mainly penicillins and
carbapenems (they are not active against expanded-spectrum
cephalosporins; Héritier et al., 2005a) unless ISAbaI or ISAba9 ele-
ments are located upstream from blaOXA-51-like genes to increase
their expression (Turton et al., 2006; Figueiredo et al., 2009). Over
68 different OXA-51 sequence variants are classiﬁed as Class D
enzymes (Zhao and Hu, 2012).

Originally named ARI-1, the acquired OXA-23 enzyme shares
56% identity at the protein level with OXA-51/69 and was initially
identiﬁed in a plasmid from an A. baumannii isolate in Scotland,
constituting the ﬁrst oxacillinase with carbapenemase activity to
be reported (Paton et al., 1993). Since then, the blaOXA-23 gene
has been identiﬁed all over the world, both in the chromosome
or in plasmids, and it is apparently exclusive of the Acinetobacter
genus, with a Proteus mirabilis isolate from France being the sole
exception (Bonnet et al., 2002). OXA-27, OXA-49, and OXA-73
are also included within this cluster (Afzal-Shah et al., 2001; see
also http://www.lahey.org/studies/).

The second cluster of acquired class D enzymes is named after
the OXA-24/40 enzyme (OXA-24 and OXA-40 were initially iden-
tiﬁed as different enzymes but re-sequencing has shown that they
are indeed indistinguishable; see http://www.lahey.org/studies/),
which was originally isolated from the chromosome of a
carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii isolate from Spain (Bou et al.,
2000c). This class also includes the OXA-25, OXA-26, and OXA-
72 (Afzal-Shah et al., 2001; Wang et al., 2007) enzymes and shares
roughly 63 and 60% amino acid identity with the OXA-51/69 and
OXA-23 clusters, respectively. Although the OXA-26 enzyme has
been identiﬁed in Belgium (Afzal-Shah et al., 2001), the OXA-72
in isolates from Asia (Wang et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2009a; Lu et al.,
2009) and more recently also from Croatia (Goic-Barisic et al.,
2011), and the blaOXA-40 gene has also been found in the United
States (Lolans et al., 2006; Qi et al., 2008), the blaOXA-40-like genes
seem to be highly prevalent in Spain and Portugal (Quinteira et al.,
2007; Ruiz et al., 2007) and they can also be found either in the
chromosome or be plasmid-borne.

The third cluster of acquired CHDLs is represented by OXA-58,
identiﬁed in A. baumannii by Poirel et al. (2005b), sharing 59%
amino acid identity with OXA-51/69 and less than 50% amino
acid identity with OXA-23 and OXA-24/40. The blaOXA-58 gene
has only been found in Acinetobacter spp. so far, and it has been
detected in A. junii in Romania and Australia (Marqué et al., 2005;
Peleg et al., 2006), in A. pittii and Acinetobacter phenon 6/ct 13TU
in Spain (Martí et al., 2008a,b), in A. nosocomialis in Taiwan (Lin
et al., 2010), and Wang et al. (2007) also reported the ﬁrst identi-
ﬁcation of a blaOXA-58-like gene in Acinetobacter genomic species
14TU in China.

The blaOXA-58 gene is usually plasmid-encoded, which most
likely accounts for its wide distribution throughout the world,
although it is especially prevalent in Italy and Greece (D’Arezzo
et al., 2009; Papa et al., 2009; Donnarumma et al., 2010; Di
Popolo et al., 2011; Gogou et al., 2011), where carbapenem-
resistant A. baumannii strains producing OXA-58 have caused
several outbreaks in intensive care and pediatric units (Poirel et al.,
2006; Pournaras et al., 2006; Tsakris et al., 2008). OXA-96 (Koh
et al., 2007b) and OXA-97 (Poirel et al., 2008b) constitute point-
mutation derivatives of OXA-58 included within the same cluster
and with similar hydrolytic properties.

The fourth cluster of acquired CHDLs present in A. baumannii
was identiﬁed more recently upon the isolation of a novel OXA-
143 enzyme recovered from an A. baumannii clinical isolate in
Brazil (Higgins et al., 2009). At the protein level, this enzyme is
88, 63, and 52% identical to OXA-24/40, OXA-23, and OXA-58
respectively, but exhibits a similar substrate proﬁle to that of other
CHDLs from A. baumannii.

Overall, the level of carbapenem-hydrolysis by CHDLs is con-
siderably low, with imipenem being the preferred substrate over
meropenem, thereby raising a debate as to the exact contribu-
tion of these enzymes to carbapenem resistance (Queenan and
Bush, 2007). Héritier et al. (2005b) addressed this issue by study-
ing changes in susceptibility to carbapenems using either knock-
out mutants or transformation experiments with both natural

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 10

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

and recombinant plasmids containing blaOXA-23, blaOXA-40, and
blaOXA-58 in different hosts and genetic backgrounds. These exper-
iments demonstrated that acquired CHDLs signiﬁcantly con-
tribute to the resistant phenotype, with OXA-40 and especially
OXA-23 showing a signiﬁcantly greater impact on resistance than
OXA-58. In addition, they also noticed that CHDLs expressed
from natural plasmids originated greater levels of carbapenem
resistance than those expressed in recombinant vectors, point-
ing out the importance of IS elements to enhance the expres-
sion of acquired class D oxacillinases in A. baumannii (Héritier
et al., 2005b). The role of mobile genetic elements in the expres-
sion and transfer of resistance determinants will be discussed
further on.

Metallo-β-lactamases
Since their introduction back in 1985, carbapenems have probably
been (and still are) the most important antimicrobial agents for the
treatment of infections caused by multidrug-resistant A. bauman-
nii. During the last decades, however, resistance to carbapenems is
increasing worldwide (Gopalakrishnan and Sureshkumar, 2010;
Davies et al., 2011; Gogou et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2011a) and
carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii strains are commonly resis-
tant to all other classes of antibiotics as well, showing intermediate
susceptibility to rifampicin and only being susceptible to tigecy-
cline and colistin, although resistance to both antimicrobials has
also recently been reported (Al-Sweih et al., 2011; Taneja et al.,
2011).

There is another class of acquired β-lactamases in A. bauman-
nii which, together with Ambler class D enzymes, contributes
to the carbapenem-resistant phenotype, the Ambler class B of
metallo-β-lactamases or MBLs. This group of enzymes differs
from other β-lactamases in its broad substrate proﬁle (they are
capable of hydrolyzing all β-lactams except the monobactam aztre-
onam), potential for horizontal transfer and the fact that they
are zinc-dependent metalloproteins inhibited by EDTA but not
by carbapenem or β-lactamase inhibitors such as clavulanic acid,
tazobactam, and sulbactam (Bush and Jacoby, 2010).

Although MBLs are not as much widespread as class D enzymes
in A. baumannii, they display a signiﬁcantly higher hydrolytic
activity toward carbapenems (100- to 1,000-fold; Poirel and Nord-
mann, 2006a). Of the several groups of MBLs described to date,
only IMP, VIM, SIM, and the novel NDM have been found in
A. baumannii and, with the exception of NDM, they are typically
identiﬁed within class 1 integrons containing an array of resistance
gene cassettes as well, usually including some aminoglycoside-
resistance determinants (Riccio et al., 2000; Houang et al., 2003;
Zarrilli et al., 2004; Lee et al., 2005; Tsakris et al., 2006). The impor-
tance of integrons and their contribution to the MDR phenotype
will be further expanded later in this review.

IMP metallo-β-lactamases

(named for being active on
imipenem) were ﬁrst described in Japan from a Pseudomonas
aeruginosa isolate in 1990 (Watanabe et al., 1991). After that initial
isolation, IMP enzymes have been reported worldwide in sev-
eral Gram-negative bacteria, including A. baumannii (Queenan
and Bush, 2007). So far there are up to 33 different IMP variants
(according to http://www.lahey.org/studies/) but only 8 (IMP-1, -
2, -4, -5, -6, -8, -11, and -19) have been identiﬁed in A. baumannii,

mostly in Asia but also in Europe and parts of South America
(Riccio et al., 2000; Chu et al., 2001; Da Silva et al., 2002; Towner
et al., 2002; Gales et al., 2003; Lee et al., 2003, 2008; Yamamoto
et al., 2011). Enzymes belonging to the IMP type have broad sub-
strate speciﬁcity and are especially active against cephalosporins
and carbapenems.

The ﬁrst VIM enzyme (VIM-1) was initially described in 1999
from a P. aeruginosa isolate in the Italian location of Verona (hence,
Veronese imipenemase; Lauretti et al., 1999) but the ﬁrst VIM
enzyme (VIM-2) in A. baumannii was not described until a few
years later (Yum et al., 2002). VIM MBLs display <40% amino
acid identity with IMP enzymes and share a similar substrate pro-
ﬁle, albeit with a higher afﬁnity toward carbapenems (Docquier
et al., 2003). During the past decade several VIM variants (VIM-1,
-2, -3, -4, and -11) have been identiﬁed in A. baumannii isolates,
mainly in European and Asian countries (Yum et al., 2002; Lee
et al., 2003, 2008; Tsakris et al., 2006; Wroblewska et al., 2007;
Figueiredo et al., 2008) but also in clinical isolates of the closely
related A. nosocomialis and A. pittii (Espinal et al., 2011b).

SIM-1 was originally found in A. baumannii

in a tertiary
care hospital in Seoul, Korea (hence, Seoul imipenemase), and
so far this isolate contains the only blaSIM-1 gene reported in
this microorganism (Lee et al., 2005). SIM-1 exhibits 64–69%
amino acid identity with IMP enzymes and, similar to IMP
and VIM, it is capable of hydrolyzing penicillins, narrow-, and
expanded-spectrum cephalosporins as well as carbapenems.

More recently, a novel class B metallo-β-lactamase enzyme has
been reported. This enzyme was ﬁrst identiﬁed in Klebsiella pneu-
moniae and E. coli clinical isolates recovered in Sweden from a
traveler returning from India and has, hence, been termed NDM-
1 for New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase (Yong et al., 2009). Similar
to other MBL enzymes, NDM-1 confers resistance to all β-lactams
except aztreonam. After its initial isolation, several reports have
identiﬁed blaNDM genes in Enterobacteriaceae worldwide due to
their plasmidic localization that allows for rapid transfer and dis-
semination (Nordmann et al., 2011, 2012; Poirel et al., 2011a).
In 2010 the blaNDM-1 gene was ﬁrst identiﬁed in an intensive
care unit in India from an A. baumannii isolate that also con-
tained the blaOXA-23 gene and armA (Karthikeyan et al., 2010),
a gene encoding a 16S rRNA methylase conferring resistance
to aminoglycosides (Yamane et al., 2005). The chromosomal or
plasmidic location of this gene, however, was not clear. Kaase
et al. (2011) identiﬁed the ﬁrst NDM variant in an A. bauman-
nii isolate from Egypt, NDM-2, which differed from NDM-1 by
a single amino acid substitution but shared an identical spec-
trum of hydrolysis. Although not fully demonstrated, blaNDM-2
was thought to be chromosomally located. Several reports have
subsequently described NDM enzymes in A. baumannii isolates
from China, Germany, and Israel (Chen et al., 2011; Espinal et al.,
2011a; Pfeifer et al., 2011) but also in an Acinetobacter lwofﬁi isolate
from China (Hu et al., 2011). Interestingly, while the blaNDM-1 and
blaNDM-2 from Germany (Pfeifer et al., 2011) and Israel (Espinal
et al., 2011a), respectively, were found on the chromosome of A.
baumannii, the blaNDM-1 from Chinese isolates were located on
several plasmids ranging from 30 to 50 kb in size (Chen et al.,
2011) and as was the blaNDM-1 gene found in A. lwofﬁi of Chinese
origin.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 11

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

Minor relevance β-lactamases
Additional β-lactamase enzymes belonging to the Ambler class A
have also been described in A. baumannii but they are generally
regarded of minor relevance since the prevalence of these enzymes
as well as their speciﬁc contribution to the resistant phenotype is
usually hindered by the presence of more prevalent mechanisms
such as the intrinsic AmpC cephalosporinase or the naturally
occurring OXA-51, among others (Poirel and Nordmann, 2006a).
Narrow-spectrum serine β-lactamases such as TEM-1, SCO-
1, CARB-2, -4, and -8 as well as OXA-20, OXA-21, and OXA-
37 have all been detected in A. baumannii (Vila et al., 1997a;
Navia et al., 2002; Mammeri et al., 2003; Zarrilli et al., 2004;
Koh et al., 2007b; Poirel et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2007; Ramírez
et al., 2010b), but some other extended-spectrum β-lactamases
and serine-carbapenemases are also present.

PER-1 was the ﬁrst ESBL enzyme identiﬁed in A. baumannii
(Vahaboglu et al., 1997) but also PER-2 and -7 (Pasterán et al.,
2006; Bonnin et al., 2011b), VEB-1 (Poirel et al., 2003), TEM
variants TEM-92, -116, and -150 (Naiemi et al., 2005; Endimi-
ani et al., 2007; Shakil and Khan, 2010), GES-11, -12, and -14
(Bogaerts et al., 2010), the atypical expended-spectrum carbenicil-
linase CARB-10 (Potron et al., 2009), capable of hydrolyzing fourth
generation cephalosporins but not ceftazidime or cefotaxime, at
least three different SHV-type ESBLs (SHV-2, -5, and -12; Naiemi
et al., 2005; Naas et al., 2007) as well as three different types of the
plasmid-mediated CTX-M enzymes (CTX-M-2, -15, -43; Nagano
et al., 2004; Celenza et al., 2006; Shakil and Khan, 2010) have been
reported so far in this microorganism.

Interestingly, while PER and VEB are usually regarded as
second-class β-lactamases in Enterobacteriaceae (Naas et al.,
2008), they are more commonly found in A. baumannii and
seem to be emerging in certain geographic regions where they are
responsible for nosocomial outbreaks (Vahaboglu et al., 1997; Naas
et al., 2006a,b). On the other hand, CTX-M variants, especially
CTX-M-15, are widely disseminated among Enterobacteriaceae
worldwide (Canton and Coque, 2006) but, until recently, were
rare in A. baumannii. Recent reports seem to indicate an increase
in A. baumannii strains bearing CTX-M variants within the Asia-
Paciﬁc region, most likely associated with transposon-mediated
mobilization events (Nagano et al., 2004; Shakil and Khan, 2010;
Potron et al., 2011).

It is worth mentioning that 10 KPC enzymes, including a novel
variant, KPC-10, have also recently been identiﬁed among isolates
belonging to the A. calcoaceticus–A. baumannii complex in Puerto
Rico, although identiﬁcation to the species level was not conclusive
(Robledo et al., 2010).

NON-ENZYMATIC MECHANISMS
Membrane permeability
Resistance to β-lactams by means of non-enzymatic mechanisms
includes any alteration in the permeability of bacterial membranes
that either prevents the entry of antimicrobial agents or promotes
their efﬂux. Very little is known about the OMPs of A. baumannii,
but several studies have highlighted the relevance of such pro-
teins in resistance to β-lactams. In 2002, Viale and co-workers
demonstrated that the loss of a 29-kDa protein, named CarO,
was associated with carbapenem resistance in A. baumannii in

the absence of any known carbapenemase (Limansky et al., 2002).
The loss of CarO in several carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii
isolates was due to the presence of distinct insertion elements that
disrupted the carO gene (Mussi et al., 2005). Structural studies on
this protein, however, showed that although CarO presented some
pore-forming properties, it did not contain any speciﬁc binding
site for carbapenems and was rather a non-speciﬁc channel (Siroy
et al., 2005). Several other investigations have also identiﬁed a
variety of OMP proteins mainly involved in carbapenem resis-
tance upon OMP-loss or reduced expression, including a set of
endemic carbapenem-resistant A. baumannii isolates from New
York presenting reduced expression of 47-, 44-, and 37-kDa OMPs
together with an increased expression of the class C cephalospori-
nase (Quale et al., 2003); an A. baumannii isolate in Spain that had
lost a 33- to 36-kDa OMP associated with carbapenem resistance
(del Mar Tomas et al., 2005); and, also similar to what has already
been described in Enterobacteriaceae (Kitchel et al., 2010; Pitart
et al., 2011), the combined effect of reduced expression of 22- and
33-kDa OMPs and an acquired carbapenemase enzyme (OXA-23;
Bou et al., 2000a).

Proteomic studies have also highlighted some OMPs that might
have a relevant role in the resistant phenotype to β-lactams, such as
the heat-modiﬁable HMP-AB, which constitutes the major OMP
of A. baumannii and resembles the OmpA protein from Enter-
obacteriaceae (Gribun et al., 2003), OmpW (Siroy et al., 2006;
Vila et al., 2007), and a 43-kDa protein similar to OprD from P.
aeruginosa (Dupont et al., 2005).

More recently, Fernández-Cuenca et al. investigated the vir-
ulence phenotype of a pan-drug-resistant A. baumannii clinical
isolate and found an association between attenuated virulence and
the decreased expression of genes encoding CarO and OprD-like
porins. Attenuated virulence in this work was attributed to a higher
biological cost when losing certain OMPs (Fernández-Cuenca
et al., 2011).

The role of efﬂux proteins in the antibiotic susceptibility pro-
ﬁle of A. baumannii will be discussed in more detail within the
following pages, however, it should be mentioned that the contri-
bution to β-lactam resistance of the three resistance–nodulation–
cell division (RND) efﬂux pumps identiﬁed so far in A. bau-
mannii (AdeABC, AdeIJK, and AdeFGH) has not been exten-
sively studied. Disruption of either adeABC or adeIJK has been
shown to cause 4- and 12-fold decreases in the MICs of cefo-
taxime and cefepime, respectively, with that of imipenem remain-
ing unchanged. AdeFGH, on the other hand, does not seem to
affect susceptibility to β-lactams (Magnet et al., 2001; Damier-
Piolle et al., 2008; Coyne et al., 2010b). Interestingly, Wong et al.
(2009) showed that disruption of adeB in three A. baumannii
strains signiﬁcantly altered susceptibility to meropenem but not
to imipenem and, more recently, Roca et al. (2011) characterized
an AdeABC-type efﬂux pump in an isolate of the closely related
A. nosocomialis which was able to extrude monobactams, third-
generation cephalosporins, cefoxitin, and meropenem but, again,
not imipenem.

Overall, β-lactam extrusion by means of efﬂux systems leads to
small increases in the MIC, and high-level resistance can only be
achieved in combination with additional resistance mechanisms
(Héritier et al., 2005a).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 12

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

Penicillin-binding proteins
Another non-enzymatic mechanism of resistance to β-lactams
involves changes in the afﬁnity or expression levels of PBPs. Sev-
eral reports have identiﬁed differences in the expression patterns of
PBPs between carbapenem-susceptible and carbapenem-resistant
A. baumannii strains. In some of these strains, carbapenem resis-
tance has been associated with the overexpression of PBP types
with low afﬁnity for carbapenem in the absence of any other
known resistance mechanism (Gehrlein et al., 1991; Urban et al.,
1995) but also with the reduced expression of PBP types together
with the production of several β-lactamases or the loss of a 22.5-
kDa OMP (Fernández-Cuenca et al., 2003; Cayo et al., 2011).
Overall, the contribution of PBP variants to carbapenem resistance
is marginal unless associated with β-lactamases, overexpression of
efﬂux pumps or decreased expression of OMPs, and the mecha-
nisms leading to altered expression levels of these proteins have
yet to be elucidated (Yun et al., 2011).

AMINOGLYCOSIDES
Resistance to aminoglycosides in A. baumannii can be achieved by
means of efﬂux proteins extruding these compounds (reviewed
below) or by the expression of aminoglycoside-modifying
enzymes (AMEs), speciﬁcally acetyltransferases, nucleotidyltrans-
ferases, and phosphotransferases (Cho et al., 2009). Activity of
AMEs results in the modiﬁcation of hydroxyl or amino groups
present within aminoglycosides that decrease their afﬁnity for the
target site (Smith and Baker, 2002). AMEs can be located in either
the bacterial chromosome or in plasmids and are usually associated
with class 1 integrons and resistance islands where two or more
aminoglycoside-resistance genes often occur in combination (Cho
et al., 2009). Nemec et al. showed that more than 95% out of 106
European multidrug-resistant A. baumannii isolates contained at
least one aminoglycoside-resistance gene and 84% contained a
combination of two to ﬁve different genes with more than 12 dis-
tinct combinations. Seventy-eight percent of the strains contained
class 1 integrons as well, highlighting the major role of horizon-
tal gene transfer in the dissemination of AMEs in A. baumannii
(Nemec et al., 2004).

More recently, 16S rRNA methylation mediated by armA has
also been described in A. baumannii, conferring high-level resis-
tance to all clinically relevant aminoglycosides, such as gentamicin,
tobramycin, and amikacin (Doi and Arakawa, 2007). armA has
been found in China, Korea, and the United States (Lee et al.,
2006a; Doi et al., 2007; Yu et al., 2007), and it is also commonly
found in combination with the blaOXA-23 gene (Kim et al., 2008;
Karthikeyan et al., 2010).

QUINOLONES
The mechanisms of ﬂuoroquinolone resistance in A. baumannii
parallel those of other Gram-negative bacteria and are mainly
achieved by point mutations originating amino acid substitutions
within the quinolone-resistance determining regions (QRDR) of
DNA gyrase and DNA topoisomerase IV (Fàbrega et al., 2009).
Mutations in both gyrA and parC have been described in A.
baumannii with the most common substitutions being Ser83 to
Leu83 for gyrA and Ser80 to Leu80 in parC (Vila et al., 1995,
1997b; Seward and Towner, 1998; Spence and Towner, 2003;

Wisplinghoff et al., 2003; Hamouda and Amyes, 2004; Higgins
et al., 2004; Valentine et al., 2008). It is worth mentioning that
mutations in parC are always accompanied by a concurrent muta-
tion in gyrA, probably suggesting that DNA gyrase is the preferred
target for ﬂuoroquinolones in A. baumannii (Vila et al., 1995,
1997b; Hamouda and Amyes, 2004).

Several efﬂux pumps in A. baumannii are also involved in ﬂu-
oroquinolone resistance and their speciﬁc contribution will be
discussed later. Interestingly, plasmid-mediated ﬂuoroquinolone
resistance mechanisms such as qnr, aac(6
)-Ib-cr, or qepA (Fàbrega
et al., 2009) have not yet been described in A. baumannii (Yin et al.,
2008; Srinivasan et al., 2009b).

(cid:2)

POLYMYXINS
To date, most multidrug A. baumannii strains still remain sus-
ceptible to polymyxins, prompting an increased use of these
compounds despite previous concerns regarding toxicity issues
(Falagas and Kasiakou, 2005). Polymyxin E (Colistin), acts by
modifying the negative charges of the outer membranes of Gram-
negative bacteria, ultimately leading to the disruption of the bac-
terial membrane. There is very little information regarding the
mechanisms of colistin resistance in A. baumannii, but it appears
that colistin resistance might be multifactorial. By comparing the
proteomes of colistin-susceptible versus colistin-resistant A. bau-
mannii isolates Fernández-Reyes et al. (2009) were able to identify
the differential expression of 35 proteins, including OMPs, chap-
erons, protein biosynthesis factors, and metabolic enzymes. Other
studies, however, have focused on modiﬁcations in the bacterial
lipopolysaccharide. It has been shown that mutations causing an
up-regulated expression of the pmrA and pmrB genes lead to col-
istin resistance in A. baumannii (Adams et al., 2009). pmrA and
pmrB constitute a two-component regulatory system that governs
the expression of pmrC, encoding a phosphoethanolamine trans-
ferase enzyme involved in lipid A modiﬁcation. Up-regulation of
pmrA and pmrB also causes the overexpression of pmrC and the
addition of phosphoethanolamine to the lipid A, which impairs
the self-promoted uptake of colistin across the outer membrane
(Arroyo et al., 2011; Beceiro et al., 2011).

On the other hand, Moffatt et al. (2010) demonstrated that
colistin resistance could also be achieved by the complete loss of
lipopolysaccharide production due to mutations affecting several
genes involved in lipid A biosynthesis (lpxA, lpxC, or lpxD). Muta-
tions in these genes ranged from single point mutations to large
deletions or even the presence of an insertion element, ISAba11,
truncating either lpxA or lpxC (Moffatt et al., 2011). Interestingly,
Moffatt et al. observed that colistin-resistant mutants lacking LPS
had a 32- to 256-fold increase in susceptibility to other classes
of antibiotics. The authors attributed this observation to a direct
consequence of LPS loss causing an increased permeability of the
outer membrane.

Interestingly, some reports seem to indicate that colistin resis-
tance in A. baumannii is associated with lower bacterial ﬁtness
in vivo as well as decreased virulence, suggesting that colistin usage
for the treatment of A. baumannii infections might constitute a
safe and effective strategy (López-Rojas et al., 2011b). Nevertheless,
reduced bacterial ﬁtness in colistin-resistant A. baumannii strains
does not always occur as acquisition of compensatory mutations

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 13

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

might contribute to maintain the virulence of resistant isolates
(López-Rojas et al., 2011c; Rolain et al., 2011).

EFFLUX
Antimicrobial efﬂux is yet another important mechanism of resis-
tance in A. baumannii. In general, efﬂux constitutes a resistance
mechanism that involves the extrusion of antimicrobial agents (as
well as other compounds) from the inner side of bacterial mem-
branes to the external environment by means of speciﬁc proteins
typically named efﬂux pumps. Although only a few efﬂux sys-
tems have been described in this microorganism, their importance
should not be taken lightly since most are capable of pumping
out several antimicrobial agents and, therefore, contribute to the
greatly feared multidrug-resistant phenotype of nosocomial A.
baumannii.

Efﬂux pumps in bacteria are classiﬁed into up to ﬁve distinct
families according to amino acid sequence similarities, energy
source, number of components, number of transmembrane-
spanning regions and types of substrates: (i) The adenosine
triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily, (ii) the
multidrug and toxic compound extrusion (MATE) family, (iii) the
small multidrug resistance (SMR) family, (iv) the major facilitator
superfamily (MFS), and (v) the RND family (Piddock, 2006).

The RND family usually plays a predominant role in MDR
in Gram-negative bacteria and species of Acinetobacter are not
an exception (Li and Nikaido, 2009). Members of this fam-
ily consist of a tripartite system including a transporter protein
embedded within the inner membrane, an OMP channel, and a
membrane fusion protein linking the other two (Magnet et al.,
2001). The ﬁrst RND pump to be identiﬁed in A. bauman-
nii was named AdeABC, with AdeB constituting the multidrug
transporter protein, AdeC being the OMP and AdeA the periplas-
mic linking protein (Magnet et al., 2001). The adeABC genes
are also preceded by two additional genes in inverted orienta-
tion, adeSR, which encode a two-component regulatory system
apparently involved in controlling adeABC expression (Marchand
et al., 2004). Expression of AdeABC confers decreased suscepti-
bility to a wide variety of antimicrobials such as kanamycin, gen-
tamicin, tobramycin, netilmicin, amikacin, erythromycin, tetra-
cycline, chloramphenicol, trimethoprim, sparﬂoxacin, oﬂoxacin,
perﬂoxacin, norﬂoxacin, ethidium bromide and, more recently,
tigecycline (Ruzin et al., 2007) and meropenem (Koh et al., 2007a).
Not all A. baumannii isolates seem to carry this system, though:
Huys et al. (2005a) detected the adeB gene in 49 out of 51 (96%)
highly related A. baumannii strains, Chu et al. (2006) found adeB
in 39 out of 56 (70%) A. baumannii isolates from Hong Kong,
Nemec et al. (2007) in roughly 83% of 116 isolates tested and
Courvalin and co-workers identiﬁed the adeB gene in 24 out of
27 A. baumannii strains (88%; Damier-Piolle et al., 2008), alto-
gether indicating that although AdeABC might not be intrinsic
to A. baumannii, it is indeed highly widespread among clinical
isolates. Interestingly, the adeSRABC genes have recently been
identiﬁed in one isolate of the closely related A. nosocomialis
together with two additional RND pumps not found in A. bau-
mannii (Roca et al., 2011). Very little is known about the resistance
mechanisms in this particular microorganism but A. nosocomi-
alis has appeared as a recent emergent pathogen with a great

potential to cause disease and acquire a multidrug-resistant phe-
notype (Espinal et al., 2011b). Hence, the presence of three major
efﬂux systems in an emerging multidrug-resistant pathogen is
alarming.

Some studies also seem to suggest a correlation between the
presence of this efﬂux system and the resistant phenotype of A.
baumannii clinical isolates, since AdeABC is commonly associated
with class 1 integron genes in resistant strains but missing in highly
susceptible isolates (Fournier et al., 2006; Lin et al., 2009).

The second RND efﬂux system (AdeIJK) described in A. bau-
mannii was reported in the same clinical isolate that led to
the identiﬁcation of AdeABC (Damier-Piolle et al., 2008). Over-
expression of this pump either in E. coli or A. baumannii is
apparently toxic, suggesting the presence of a tight regulation
mechanism to maintain its expression levels low. No adjacent
regulatory genes, however, have been found in the vicinity of
adeIJK.

Inactivation of AdeIJK by allelic replacement showed decreased
resistance to substrates similar to those of the AdeABC pump, and
a double mutant (ΔadeABC/ ΔadeIJK ) displayed even lower MICs
of chloramphenicol, tetracyclines, erythromycin, clindamycin, ﬂu-
oroquinolones, and tigecycline than each of the single mutants,
thus indicating both a cumulative effect of the pumps as well
as overlapping substrate proﬁles, which is, nevertheless, interest-
ing from a clinical point of view. However, opposed to AdeABC,
AdeIJK did not seem capable of extruding ethidium bromide or
azithromycin, despite the latter being a preferred substrate for
AdeABC (Damier-Piolle et al., 2008). Unfortunately, extrusion
of aminoglycosides could not be tested in this system since the
allelic replacement mutants incorporated either kanamycin or
apramycin resistance cassettes.

AdeIJK has so far been detected in all the A. baumannii strains
tested (Damier-Piolle et al., 2008) and is therefore considered to
have a more predominant role in the intrinsic low-level resistant
phenotype of A. baumannii. The AdeIJK efﬂux transporter seems
highly speciﬁc to A. baumannii and has not yet been described in
other species of the Acinetobacter genus. It is worth mentioning,
however, that adeIJK and adeXYZ (an RND efﬂux pump described
in A. pittii and A. nosocomialis; Chu et al., 2006; Roca et al., 2011)
are extremely alike, sharing 93% identity at the nucleotide level and
99% similarity at the protein level. Similarity percentages obtained
when comparing already described adeJ sequences from different
A. baumannii strains also provide similar ﬁgures which might sug-
gest that they actually constitute the same efﬂux system that has
been described twice in different genomic species and has been
given different names.

Coyne et al. (2010a) reported a third RND-type efﬂux pump
(AdeFGH) within a derivative mutant (ΔadeABC/ ΔadeIJK ) from
the same A. baumannii strain in which AdeABC and AdeIJK
had been characterized. Expression of AdeFGH was responsible
for high-level resistance to chloramphenicol, clindamycin, ﬂuo-
roquinolones, and trimethoprim as well as decreased susceptibil-
ity to tetracycline–tigecycline and sulfonamides, but β-lactams,
erythromycin, and rifampin remained unchanged (Coyne et al.,
2010b). Once again, substrate speciﬁcity toward aminoglyco-
sides could not be assessed due to the presence of the respective
kanamycin and apramycin resistance cassettes.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 14

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

A small ORF encoding a putative LysR-type transcriptional reg-
ulator, named adeL, was also identiﬁed in inverted orientation
upstream from adeFGH and mutations within the adeL gene
have been associated with the overexpression of this efﬂux system
(Coyne et al., 2010b).

As for the presence of efﬂux pumps included within the remain-
ing families of efﬂux transporters in A. baumannii, there is even
less information than that available for the RND family.

Roca et al. (2009) identiﬁed the MFS efﬂux pump CraA, for
chloramphenicol resistance Acinetobacter, in an A. baumannii clin-
ical isolate from Spain. This protein was similar in sequence and
secondary structure to the MdfA efﬂux pump from E. coli but dif-
fered in its substrate proﬁle. CraA was shown to be highly speciﬁc
for chloramphenicol and has, so far, been found in all the A. bau-
mannii strains tested and might be responsible for the intrinsic
resistance of A. baumannii to this antimicrobial agent.

More recently, Rajamohan et al. described a second MFS efﬂux
pump, AmvA, mainly involved in the extrusion of dyes, disinfec-
tants, and detergents and also erythromycin, although only causing
a fourfold decrease in the MIC of this antibiotic. AmvA is also
present in all A. baumannii strains studied so far (Rajamohan
et al., 2010).

The third type of MFS efﬂux pumps present in A. baumannii is
made of the acquired tetracycline efﬂux systems (Tet) that are part
of plasmids, transposons, or resistance islands (see below). TetA
and TetB constitute the most prevalent Tet efﬂux pumps in A. bau-
mannii with TetA conferring resistance to tetracycline and TetB to
both tetracycline and minocycline (Vila et al., 2007), although
the tet(M) gene, involved in tetracycline ribosomal protection,
has also been identiﬁed in one clinical isolate of A. baumannii
(Ribera et al., 2003b). tet(A), together with the gene encoding its
transcriptional regulator, tetR, is located in a Tn1721-like trans-
poson that, in turn, might be part of a larger resistance island
(Ribera et al., 2003a; Fournier et al., 2006). On the other hand,
tet (B) is located in small plasmids ranging from 5- to 9-kDa
(Srinivasan et al., 2009b). Prevalence studies seemed to indicate
that tet (B) is more commonly found in multidrug-resistant A.
baumannii clinical isolates, with at least 50% of the strains con-
taining this determinant (Guardabassi et al., 2000; Huys et al.,
2005b; Martí et al., 2006; Mak et al., 2009; Srinivasan et al.,
2009b).

The only efﬂux pump of the MATE family described so far
in A. baumannii, AbeM, was identiﬁed in Su et al. (2005) and it
was shown to extrude aminoglycosides, ﬂuoroquinolones, chlo-
ramphenicol, trimethoprim, ethidium bromide and several dyes.
Although AbeM has also been found in all A. baumannii strains
studied to date, the role of this pump in antimicrobial resistance
remains unclear since substrate-proﬁling studies carried out in E.
coli did not ﬁns any correlation between antibiotic resistance and
overexpression of this pump.

AbeS is yet another efﬂux pump identiﬁed in A. baumannii
that confers low-level resistance to several antimicrobial agents,
including chloramphenicol, ﬂuoroquinolones, erythromycin, and
novobiocin, as well as resistance to dyes and detergents, but it is not
present in all fully sequenced A. baumannii genomes. AbeS belongs
to the SMR family and retains a certain degree of similarity with
the EmrE system of E. coli (Srinivasan et al., 2009a).

GENOME PLASTICITY
As already mentioned, probably one of the most intriguing char-
acteristics of A. baumannii is its capacity to acquire, retain, and
disseminate multiple resistance mechanisms which, combined
with its ability to survive desiccation as well as most disinfectants,
accounts for the prolonged survival of A. baumannii strains in the
clinical setting and makes this microorganism almost impossible
to eradicate.

Acquisition and dissemination of antimicrobial resistance
determinants in A. baumannii are achieved by combining resis-
tance genes with an array of mobile elements that mediate the
exchange of genetic material and rearrange bacterial genomes, giv-
ing rise to multiple genetic combinations and providing an endless
source of genetic adaptability.

Such an array includes IS, transposons, integrons, plasmids and,

ultimately, resistance islands.

INSERTION SEQUENCES
Insertion sequences indeed have a predominant role in the acquisi-
tion of resistance within A. baumannii. They are generally deﬁned
as the smallest mobile DNA elements (<2.5 kb), carrying only
the genetic information required for their mobilization. In prac-
tical terms IS are constituted by a pair of short inverted-repeat
sequences (IR) bracketing one or perhaps two ORFs encod-
ing a transposase, the enzyme involved in the transposition or
“jumping” of the IS element.

More than 30 different types of ISs have been reported in Acine-
tobacter spp. (Siguier et al., 2006) being ISAbaI and ISAba125 the
most prevalent ISs in this microorganism (Adams et al., 2010). The
genome of the A. baumannii AYE strain has been shown to contain
up to 21 copies of ISAbaI (Vallenet et al., 2008) but this IS has also
been identiﬁed in additional A. baumannii isolates from around
the world (Goic-Barisic et al., 2009; Andriamanantena et al., 2010;
Culebras et al., 2010; Higgins et al., 2010; Koo et al., 2010; Adams-
Haduch et al., 2011; Karunasagar et al., 2011; Kusradze et al., 2011;
Nigro et al., 2011b; Zhou et al., 2011).

As a consequence of IS mobilization these genetic elements can

contribute to resistance in three different ways:

(i) Insertion of an IS immediately upstream from a given ORF
might provide additional promoters to enhance transcrip-
tional levels of genes that are otherwise poorly expressed.
In this respect, ISAbaI is commonly found upstream from
blaampC and blaOXA-51-like genes in A. baumannii, being
responsible for ceftazidime and carbapenem resistance,
respectively, in isolates lacking additional resistance mech-
anisms (Héritier et al., 2006; Turton et al., 2006). In addi-
tion, ISAbaI, ISAba2, ISAba3, ISAba4, ISAba10, ISAba16,
ISAba125, ISAba825, and IS18 have also been found upstream
from blaOXA-23 and blaOXA-58 (Poirel and Nordmann, 2006b;
Bertini et al., 2007; Corvec et al., 2007; Giannouli et al., 2009;
Lee et al., 2011b; Ravasi et al., 2011; Lopes et al., 2012) and
ISAba9 has been described upstream from both blaOXA-51 and
the gene encoding CARB-10 (Figueiredo et al., 2009; Potron
et al., 2009).

CHDLs however, are not the only β-lactamases whose
expression is enhanced by the presence of upstream ISs, both

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 15

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

blaPER-1 and blaPER-2 contain a novel IS element, ISPa12,
that has been shown to up-regulate their expression (Poirel
et al., 2005a; Pasterán et al., 2006). Similarly, expression of
blaPER-7 is also driven by a promoter sequence located within
an upstream ISCR1 element (Bonnin et al., 2011b).

(ii) IS elements can also contribute to resistance by inserting
within certain ORFs and disrupting their coding sequences.
Insertional inactivation leading to resistance has been asso-
ciated with the disruption of transcriptional regulators, such
as the insertion of ISAba1 within the adeS gene leading to
overexpression of the AdeABC efﬂux pump, but also with
the disruption of genes involved in membrane permeability,
such as ISAba10, ISAba10, ISAba825, and ISAba125 inser-
tion within the carO gene leading to carbapenem resistance
(Lu et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2011b; Ravasi et al., 2011) or the
insertion of ISAba11 within the lpxA or lpxC genes causing
loss of lipopolysaccharide production and colistin resistance
(Moffatt et al., 2011).

(iii) Without any doubt, however, the major contribution of ISs to
the development of pan-resistant A. baumannii strains lies in
their ability to mobilize gene cassettes, either within the bacte-
rial chromosome or between the chromosome and plasmids,
allowing for a rapid dissemination of such cassettes not only
among different A. baumannii strains but also among iso-
lates belonging to different taxonomic genera (Roberts et al.,
2008).

Insertion sequences-mediated mobilization might take place when
two IS elements bracket a gene cassette, usually containing antimi-
crobial resistance genes, and the terminal IR from each IS coop-
erate to displace the intervening DNA sequence, thereby forming
a compound transposon (Roberts et al., 2008). Bear in mind that
ISs involved in compound transposons can still provide promoter
sequences for the transcriptional expression of the genes they
carry.

A single IS can also mediate the mobilization of ﬂanking DNA
by a rare mechanism known as “one-ended” transposition that
combines one authentic end together with a surrogate end dis-
playing a certain degree of similarity and located nearby (Motsch
et al., 1985). In addition, ISs belonging to the IS91 family (which
includes ISCR1 and ISCR2) are able to transpose by means of
a rolling-circle replication mechanism (Toleman et al., 2006) and
mobilization of DNA elements adjacent to ISs can also be achieved
due to homologous recombination between two ISs, although this
mechanism feeds on the copy number of ISs.

In A. baumannii, mobilization of the blaOXA-23 gene is mediated
either by two copies of ISAba1 in inverted or direct orientation
and generating a compound transposon designated Tn2006 or
Tn2009, respectively (Corvec et al., 2007; Adams et al., 2008; Zhou
et al., 2011); by a single copy of ISAba1 forming a transposon-
like structure named Tn2008 (Adams-Haduch et al., 2008); or
by a similar structure comprising a single ISAba4 copy forming
another transposon-like structure named Tn2007 (Corvec et al.,
2007).

Of note, the chromosome of the non-pathogenic and environ-
mental Acinetobacter radioresistens was recently identiﬁed as the
original source of the acquired blaOXA-23 gene of A. baumannii,

and other OXA-23 variants have also been found in other A.
radioresistens isolates (Poirel et al., 2008a), suggesting that the
diversity of structures surrounding the blaOXA-23 gene might have
arisen from independent transposition events from the chromo-
some of commensal A. radioresistens strains to transferable plas-
mids that have subsequently been mobilized into A. baumannii.

The plasmid-encoded blaOXA-58 gene is also commonly brack-
eted by distinct combinations of IS elements that usually contain
ISAba3 downstream from blaOXA-58 and differ in the presence of
(cid:2)
ISs in the 5
ﬂanking end. Speciﬁcally, ISAba3 seems to be more
prevalent, but ISAba825, ISAba1, ISAba2, IS18, and IS26 can also be
present (Poirel and Nordmann, 2006b; Bertini et al., 2007; Gian-
nouli et al., 2009). The role of such upstream ISs in providing
additional promoters has been clearly demonstrated, but their role
in the genetic mobilization of blaOXA-58 is not yet clear. Apparently,
each of these IS elements shows a distinct geographic distribu-
tion and since the blaOXA-58 is usually plasmid-borne they might
have been acquired through horizontal gene transfer and homol-
ogous recombination (Poirel and Nordmann, 2006b; Giannouli
et al., 2009). Of note, the blaOXA-58 gene ﬂanked by two ISAba3
elements has also been identiﬁed in plasmids recovered from A.
pittii isolates but, then again, this probably reﬂects the inter-genus
transferability of these plasmids rather than transposon-mediated
acquisition (Evans et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2010).

Additional resistance determinants thought to have been mobi-
lized by means of IS-mediated transfer include the ESBLs blaPER-1,
bracketed by ISPa12 and ISPa13 and forming a compound trans-
poson named Tn1213 (Poirel et al., 2005a), blaPER-7 and blaVEB-1
mobilized by the upstream ISCR1 and ISCR2, respectively, by
means of rolling-circle transposition (Poirel et al., 2009; Bonnin
et al., 2011b), and also CARB-10, whose transfer is apparently
due to a one-ended transposition event from an upstream ISAba9
(Potron et al., 2009).

More recently, Potron et al. (2011) characterized a novel com-
pound transposon in the chromosome of A. baumannii isolates
from Haiti containing the blaCTX-M-15 gene ﬂanked by ISEcp1 and a
truncated IS26, reﬂecting a transfer event from Enterobacteriaceae.
Among MBLs, the blaNDM sequences from Enterobacteriaceae
have been shown to contain different ISs upstream from the
blaNDM-1 gene, although the role of these ISs in the expression
of NDM is not clear and they are most likely involved in the
genetic mobilization of the resistance gene (Yong et al., 2009; Poirel
et al., 2010; Ho et al., 2011). Sequence analysis of some of these
blaNDM genes from Enterobacteriaceae identiﬁed a fragment of
variable length containing the right-end repeat from the inser-
tion sequence ISAba125 in-between the blaNDM-1 gene and the
corresponding IS element as a remnant of ISAba125 insertion,
and the IS element ISEc33 from E. coli strain 271 is bracketed
by the sequence upstream from the ISAba125 right-end (Poirel
et al., 2011b; Solé et al., 2011). ISAba125 belongs to the IS30
family and, until recently, had only been found in A. bauman-
nii, either chromosomally or on a plasmid upstream from the
blaOXA-58 gene (Mussi et al., 2005; Evans et al., 2010) but never
linked to blaNDM genes. Interestingly, Solé et al. recently identiﬁed
a complete ISAba125 copy upstream from a blaNDM-1 gene in E.
coli and both Pfeifer et al. (2011) and Espinal et al. (2011a) have
also found blaNDM-1 and blaNDM-2 sequences in A. baumannii

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 16

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

bracketed between two copies of ISAba125, thereby deﬁning a
novel transposon. In view of these results, it has been postulated
that some of the blaNDM sequences found in Enterobacteriaceae
might have originated from Acinetobacter by means of ISAba125-
mediated mobilization (Solé et al., 2011). ISAba125 has also been
found ﬂanking the aminoglycoside-resistance gene aphA6 and
constituting the compound transposon TnaphA6 (Nigro et al.,
2011a).

Insertion sequences are also involved in the mobilization of the
tet(A) and tetR genes, encoding the tetracycline efﬂux pump and
its transcriptional regulator, respectively, and commonly found
within a Tn1721-like transposon that might also be present in
multiple copies within the bacterial chromosome (Ribera et al.,
2003a; Fournier et al., 2006).

It is worth mentioning that conserved inverted repeats homol-
ogous to binding sites acting as targets for the XerC and
XerD recombinases, usually involved in site-speciﬁc recombi-
nation mechanisms, have been described ﬂanking blaOXA-24/40
genes in different plasmids recovered from A. baumannii isolates
(D’Andrea et al., 2009; Merino et al., 2010; Acosta et al., 2011; Tian
et al., 2011). In view of these results, XerC/XerD recombinases
have been postulated as a novel mechanism driving mobilization
of the blaOXA-24/40 gene (Merino et al., 2010).

Conjugative plasmids are also known to play a central role in
the intra- and inter-species transfer of resistance determinants.
However, although some resistance genes such as blaOXA-58 and
blaOXA-23 are commonly plasmid-borne in Acinetobacter spp., a
recent study of plasmid replicons in A. baumannii suggested that
replicon types within this microorganism do not correspond to
those circulating among Enterobacteriaceae, which might provide
a plausible explanation for the observation that prevalent plasmid-
encoded resistance mechanisms identiﬁed among Gram-negative
bacteria (ESBLs, KPC, etc.) are rarely present in Acinetobacter
spp. while this genus seems to contain its own type (CHDLs) of
plasmid-borne carbapenemases (Bertini et al., 2010).

INTEGRONS
Integrons constitute another important vehicle for the spread and
accumulation of resistance genes in A. baumannii, and several
studies have demonstrated a positive correlation in A. baumannii
between the carriage of integrons and the degree of MDR (Huang
et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2009b). Integrons are genetic elements that
mediate the integration of gene cassettes by a site-speciﬁc recombi-
national mechanism and direct their coordinated expression. All
integrons bear three key elements: a speciﬁc recombination site
(attI ), a gene encoding an integrase (intI ) and a common pro-
moter region (P1–P2) oriented toward the site of integration. The
integrase recombinates discrete units of circular DNA known as
gene cassettes (often carrying resistance genes) into the attI site
allowing the coordinated expression of the genes in the cassette
from the common promoter (Mazel, 2006).

Although integrons are not mobile by themselves (but gene
cassettes can readily be exchanged to other integrons), they can
be spread to different chromosomal locations, plasmids or even
other microorganisms by means of IS-mediated transposition
or homologous recombination (Mazel, 2006). There are several
classes of integrons mainly classiﬁed according to the sequence of

the encoded integrases, which show 40–58% identity. Class 1 inte-
grons displaying a wide variety of gene cassettes are commonly
found in A. baumannii, and typically encode aminoglycoside-
resistance genes as well as genes conferring resistance to antiseptics
and sulfonamides (Nemec et al., 2004; Zhao and Hu, 2011). Other
resistance determinants associated with class 1 integrons in A. bau-
mannii include blaIMP, blaVIM, and blaSIM MBL types (Lee et al.,
2003, 2005, 2008; Yamamoto et al., 2011) as well as some Ambler
class A β-lactamases such as CARB, GES, PER, VEB, and narrow-
spectrum OXA-types (Vila et al., 1997a; Navia et al., 2002; Poirel
et al., 2003; Zarrilli et al., 2004; Naas et al., 2006a; Moubareck et al.,
2009; Potron et al., 2009; Bonnin et al., 2011a).

Class 2 integrons, which are embedded within the Tn7 trans-
poson, display a narrower diversity of gene cassettes and those
described in A. baumannii have been shown to contain several
resistance determinants such as aadB, catB2, dfrA1, sat2, and
aadA1, conferring resistance to aminoglycosides, chlorampheni-
col, trimethoprim, streptothricin, and streptomycin, respectively
(Ramírez et al., 2010a). More recently, Ramírez et al. reported an A.
baumannii isolate carrying blaCARB-4 in a class 2 integron together
with 6 additional resistance determinants comprising four fami-
lies of antibiotics. This novel integron constitutes the longest class
2 integron described so far and also represents the only example
of a β-lactamase gene encoded within such a class (Ramírez et al.,
2010b).

RESISTANCE ISLANDS
In addition to the huge diversity of resistance mechanisms dis-
played by A. baumannii isolates, this microorganism is also able
to accumulate multiple resistance determinants in what has been
termed as “resistance islands.” Resistance islands are speciﬁc
regions of the genome that harbor large clusters of horizontally
transferred genetic DNA including a great deal of antimicrobial
resistance genes. Such regions provide a “safe haven” for mobile
elements since insertion at this site is not likely to cause any dam-
age to the host cell. They are often inserted at the same locus on the
A. baumannii chromosome and are assembled by discrete genes
or gene packages usually associated with mobile elements (IS and
Tn), integrons, or both.

(cid:2)

The ﬁrst resistance island described in A. baumannii was found
in the multidrug-resistant A. baumannii AYE strain and was
hence termed AbaR1. AbaR1 comprised an 86 kb region integrated
within the comM gene and contained up to 45 antibiotic and heavy
metal resistance genes. Interestingly, AbaR1 was ﬂanked at both
ends by 5 bp perfect direct repeats (DR) and included two ORFs
near the 3
comM end annotated as putative transposition genes,
thereby suggesting acquisition by means of a transposition event.
At the time of this review, more than 22 resistance islands have
been described (Fournier et al., 2006; Adams et al., 2008, 2010;
Iacono et al., 2008; Post and Hall, 2009; Krizova and Nemec, 2010;
Post et al., 2010; Rose, 2010; Krizova et al., 2011; Nigro et al., 2011b;
Zhou et al., 2011) and, with only three exceptions (Adams et al.,
2008; Rose, 2010), all have been found inserted within the comM
gene (Table 2).

Shaikh et al. (2009) studied a collection of 50 multidrug-
resistant A. baumannii isolates and found that 82% contained a
truncated comM gene. Deeper sequence analysis of 10 such isolates

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 17

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

Table 2 | Resistance Islands in A. baumannii .

AbaR-type Size
(kb)

Strain

EC comM

Reference

AbaR1
AbaR2
AbaR3
AbaR4
AbaR5
AbaR6
AbaR7
AbaR8
AbaR9
AbaR10
AbaR11
AbaR12
AbaR13
AbaR14
AbaR15
AbaR16
AbaR17
AbaR18
AbaR19
AbaR21
AbaR22
n.a.
n.a.

86
17
63
18
56
27
20
29
39
30
20
38
45
21
55
39
58
52
30
64
39
n.f.
n.f.

AYE
ACICU
AB0057
AB0057
3208
D2
A92
D13
AB056
AB058
NIPH470
LUH 6013
LUH6015
LUH5881
LUH6125
LUH7140
LUH8592
NIPH2713
NIPH2554
RUH875
MDR-ZJ06
A473
A473

I
II
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
II
I
I

Insertion
+
+
+
−
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
−
−

Fournier et al. (2006)
Iacono et al. (2008)
Adams et al. (2008)
Adams et al. (2008)
Post and Hall (2009)
Post et al. (2010)
Post et al. (2010)

Adams et al. (2010)
Adams et al. (2010)
Krizova et al. (2011)
Krizova et al. (2011)
Krizova et al. (2011)
Krizova et al. (2011)
Krizova et al. (2011)
Krizova et al. (2011)
Krizova et al. (2011)
Krizova et al. (2011)
Krizova et al. (2011)
Nigro et al. (2011b)
Zhou et al. (2011)
Rose (2010)
Rose (2010)

EC, European clone lineage; n.a., not assigned; n.f., not found.

identiﬁed AbaR-like sequences in 8, thus conﬁrming that the comM
is likely a preferred integration site for this sort of genetic structures
(Shaikh et al., 2009).

In addition, all AbaR sequences identiﬁed in A. baumannii iso-
lates belonging to the European Clone I (EC I) lineage seem to
have a common genetic structure. They share a 16.3-kb backbone
transposon, designated Tn6019, containing two ORFs annotated as
putative transposition genes, an arsenate resistance operon (arsH-
BRC), a putative sulfate permease gene (sup), and a universal stress
protein gene (uspA) that, in turn, is disrupted by a second com-
pound transposon formed by two copies of a cadmium and zinc
resistance transposon (Tn6018) bracketing a multiple antibiotic
resistance region (MARR). The MARR region contains most of
the variability found among all AbaRs, with only a few excep-
tions displaying additional differences within the left-hand copy
of Tn6018 and the Tn6019 backbone region (Post et al., 2010;
Figure 2).

Although AbaR1 is so far the largest resistance island described
in A. baumannii (Fournier et al., 2006), there is general agreement
that AbaR5 to AbaR21 are all derivatives of AbaR3 that have orig-
inated as a result of either deletions mediated by one of the three
IS26 elements present within AbaR3, deletions caused by a single
homologous recombination event or arisen due to integron shuf-
ﬂing (Krizova et al., 2011; Nigro et al., 2011b). AbaR1 displays the
same general structure as AbaR3 but contains an additional 29 kb
region consisting of a very complex class 1 integron that might
have been incorporated into AbaR3.

FIGURE 2 | Schematic overview of the conserved AbaR structure found
in A. baumannii isolates belonging to the European clone I lineage and
that of AbaR22, isolated from strain MDR-ZJ06 belonging to the
European clone II lineage (Zhou et al., 2011).

Interestingly, some AbaR-related structures found in A. bau-
mannii
isolates belonging to the EC II lineage present some
noticeable differences compared to AbaRs from EC I. Several EC
II isolates have been shown to contain a Tn6019-related trans-
poson (termed Tn6021) as well as some genes present in AbaR1
but they also possess an intact uspA gene and, therefore, lack the
Tn6018 compound transposon and the MARR region (Post et al.,
2010; Zhou et al., 2011; Bonnin et al., 2012). These differences
reinforce the delineation of A. baumannii isolates in different
European clones since AbaRs structures seem to have appeared
independently in each of these isolates (Figure 2).

Krizova et al. have recently suggested that the origin of AbaRs
in strains of the EC I might lie in the antibiotic regimes admin-
istered in Europe during the 1970s and 1980s, since AbaRs seem
to provide resistance to antimicrobials mostly used during that
period, thereby facilitating the survival and spread of AbaRs-
bearing strains. The subsequent modiﬁcation of the treatment of
choice might have then diminished the selective pressure on such
determinants and accounted for the truncated AbaR3-derivatives
in the current population of A. baumannii clinical isolates (Krizova
et al., 2011).

The combination of IS, Tn, integrons, conjugative plasmids,
and resistance islands accounts for the extreme genomic plasticity
of A. baumannii and partly explains the successful emergence of
this microorganism as a dreadful nosocomial human pathogen.
Recent studies comparing the whole genome sequence of closely
related A. baumannii isolates have demonstrated a unique genetic
repertoire in terms of IS, plasmids, and AbaRs even in A. bauman-
nii isolates belonging to the same sequence type (ST; Adams et al.,
2010; Di Nocera et al., 2011; Snitkin et al., 2011).

CLINICAL IMPORTANCE AND TREATMENT OPTIONS
Acinetobacter baumannii is currently considered one of the most
important nosocomial pathogens. In a prevalence study of infec-
tions in intensive care units conducted among 75 countries of the
5 continents, this microorganism was found to be the ﬁfth most
common pathogen, although with a high variability among the
different countries (Vincent et al., 2009). Different surveillance
studies have found this pathogen to be the ﬁfth cause of pneumo-
nia, after P. aeruginosa, in hospitalized patients, mainly in intensive

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 18

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

care units (Jones, 2010). In addition, these microorganisms are also
frequently reported to cause other nosocomial infections such as
bacteremia and urinary tract and surgical infections. In fact, A.
baumannii was found to be third most frequent cause of nosoco-
mial bloodstream infection in a large multicenter study with an
estimation of 34% of all patients and 43% in patients in intensive
care units (Wisplinghoff et al., 2004).

With respect to the treatment of A. baumannii infections it
is important to take into account the resistant proﬁle involved
to thereby consider the different treatment options available. As
mentioned above, A. baumannii is currently resistant to multiple
antibacterial agents, including carbapenems and, occasionally, col-
istin. Therefore, in many cases, optimal treatment for nosocomial
infections caused by this microorganism is sometimes not avail-
able. A decade ago sulbactam, which has intrinsic activity against
A. baumannii and shows in vivo efﬁcacy in a murine model of
pneumoniae, was used to treat infections caused by carbapenem-
resistant clinical isolates (Rodríguez-Hernández et al., 2001; Levin
et al., 2003). However, nowadays the percentage of resistance to
sulbactam has reached such a high level that its use as antimi-
crobial agent against infections caused by A. baumannii has been
invalidated

Rifampicin has demonstrated consistent results related to
in vivo efﬁcacy in experimental models of infection and in some
open studies of human infections, especially when combined with
colistin. These studies suggest that the possible use of rifampicin
for the treatment of multidrug-resistant A. baumannii infections
should be analyzed in well-designed clinical trials (Pachón-Ibáñez
et al., 2006; Pachón-Ibánez et al., 2010). Bassetti et al. (2008)
studied the use of colistin in combination with rifampin in crit-
ically ill patients with pneumonia (19 patients) and bacteremia
(10 patients) caused by A. baumannii resistant to all antibiotics
except colistin in medical and surgical intensive care units. Clin-
ical and microbiological response was observed in 22 of 29 cases
(76%), suggesting that the combination of colistin and rifampicin
appears to be an effective and safe therapy for severe infections
due to multidrug-resistant A. baumannii.

There is some heterogenicity concerning the clinical data to
determine the utility of tigecycline in the treatment of nosoco-
mial infections caused by A. baumannii. The possible development
of resistance during treatment with tigecycline suggests that it
should only be used in combined regimens with other antimicro-
bials. Two studies have reported the combination of tigecycline
with other antimicrobial agents. Principe et al. (2009) found
that tigecycline showed synergism with levoﬂoxacin, amikacin,
imipenem, and colistin, whereas antagonism was observed for
the tigecycline/piperacillin–tazobactam combination. Consider-
ing all antimicrobials in combination with tigecycline, checker-
board analysis showed 5.9% synergy, 85.7% indifference, and 8.3%
antagonism. Tigecycline showed synergism with levoﬂoxacin (four
strains; 16.6%), amikacin (two strains; 8.3%), imipenem (two
strains; 8.3%), and colistin (two strains; 8.3%). Synergism was
detected only among tigecycline non-susceptible strains. Time-kill
assays conﬁrmed the synergistic interaction between tigecycline
and levoﬂoxacin, amikacin, imipenem, and colistin in ﬁve out
of seven selected isolates. Ozbek and Senturk (2010) isolated
six meropenem-resistant A. baumannii strains in which synergy

of tigecycline/colistin and tigecycline/levoﬂoxacin was observed
using checkerboard analysis in just one strain each.

Other combinations have recently been described in the sci-
entiﬁc literature. Liang et al. isolated 14 extensive drug-resistant
A. baumannii strains from patients admitted to the intensive
care units of a Chinese hospital. Most of the strains were
resistant to all antimicrobials except colistin and minocycline,
and the combinatory results by killing curves showed a syn-
ergistic effect between colistin/meropenem, colistin/rifampicin
meropenem/minocycline and colistin/minocycline. It is worth
mentioning that the combination of meropenem/minocycline
could be a possible alternative when colistin is not available as
in China (Liang et al., 2011). In a recent study the combina-
tion of teicoplanin/colistin was investigated against multidrug-
resistant A. baumannii
isolates (resistant to third-generation
cephalosporins, quinolones, and aminoglycosides), with checker-
board analysis showing synergy between the two antibiotics. Bacte-
ricidal activity was shown in the ﬁrst 4 h for both colistin alone and
in combination with teicoplanin, however regrowth was observed
when colistin was used alone (Wareham et al., 2011). Although
the mechanism of action of colistin is not completely known, it is
thought to act in the bacterial membrane by disrupting it (Lam
et al., 1986). Therefore, the use of colistin in combination with
antibiotics such as teicoplanin or vancomycin which are effec-
tive against Gram-positive microorganisms (Gordon et al., 2010),
likely helps glycopeptides to reach the target.

Of particular concern are infections caused by pan-drug-
resistant A. baumannii isolates, which are steadily increasing in
various regions worldwide. There is an urgent need for new ther-
apeutic strategies since isolates resistant to all antibacterial agents,
including colistin, have been reported (Park et al., 2009) and this
scenario will likely progress in association with the increased use
of this antibiotic.

FUTURE POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC ALTERNATIVES
The emergence of bacteria resistant to most of the antibiotics
available has lead to the appearance of different terms concerning
resistance. Only a short time ago, experts in the topic homog-
enized all these terms, in the case of A. baumannii, MDR may
be referred when the strain is non-susceptible to ≥1 antimicrobial
agent in≥3 antimicrobial categories; an increase in resistance now
refers to extensive drug resistance (XDR) when non-susceptible
to ≥1 antimicrobial agents in all but ≤2 categories (i.e., bacterial
isolates remain susceptible to only one or two categories), and pan-
drug resistance (PDR) is considered when the microorganism is
non-susceptible to all the antimicrobial agents in all antimicrobial
categories (Magiorakos et al., 2012).

In regard to future potential therapeutic alternatives, the per-
spectives are not good, at least within the next decade (Payne et al.,
2007). Nonetheless there are two main options for the design of
new drugs to treat infections caused by PDR-resistant A. bau-
mannii. The ﬁrst is related to knowledge of the biochemical bases
of resistance and has been used to design rational strategy to
counteract resistance. This strategy can follow two approaches:
(i) Modiﬁcation of the basic structure of the antibacterial agent,
circumventing antibacterial resistant mechanisms, and (ii) Devel-
opment of compounds inhibiting the mechanisms of resistance

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 19

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

for an antibacterial agent, whereby the concomitant administra-
tion of the antibacterial agent plus the inhibitor, as a co-drug,
potentiates this activity (Li and Heide, 2005). Some studies have
used this strategy to develop drugs active against MDR A. bauman-
nii. A derivative of ciproﬂoxacin (UB-8902) showed good activity
against A. baumannii strains carrying a mutation in the gyrA gene,
with a MIC50 of 4 mg/L (range <0.06–8 mg/L) in comparison with
ciproﬂoxacin displaying a MIC50 of 64 mg/L (Vila et al., 2006).
Further in vivo studies using this new quinolone have also been
performed in a murine pneumonia model, showing that UB-8902
presented bactericidal activity against A. baumannii strains resis-
tant to ciproﬂoxacin. Moreover, this quinolone was effective at
reducing mortality with a dose lower than the toxic dose in a
model of peritoneal sepsis (López-Rojas et al., 2011a). BAL30072
is a new monocyclic β-lactam belonging to the sulbactam class
of antibiotics active against MDR A. baumannii. BAL30072 pos-
sesses a dihydropyrimidinone siderophore in its side chain and has
shown better activity than meropenem in ﬁve MDR A. baumannii
strains, with increased activity when a combination of the two was
used (Russo et al., 2011).

The second option is to design a new compound involving
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) as the principal candidates. The
use of AMPs as antibiotics has several advantages and disadvan-
tages, the main disadvantage being the instability of the compound
against proteases present in the blood and serum. Several methods
may be used to overcome this issue although these may sometimes
not be easy to apply due to a possible loss of the effectiveness of
peptides upon changes in their structure. d-Amino acids, stable
to proteases (Chen et al., 2006; Friedman, 2010) may be used as
well as both methylation and ﬂuorination of speciﬁc amino acids
(Meng and Kumar, 2007; Fernández-Reyes et al., 2010). Another
option, albeit sometimes less effective in terms of activity due to
the loss of one positive charge which is important for the interac-
tion with membranes, is cyclation (Molhoek et al., 2011). On the
other hand, the advantages of AMPs are that they are a less spe-
ciﬁc target and, compared to antibiotics, acquisition of resistance
is difﬁcult (Marr et al., 2006).

Braunstein et al. (2004) used a gentamicin-resistant A. bau-
mannii strain to test an AMP containing 33% of d-amino acids
that showed better activity (5.6–11.2 mg/L) and greater stability to
hemolysis (0–100% at 180 mg/L) than the l-amino acid form. The
same effect was seen by Jiang et al. in which a totally synthetic d-
amino acid AMP was tested against 550 clinical isolates involving
74% of MDR strains. Although no resistance proﬁle was reported
in the article, the AMP showed good values for both MIC50 and
MIC90 (Jiang et al., 2011).

In another study using strains resistant to ciproﬂoxacin, the
MIC50 and MIC90 values of pexiganan, an analog of magainin,
were 2 and 8 mg/L, respectively (Ge et al., 1999). In another analog,
but in this case a short version of the peptide of human lactoferrin,
11 residues from the N-terminal were studied. The A. baumannii
strains used were resistant or intermediate to 16 and 19 out of 20
antimicrobial agents, including imipenem and meropenem. This
peptide was tested in vivo and a reduction of 3–4 log CFU/ml was
observed in an experimental infection in mice. However at pep-
tide concentration ranging from 49.5 to 98.9 mg/L, this effect was

not seen in the control. In addition the effect of this peptide was
very rapid, achieving the minimal number of CFU in 5–15 min
(Dijkshoorn et al., 2004). Other peptides present in the human
body such as β-defensin 3 have been tested against A. baumannii.
This AMPs belongs to the cysteine-rich peptides, and a bactericidal
effect was achieved in vitro after 1.5 h using 4 mg/L of the peptide
against MDR A. baumannii (Maisetta et al., 2006).

The origin of the peptides tested so far is different, some being
totally synthetic, some isolated from humans or others from ani-
mals. In the case of animals, amphibians are a large source of
peptides as in the case of the study published by Mangoni et al.
(2008) in which most of the peptides were isolated from frogs
and showed good MIC values against MDR A. baumannii. The
same strategy was used in the report published by Conlon et al.
(2009) however the MIC values were higher compared to the other
peptides. Other peptides isolated from toad skin secretions were
also tested against XDR strains obtaining values from 112.8 to
2.8 mg/L (Conlon et al., 2010). The A3-APO peptide is shown to
be more effective and less toxic against A. baumannii than colistin,
however this has only been observed in vivo and the effect could
not be shown in vitro, suggesting that this peptide may prevent
inﬂammation at the site of the infection (Ostorhazi et al., 2010,
2011).

Different AMPs have been tested against A. baumannii, however
the peptide constituted by the mixture of cecropin A and melittin
(Andreu et al., 1992) has been extensively studied. The ﬁrst hybrid
tested against MDR A. baumannii was cecropin A(1-8)melittin(1-
18), or CA(1-8)M(1-18). This hybrid was tested under different
experimental conditions, with all showing a lower MIC compared
to polymixin B (Saugar et al., 2002). The next hybrid tested was
CA(1-7)M(2-9) and, compared to the original peptides cecropin
A and melittin as well as to other antibiotics, the MIC of this
hybrid peptide was 0.25–8 mg/L, being the lowest value com-
pared to other hybrid peptides. In addition, this hybrid peptide
also showed synergy with co-amoxiclav, ceftazidime, piperacillin,
and imipenem (Giacometti et al., 2003). Synergy of other AMPs
and currently used antibiotics has also been studied by Gia-
cometti et al. (2000), observing synergy of magainin II with co-
amoxiclav, aztreonam, chloramphenicol, ceftazidime, piperacillin,
and meropenem. CA(1-7)M(2-9) was also tested against PDR
A. baumannii strains, Similar to other hybrids, CA(1-8)M(1-18),
Oct-CA(1-7)M(2-9), and CA(1-7)M(5-9), the MIC values ranged
from 2 to 8 mg/L compared to 4 to 64 mg/L for colistin. In addition,
the hybrids showed bactericidal activity at 4× MIC (Rodríguez-
Hernández et al., 2006). Several commercial peptides have also
been tested against colistin-resistant A. baumannii strains. Most
did not show any activity, although indolicidin and particularly
mastoparan showed MIC values of 2 and 1 mg/L, respectively,
compared to the colistin MIC of 256 mg/L. Moreover, a bacte-
ricidal effect was found for mastoparan along all the killing curve
for 8× MIC (Vila-Farrés et al., 2012).

Although AMPs and AMPs in combination with antibiotics are
potential future therapeutic alternatives against PDR A. bauman-
nii clinical isolates, another therapeutic alternative might involve
the use of vaccines, speciﬁcally those administered through OMVs
(McConnell et al., 2011a,b).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 20

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

CONCLUSION
Over the past few decades A. baumannii has emerged as one of
the most successful nosocomial pathogens throughout the world.
This is partly due to its intrinsic aptitude to persist in the hospital
setting and acquire multiple resistance mechanisms, but also to its
capacity to cause acute infections especially in severely ill patients.
While we know a great deal about the mechanisms responsible
for antimicrobial resistance in this microorganism we see our-
selves unable to stop it. Pan-drug strains resistant even to colistin
have already been reported and we are running out of options
to deal with this novel menace. On the other hand, there is lit-
tle knowledge regarding the mechanisms driving the pathogenesis
of A. baumannii and there is much to learn on this issue. Novel
therapeutic strategies are urgently needed and while research on

novel antimicrobial agents does not seem very promising, the quest
for novel drugs interfering with A. baumannii pathogenicity and
not just bacterial growth opens up as a novel and challenging
alternative.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Health
(FIS 08/00195), by grant 2009SGR1256 from the Generalitat de
Catalunya and by Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo, Instituto de
Salud Carlos III – FEDER, Spanish Network for the Research in
Infectious Diseases (REIPI RD06/0008). This work has also been
supported by funding from the European Community (TROCAR
contract HEALTH-F3-2008-223031 and AntiPathoGN contract
HEALTH-F3-2008-223101).

REFERENCES
Acosta, J., Merino, M., Viedma, E., Poza,
M., Sanz, F., Otero, J. R., Chaves,
F., and Bou, G. (2011). Multidrug-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii
Harboring OXA-24 carbapenemase,
Spain. Emerging Infect. Dis. 17,
1064–1067.

Adams, M. D., Chan, E. R., Molyneaux,
N. D., and Bonomo, R. A. (2010).
Genomewide
analysis of diver-
gence of antibiotic resistance deter-
minants
in closely related iso-
lates of Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54,
3569–3577.

Adams, M. D., Goglin, K., Molyneaux,
N., Hujer, K. M., Lavender, H., Jami-
son, J. J., MacDonald, I. J., Mar-
tin, K. M., Russo, T., Campagnari,
A. A., Hujer, A. M., Bonomo, R.
A., and Gill, S. R. (2008). Com-
parative genome sequence analy-
sis of multidrug-resistant Acineto-
bacter baumannii. J. Bacteriol. 190,
8053–8064.

Adams, M. D., Nickel, G. C., Bajak-
souzian, S., Lavender, H., Murthy,
A. R., Jacobs, M. R., and Bonomo,
R. A. (2009). Resistance to col-
istin in Acinetobacter
bauman-
nii associated with mutations in
the PmrAB two-component system.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 53,
3628–3634.

Adams-Haduch,

J. M., Onuoha, E.
O., Bogdanovich, T., Tian, G. B.,
Marschall, J., Urban, C. M., Spell-
berg, B.
J., Rhee, D., Halstead,
D. C., Pasculle, A. W., and Doi,
Y.
(2011). Molecular epidemiol-
ogy of carbapenem-non-susceptible
Acinetobacter baumannii
in the
United States. J. Clin. Microbiol. 49,
3849–3854.

Adams-Haduch, J. M., Paterson, D. L.,
Sidjabat, H. E., Pasculle, A. W.,
Potoski, B. A., Muto, C. A., Har-
rison, L. H., and Doi, Y. (2008).
Genetic basis of multidrug resistance

in Acinetobacter baumannii clinical
isolates at a tertiary medical center
in Pennsylvania. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 52, 3837–3843.

Afzal-Shah, M., Woodford, N., and
Livermore, D. M. (2001). Char-
acterization of OXA-25, OXA-26,
and OXA-27, molecular class D
β-lactamases associated with car-
bapenem resistance in clinical iso-
lates of Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45,
583–588.

of

Al-Sweih, N. A., Al-Hubail, M.
A., and Rotimi, V. O.
(2011).
Emergence
and
colistin resistance in Acinetobacter
species isolated from patients in
Kuwait hospitals. J. Chemother. 23,
13–16.

tigecycline

Ambler, R. P. (1980). The structure of
β-lactamases. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B. Biol. Sci. 289, 321–331.

Andreu, D., Ubach,

J., Boman, A.,
Wahlin, B., Wade, D., Merriﬁeld, R.
B., and Boman, H. G. (1992). Short-
ened cecropin A-melittin hybrids.
Signiﬁcant size reduction retains
potent antibiotic activity. FEBS Lett.
296, 190–194.

Andriamanantena, T. S., Ratsima, E.,
Rakotonirina, H. C., Randriani-
rina, F., Ramparany, L., Carod, J.
F., Richard, V., and Talarmin, A.
(2010). Dissemination of mul-
tidrug
Acinetobacter
in various hospitals
baumannii
of
Antananarivo Madagascar.
Ann. Clin. Microbiol. Antimicrob.
9, 17.

resistant

Antunes, L. C.,

Imperi, F., Carat-
(2011a).
toli, A., and Visca, P.
Deciphering
the multifactorial
nature of Acinetobacter bauman-
nii
PLoS ONE
6,
doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0022674.g003

pathogenicity.
e22674.

Antunes, L. C., Imperi, F., Towner, K.
J., and Visca, P. (2011b). Genome-
assisted identiﬁcation of putative

iron-utilization genes in Acinetobac-
ter baumannii and their distribu-
tion among a genotypically diverse
collection of clinical isolates. Res.
Microbiol. 162, 279–284.

Arroyo, L. A., Herrera, C. M., Fernán-
dez, L., Hankins, J. V., Trent, M. S.,
and Hancock, R. E. (2011). The pmr-
CAB operon mediates polymyxin
resistance in Acinetobacter bauman-
nii ATCC 17978 and clinical iso-
lates through phosphoethanolamine
modiﬁcation of lipid A. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 55, 3743–3751.

Bassetti, M., Repetto, E., Righi, E., Boni,
S., Diverio, M., Molinari, M. P.,
Mussap, M., Artioli, S., Ansaldi, F.,
Durando, P., Orengo, G., Bobbio
Pallavicini, F., and Viscoli, C. (2008).
Colistin and rifampicin in the
treatment of multidrug-resistant
Acinetobacter
infec-
tions. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 61,
417–420.

baumannii

Beceiro, A., Llobet, E., Aranda,

J.,
Bengoechea, J. A., Doumith, M.,
Hornsey, M., Dhanji, H., Chart,
H., Bou, G., Livermore, D. M.,
and Woodford, N. (2011). Phospho-
ethanolamine modiﬁcation of lipid
A in colistin-resistant variants of
Acinetobacter baumannii mediated
by the pmrAB two-component reg-
ulatory system. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 55, 3370–3379.

Bernards, A. T., van der Toorn, J.,
van Boven, C. P., and Dijkshoorn,
L. (1996). Evaluation of the abil-
ity of a commercial system to iden-
tify Acinetobacter genomic species.
Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 15,
303–308.

Bertini, A., Poirel, L., Bernabeu, S.,
Fortini, D., Villa, L., Nordmann,
P., and Carattoli, A. (2007). Multi-
copy blaOXA-58 gene as a source
of high-level resistance to carbapen-
ems
in Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 51,
2324–2328.

Bertini, A., Poirel, L., Mugnier, P.
D., Villa, L., Nordmann, P., and
Carattoli, A.
(2010). Character-
ization and PCR-based replicon
typing
plasmids
in
baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54,
4168–4177.

Acinetobacter

resistance

of

Bhargava, N., Sharma, P., and Capalash,
(2010). Quorum sensing
N.
in Acinetobacter:
an emerging
pathogen. Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 36,
349–360.

Bogaerts, P., Naas, T., El Garch, F.,
Cuzon, G., Deplano, A., Delaire,
T., Huang, T. D., Lissoir, B., Nord-
mann, P., and Glupczynski, Y.
extended-spectrum
(2010). GES
β-lactamases
Acinetobacter
in
baumannii
in Belgium.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54,
4872–4878.

isolates

Bonnet, R., Marchandin, H., Chanal,
C., Sirot, D., Labia, R., De Champs,
C., Jumas-Bilak, E., and Sirot, J.
(2002). Chromosome-encoded class
D β-lactamase OXA-23 in Pro-
teus mirabilis. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 46, 2004–2006.

Bonnin, R. A., Nordmann, P., Potron,
A., Lecuyer, H., Zahar, J. R., and
(2011a). Carbapenem-
Poirel, L.
hydrolyzing GES-type
extended-
spectrum β-lactamase in Acinetobac-
ter baumannii. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 55, 349–354.

Bonnin, R. A., Potron, A., Poirel,
L., Lecuyer, H., Neri, R., and
Nordmann, P. (2011b). PER-7, an
extended-spectrum beta-lactamase
toward
with increased activity
broad-spectrum
cephalosporins
in
baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 55,
2424–2427.

Acinetobacter

Bonnin, R. A., Poirel, L., and Nord-
mann, P. (2012). AbaR-type transpo-
son structures in Acinetobacter bau-
mannii. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
67, 234–236.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 21

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

Bou, G., Cervero, G., Domínguez, M.
A., Quereda, C., and Martínez-
Beltran, J. (2000a). Characterization
of a nosocomial outbreak caused by
a multiresistant Acinetobacter bau-
mannii strain with a carbapenem-
hydrolyzing enzyme: high-level car-
bapenem resistance in A. baumannii
is not due solely to the presence of
β-lactamases. J. Clin. Microbiol. 38,
3299–3305.

Cloning,

Bou, G., and Martinez-Beltran,

J.
nucleotide
(2000b).
sequencing, and analysis of the gene
encoding an AmpC β-lactamase
in
baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 44,
428–432.

Acinetobacter

J.

Bou, G., Oliver, A., and Martínez-
Beltran,
(2000c). OXA-24, a
novel class D β-lactamase with car-
bapenemase activity in an Acine-
tobacter baumannii clinical strain.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 44,
1556–1561.

Braunstein, A., Papo, N., and Shai,
Y. (2004).
In vitro activity and
potency of an intravenously injected
antimicrobial peptide and its DL
amino acid analog in mice infected
with bacteria. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 48, 3127–3129.

Bresser, P., van Alphen, L., Habets, F. J.,
Hart, A. A., Dankert, J., Jansen, H.
M., and Lutter, R. (1997). Persist-
ing Haemophilus inﬂuenzae strains
induce lower levels of interleukin-
6 and interleukin-8 in H292 lung
epithelial cells than nonpersisting
strains. Eur. Respir. J. 10, 2319–2326.
Brown, S., Young, H. K., and Amyes, S.
G. (2005). Characterisation of OXA-
51, a novel class D carbapenemase
found in genetically unrelated clini-
cal strains of Acinetobacter bauman-
nii from Argentina. Clin. Microbiol.
Infect. 11, 15–23.

Bush, K., and Jacoby, G. A. (2010).
Updated functional
classiﬁcation
of β-lactamases. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 54, 969–976.

Camarena, L., Bruno, V., Euskirchen, G.,
Poggio, S., and Snyder, M. (2010).
Molecular mechanisms of ethanol-
induced pathogenesis revealed by
RNA-sequencing.
Pathog.
6,
doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.ppat.1000834.t001

e1000834.

PLoS

Canton, R., and Coque, T. M. (2006).
The CTX-M β-lactamase pandemic.
Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 9, 466–475.

Cayo, R., Rodríguez, M. C., Espinal,
P., Fernández-Cuenca, F., Ocampo-
Sosa, A. A., Pascual, A., Ayala, J. A.,
Vila, J., and Martínez-Martínez, L.
(2011). Analysis of genes encoding
for penicillin-binding proteins in
clinical
isolates of Acinetobacter

baumannii.
Antimicrob.
Chemother. 55, 5907–5913.

Agents

Celenza, G., Pellegrini, C., Caccamo,
M., Segatore, B., Amicosante, G.,
and Perilli, M.
(2006). Spread
of blaCTX-M-type and blaPER-
2 β-lactamase
in clini-
isolates from Bolivian hospi-
cal
tals. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 57,
975–978.

genes

Cerqueira, G. M., and Peleg,A. Y. (2011).
Insights into Acinetobacter bauman-
nii pathogenicity. IUBMB Life 63,
1055–1060.

Chan, K. G., Atkinson, S., Mathee,
K., Sam, C. K., Chhabra, S. R.,
Camara, M., Koh, C. L., and
Williams, P. (2011). Characteriza-
tion of N-acylhomoserine lactone-
degrading bacteria associated with
the Zingiber ofﬁcinale (ginger) rhi-
zosphere:
quo-
rum quenching and quorum sens-
ing in Acinetobacter
and Burk-
holderia. BMC Microbiol. 11, 51.
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-11-51

co-existence of

Chen, Y., Vasil, A. I., Rehaume, L., Mant,
C. T., Burns, J. L., Vasil, M. L.,
Hancock, R. E., and Hodges, R. S.
(2006). Comparison of biophysical
and biologic properties of alpha-
helical enantiomeric antimicrobial
peptides. Chem. Biol. Drug Des. 67,
162–173.

Chen, Y., Zhou, Z., Jiang, Y., and Yu,
Y. (2011). Emergence of NDM-1-
producing Acinetobacter baumannii
in China. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
66, 1255–1259.

Cho, Y. J., Moon, D. C., Jin, J. S., Choi, C.
H., Lee, Y. C., and Lee, J. C. (2009).
Genetic basis of resistance to amino-
glycosides in Acinetobacter spp. and
spread of armA in Acinetobacter bau-
mannii sequence group 1 in Korean
hospitals. Diagn. Microbiol. Infect.
Dis. 64, 185–190.

Choi, A. H., Slamti, L., Avci, F. Y.,
Pier, G. B., and Maira-Litran, T.
(2009). The pgaABCD locus of
Acinetobacter baumannii
encodes
the production of poly-beta-1-6-N-
acetylglucosamine, which is critical
for bioﬁlm formation. J. Bacteriol.
191, 5953–5963.

Choi, C. H., Lee, E. Y., Lee, Y. C., Park, T.
I., Kim, H. J., Hyun, S. H., Kim, S. A.,
Lee, S. K., and Lee, J. C. (2005). Outer
membrane protein 38 of Acineto-
bacter baumannii
localizes to the
mitochondria and induces apopto-
sis of epithelial cells. Cell. Microbiol.
7, 1127–1138.

Choi, C. H., Lee, J. S., Lee, Y. C., Park,
T. I., and Lee, J. C. (2008). Acine-
tobacter baumannii invades epithe-
lial cells and outer membrane pro-
tein A mediates interactions with

epithelial cells. BMC Microbiol. 8,
216. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-8-216

Chu, Y. W., Afzal-Shah, M., Houang,
E. T., Palepou, M. I., Lyon, D. J.,
Woodford, N., and Livermore, D. M.
(2001). IMP-4, a novel metallo-β-
lactamase from nosocomial Acineto-
bacter spp. collected in Hong Kong
between 1994 and 1998. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 45, 710–714.

Chu, Y. W., Chau, S. L., and Houang,
E. T. (2006). Presence of active
efﬂux systems AdeABC, AdeDE and
AdeXYZ in different Acinetobac-
ter genomic DNA groups. J. Med.
Microbiol. 55, 477–478.

Clemmer, K. M., Bonomo, R. A., and
Rather, P. N. (2011). Genetic analy-
sis of surface motility in Acineto-
bacter baumannii. Microbiology 157,
2534–2544.

Conlon,

J. M., Ahmed, E.,

and
Condamine, E. (2009). Antimicro-
bial properties of brevinin-2-related
peptide and its analogs: efﬁcacy
against multidrug-resistant Acineto-
bacter baumannii. Chem. Biol. Drug
Des. 74, 488–493.

Conlon, J. M., Ahmed, E., Pal, T.,
and Sonnevend, A. (2010). Potent
and rapid bactericidal action of
alyteserin-1c and its [E4K] analog
against multidrug-resistant strains
of Acinetobacter baumannii. Peptides
31, 1806–1810.

Cornaglia, G., Giamarellou, H., and
Rossolini, G. M. (2011). Metallo-
β-lactamases: a last
for
β-lactams? Lancet Infect. Dis. 11,
381–393.

frontier

the

Corvec, S., Poirel, L., Naas, T., Dru-
geon, H.,
and Nordmann, P.
(2007). Genetics and expression
carbapenem-hydrolyzing
of
oxacillinase
blaOXA-23
in
baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 51,
1530–1533.
J.

gene
Acinetobacter

(1995). Overview of
microbial bioﬁlsm. J. Ind. Microbiol.
15, 137–140.

Costerton,

Coyne, S., Guigon, G., Courvalin, P., and
Périchon, B. (2010a). Screening and
quantiﬁcation of the expression of
antibiotic resistance genes in Acine-
tobacter baumannii with a microar-
ray. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
54, 333–340.

Coyne, S., Rosenfeld, N., Lambert,
T., Courvalin, P., and Périchon,
B.
(2010b). Overexpression of
resistance-nodulation-cell division
pump AdeFGH confers multidrug
resistance in Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
54, 4389–4393.

Culebras, E., Gonzalez-Romo, F., Head,
J., Gomez, M., Morales, G., and

Picazo, J. J. (2010). Outbreak of
Acinetobacter baumannii producing
OXA-66 in a Spanish hospital: epi-
demiology and study of patient
movements. Microb. Drug Resist. 16,
309–315.

Da Silva, G. J., Correia, M., Vital, C.,
Ribeiro, G., Sousa, J. C., Leitao, R.,
Peixe, L., and Duarte,A. (2002). Mol-
ecular characterization of blaIMP-
5, a new integron-borne metallo-β-
lactamase gene from an Acinetobac-
ter baumannii nosocomial isolate in
Portugal. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 215,
33–39.

Damier-Piolle, L., Magnet, S., Brémont,
S., Lambert, T., and Courvalin,
(2008). AdeIJK, a resistance-
P.
nodulation-cell
pump
antibiotics
efﬂuxing multiple
in
baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 52,
557–562.

Acinetobacter

division

D’Andrea, M. M., Giani, T., D’Arezzo,
S., Capone, A., Petrosillo, N., Visca,
P., Luzzaro, F., and Rossolini, G.
M.
(2009). Characterization of
pABVA01, a plasmid encoding the
OXA-24 carbapenemase from Italian
isolates of Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 53,
3528–3533.

D’Arezzo, S., Capone, A., Petrosillo, N.,
Visca, P., Ballardini, M., Bartolini,
S., Bordi, E., Di Stefano, A., Galie,
M., Minniti, R., Meledandri, M., Pac-
ciani, L., Parisi, G., Prignano, G.,
Santini, C., Valmarin, M., Venditti,
M., and Ziantoni, S. (2009). Epi-
demic multidrug-resistant Acineto-
bacter baumannii related to Euro-
pean Clonal Types I and II in Rome
(Italy). Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 15,
347–357.

Davies, T. A., Marie Queenan, A., Mor-
row, B. J., Shang, W., Amsler, K.,
He, W., Lynch, A. S., Pillar, C., and
Flamm, R. K. (2011). Longitudi-
nal survey of carbapenem resistance
and resistance mechanisms in Enter-
obacteriaceae and non-fermenters
from the USA in 2007-09. J. Antimi-
crob. Chemother. 66, 2298–2307.

de Breij, A., Dijkshoorn, L., Lagendijk,
E., van der Meer, J., Koster, A.,
Bloemberg, G., Wolterbeek, R.,
van den Broek, P., and Nibber-
ing, P. (2010). Do bioﬁlm forma-
tion and interactions with human
cells explain the clinical
success
of Acinetobacter baumannii? PLoS
ONE 5, e10732. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0010732

de Breij, A., Gaddy,

J., van der
Meer, J., Koning, R., Koster, A.,
van den Broek, P., Actis, L.,
Nibbering, P., and Dijkshoorn, L.
(2009). CsuA/BABCDE-dependent

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 22

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

pili are not involved in the adher-
ence of Acinetobacter baumannii
ATCC19606(T) to human airway
epithelial cells and their inﬂamma-
tory response. Res. Microbiol. 160,
213–218.

De La Fuente, L., Burr, T. J., and Hoch,
H. C. (2007). Mutations in type
I and type IV pilus biosynthetic
genes affect twitching motility rates
in Xylella fastidiosa. J. Bacteriol. 189,
7507–7510.

del Mar Tomas, M., Beceiro,A., Perez,A.,
Velasco, D., Moure, R., Villanueva,
R., Martinez-Beltran, J., and Bou,
G. (2005). Cloning and functional
analysis of the gene encoding the 33-
to 36-kilodalton outer membrane
protein associated with carbapenem
resistance in Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
49, 5172–5175.

Di Nocera, P. P., Rocco, F., Gian-
nouli, M., Triassi, M., and Zarrilli,
R. (2011). Genome organization of
epidemic Acinetobacter baumannii
strains. BMC Microbiol. 11, 224.
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-11-224

Di Popolo, A., Giannouli, M., Triassi,
M., Brisse, S., and Zarrilli, R.
(2011). Molecular epidemiological
investigation of multidrug-resistant
Acinetobacter
strains
in four Mediterranean countries
with a multilocus sequence typing
scheme. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 17,
197–201.
Dijkshoorn,

L., Brouwer, C.

baumannii

P.,
Bogaards, S. J., Nemec, A., van den
Broek, P. J., and Nibbering, P. H.
(2004). The synthetic N-terminal
peptide
human lactoferrin,
hLF(1–11), is highly effective against
infection caused by
experimental
multidrug-resistant
Acinetobacter
baumannii.
Agents
Antimicrob.
Chemother. 48, 4919–4921.

of

Dijkshoorn, L., Nemec, A., and Seifert,
H. (2007). An increasing threat in
hospitals: multidrug-resistant Acine-
tobacter baumannii. Nat. Rev. Micro-
biol. 5, 939–951.

Docquier,

J. D., Lamotte-Brasseur,
J., Galleni, M., Amicosante, G.,
Frere, J. M., and Rossolini, G. M.
(2003). On functional and struc-
tural heterogeneity of VIM-type
metallo-β-lactamases. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 51, 257–266.

Doi, Y., Adams, J. M., Yamane, K.,
and Paterson, D. L. (2007). Iden-
tiﬁcation of 16S rRNA methylase-
producing Acinetobacter baumannii
clinical strains in North America.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 51,
4209–4210.

Doi, Y., and Arakawa, Y.

(2007).
16S ribosomal RNA methylation:

emerging
against
Infect. Dis. 45, 88–94.

resistance mechanism
Clin.

aminoglycosides.

Donlan, R. (2002). Bioﬁlms: microbial
life on surfaces. Emerging Infect. Dis.
8, 881–890.

Donnarumma, F., Sergi, S., Indorato, C.,
Mastromei, G., Monnanni, R., Nico-
letti, P., Pecile, P., Cecconi, D., Man-
nino, R., Bencini, S., Fanci, R., Bosi,
A., and Casalone, E. (2010). Mol-
ecular characterization of Acineto-
bacter isolates collected in intensive
care units of six hospitals in Flo-
rence, Italy, during a 3-year surveil-
lance program: a population struc-
ture analysis. J. Clin. Microbiol. 48,
1297–1304.

Dorsey, C. W., Beglin, M. S., and Actis, L.
A. (2003a). Detection and analysis of
iron uptake components expressed
by Acinetobacter baumannii clini-
cal isolates. J. Clin. Microbiol. 41,
4188–4193.

Dorsey, C. W., Tolmasky, M. E., Crosa,
J. H., and Actis, L. A. (2003b).
Genetic organization of an Acine-
tobacter baumannii chromosomal
region harbouring genes related to
siderophore biosynthesis and trans-
port. Microbiology 149, 1227–1238.
Drawz, S. M., Babic, M., Bethel, C. R.,
Taracila, M., Distler, A. M., Ori, C.,
Caselli, E., Prati, F., and Bonomo,
R. A. (2010). Inhibition of the class
C β-lactamase from Acinetobacter
spp.: insights into effective inhibitor
design. Biochemistry 49, 329–340.

Dupont, M., Pages, J. M., Laﬁtte, D.,
Siroy, A., and Bollet, C. (2005). Iden-
tiﬁcation of an OprD homologue
in Acinetobacter baumannii. J. Pro-
teome Res. 4, 2386–2390.

Eijkelkamp, B. A., Stroeher, U. H.,
Hassan, K. A., Papadimitrious, M.
S., Paulsen, I. T., and Brown, M.
H. (2011). Adherence and motil-
ity characteristics of clinical Acine-
tobacter baumannii isolates. FEMS
Microbiol. Lett. 323, 44–51.

Endimiani, A., Luzzaro, F., Migliavacca,
R., Mantengoli, E., Hujer, A. M.,
Hujer, K. M., Pagani, L., Bonomo,
R. A., Rossolini, G. M., and Toniolo,
A. (2007). Spread in an Italian hos-
pital of a clonal Acinetobacter bau-
mannii strain producing the TEM-
92 extended-spectrum β-lactamase.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 51,
2211–2214.

Erridge, C., Moncayo-Nieto, O. L., Mor-
gan, R., Young, M., and Poxton, I.
R. (2007). Acinetobacter bauman-
nii
lipopolysaccharides are potent
stimulators of human monocyte
activation via Toll-like receptor 4
signalling.
J. Med. Microbiol. 56,
165–171.

Espinal, P., Fugazza, G., Lopez, Y.,
Kasma, M., Lerman, Y., Malhotra-
Kumar, S., Goosens, H., Carmeli, Y.,
and Vila, J. (2011a). Dissemination
of the NDM-2-producing Acineto-
bacter baumannii clone in an Israeli
Rehabilitation Center. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 55, 5396–5398.
I., and Vila,

J.
(2011b). Clinical impact and mol-
ecular basis of antimicrobial resis-
tance in non-baumannii Acinetobac-
ter. Future Microbiol. 6, 495–511.

Espinal, P., Roca,

Espinal, P., Seifert, H., Dijkshoorn,
L., Vila, J., and Roca, I. (2011c).
identiﬁca-
Rapid and accurate
tion of
from
the
baumannii
(Ab) group by MALDI-TOF MS.
Clin. Microbiol. Infect. (in press).
doi:10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03696.x

genomic
Acinetobacter

species

Espinal, P., Martí, S., and Vila, J. (2012).
Effect of bioﬁlm formation on the
survival of Acinetobacter baumannii
on dry surfaces. J. Hosp. Infect. 80,
56–60.

Evans, B. A., Hamouda, A., Towner,
K. J., and Amyes, S. G. (2010).
Novel genetic context of multi-
ple blaOXA-58 genes in Acineto-
bacter genospecies 3. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 65, 1586–1588.

Fàbrega, A., Madurga, S., Giralt, E., and
Vila, J. (2009). Mechanism of action
of and resistance to quinolones.
Microb. Biotechnol. 2, 40–61.

Falagas, M. E., and Kasiakou, S. K.
(2005). Colistin:
the revival of
polymyxins for the management of
multidrug-resistant Gram-negative
bacterial infections. Clin. Infect. Dis.
40, 1333–1341.
Fernández-Cuenca,

production,

F., Martínez-
Martínez, L., Conejo, M. C., Ayala,
J. A., Perea, E.
J., and Pascual,
(2003). Relationship between
A.
β-lactamase
outer
membrane protein and penicillin-
binding protein proﬁles on the
activity of
carbapenems against
of Acinetobac-
clinical
ter
J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 51, 565–574.

isolates
baumannii.

Fernández-Cuenca,

F.,

Smani, Y.,
Gómez-Sánchez, M. C., Docobo-
Pérez, F., Caballero-Moyano, F. J.,
Domínguez-Herrera,
J., Pascual,
A., and Pachón, J. (2011). Attenu-
ated virulence of a slow-growing
Acinetobacter
pandrug-resistant
baumannii
associated with
decreased
genes
encoding the porins CarO and
OprD-like. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents
38, 548–549.

expression of

is

Fernández-Reyes, M., Díaz, D., de la
Torre, B. G., Cabrales-Rico, A.,
Vallès-Miret, M., Jiménez-Barbero,

J., Andreu, D., and Rivas, L. (2010).
Lysine N(epsilon)-trimethylation, a
tool for improving the selectivity
of antimicrobial peptides. J. Med.
Chem. 53, 5587–5596.
Fernández-Reyes, M.,

Rodríguez-
Falcón, M., Chiva, C., Pachón, J.,
Andreu, D., and Rivas, L. (2009).
The cost of resistance to colistin
in Acinetobacter
a
proteomic perspective. Proteomics
9, 1632–1645.

baumannii:

Figueiredo, S., Poirel, L., Papa, A.,
Koulourida, V., and Nordmann, P.
(2008). First identiﬁcation of VIM-4
metallo-β-lactamase in Acinetobac-
ter spp. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 14,
289–290.

Figueiredo, S., Poirel, L., Papa, A.,
Koulourida, V., and Nordmann, P.
(2009). Overexpression of the nat-
urally occurring blaOXA-51 gene in
Acinetobacter baumannii mediated
by novel insertion sequence ISAba9.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 53,
4045–4047.

Fournier, P. E., Vallenet, D., Barbe,
V., Audic, S., Ogata, H., Poirel, L.,
Richet, H., Robert, C., Mangenot,
S., Abergel, C., Nordmann, P., Weis-
senbach, J., Raoult, D., and Claverie,
J. M. (2006). Comparative genomics
of multidrug resistance in Acineto-
bacter baumannii. PLoS Genet. 2, e7.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.0020007

Friedman, M. (2010). Origin, microbi-
ology, nutrition, and pharmacology
of D-amino acids. Chem. Biodivers.
7, 1491–1530.

Gaddy, J. A., and Actis, L. A. (2009). Reg-
ulation of Acinetobacter baumannii
bioﬁlm formation. Future Microbiol.
4, 273–278.

Gaddy,

J. A., Tomaras, A. P., and
Actis, L. A. (2009). The Acinetobac-
ter baumannii 19606 OmpA pro-
tein plays a role in bioﬁlm forma-
tion on abiotic surfaces and in the
interaction of this pathogen with
eukaryotic cells. Infect. Immun. 77,
3150–3160.

Gales, A. C., Tognim, M. C., Reis, A. O.,
Jones, R. N., and Sader, H. S. (2003).
Emergence of an IMP-like metallo-
enzyme in an Acinetobacter bauman-
nii clinical strain from a Brazilian
teaching hospital. Diagn. Microbiol.
Infect. Dis. 45, 77–79.

García, A., Salgado, F., Solar, H.,
González, C. L., Zemelman, R., and
Onate, A. (1999). Some immuno-
logical properties of lipopolysaccha-
ride from Acinetobacter baumannii.
J. Med. Microbiol. 48, 479–483.

Ge, Y., MacDonald, D. L., Holroyd, K.
J., Thornsberry, C., Wexler, H., and
Zasloff, M. (1999). In vitro antibac-
terial properties of pexiganan, an

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 23

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

analog of magainin. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 43, 782–788.

Gehrlein, M., Leying, H., Cullmann,
W., Wendt, S., and Opferkuch,
W. (1991). Imipenem resistance in
Acinetobacter baumanii
is due to
altered penicillin-binding proteins.
Chemotherapy 37, 405–412.

Giacometti, A., Cirioni, O., Del Prete, M.
S., Barchiesi, F., Paggi, A. M., Petrelli,
E., and Scalise, G. (2000). Compar-
ative activities of polycationic pep-
tides and clinically used antimi-
crobial agents against multidrug-
resistant nosocomial
isolates of
Acinetobacter baumannii. J. Antimi-
crob. Chemother. 46, 807–810.

Giacometti, A., Cirioni, O., Kamysz,
W., D’Amato, G., Silvestri, C., Del
Prete, M. S., Lukasiak, J., and Scalise,
G. (2003). Comparative activities of
cecropin A, melittin, and cecropin
A-melittin peptide CA(1-7)M(2-
9)NH2 against multidrug-resistant
nosocomial isolates of Acinetobacter
baumannii. Peptides 24, 1315–1318.
Giannouli, M., Tomasone, F., Agodi,
A., Vahaboglu, H., Daoud, Z., Tri-
assi, M., Tsakris, A., and Zarrilli,
R. (2009). Molecular epidemiology
of carbapenem-resistant Acinetobac-
ter baumannii strains in intensive
care units of multiple Mediterranean
hospitals. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
63, 828–830.

Gogou, V., Pournaras, S., Giannouli, M.,
Voulgari, E., Piperaki, E. T., Zarrilli,
R., and Tsakris, A. (2011). Evolu-
tion of multidrug-resistant Acine-
tobacter baumannii clonal lineages:
a 10 year study in Greece (2000-
09). J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 66,
2767–2772.

Goic-Barisic, I., Bedenic, B., Tonkic,
M., Novak, A., Katic, S., Kalenic,
S., Punda-Polic, V., and Towner, K.
J. (2009). Occurrence of OXA-107
and ISAba1 in carbapenem-resistant
isolates of Acinetobacter baumannii
from Croatia. J. Clin. Microbiol. 47,
3348–3349.

Goic-Barisic, I., Towner, K. J., Kovacic,
A., Sisko-Kraljevic, K., Tonkic, M.,
Novak, A., and Punda-Polic, V.
(2011). Outbreak in Croatia caused
by a new carbapenem-resistant clone
of Acinetobacter baumannii produc-
ing OXA-72 carbapenemase. J. Hosp.
Infect. 77, 368–369.

González, R. H., Dijkshoorn, L.,Van den
Barselaar, M., and Nudel, C. (2009).
Quorum sensing signal proﬁle of
Acinetobacter strains from nosoco-
mial and environmental sources.
Rev. Argent. Microbiol. 41, 73–78.

González, R. H., Nusblat, A., and Nudel,
B. C. (2001). Detection and charac-
terization of quorum sensing signal

molecules in Acinetobacter strains.
Microbiol. Res. 155, 271–277.

Gopalakrishnan, R., and Sureshku-
mar, D. (2010). Changing trends in
antimicrobial susceptibility and hos-
pital acquired infections over an 8
year period in a tertiary care hos-
pital in relation to introduction of
an infection control programme. J.
Assoc. Physicians India 58(Suppl.),
25–31.

Gordon, N. C., Png, K., and Ware-
ham, D. W. (2010). Potent synergy
and sustained bactericidal activ-
ity of a vancomycin-colistin com-
bination versus multidrug-resistant
strains of Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54,
5316–5322.

Gribun, A., Nitzan, Y., Pechatnikov, I.,
Hershkovits, G., and Katcoff, D. J.
(2003). Molecular and structural
characterization of
the HMP-AB
gene encoding a pore-forming pro-
tein from a clinical isolate of Acine-
tobacter baumannii. Curr. Microbiol.
47, 434–443.

Guardabassi, L., Dijkshoorn, L., Col-
lard, J. M., Olsen, J. E., and Dals-
gaard, A. (2000). Distribution and
in-vitro transfer of tetracycline resis-
tance determinants in clinical and
aquatic Acinetobacter strains. J. Med.
Microbiol. 49, 929–936.

Hamouda, A., and Amyes, S. G.
gyrA and parC
(2004). Novel
point mutations
in two strains
of Acinetobacter baumannii resis-
tant to ciproﬂoxacin. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 54, 695–696.

Henrichsen, J., and Blom, J. (1975). Cor-
relation between twitching motil-
ity and possession of polar ﬁm-
briae in Acinetobacter calcoaceticus.
Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Scand. B 83,
103–115.

Héritier, C., Poirel, L., Fournier, P. E.,
Claverie, J. M., Raoult, D., and Nord-
mann, P. (2005a). Characterization
of the naturally occurring oxacil-
linase of Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49,
4174–4179.

Héritier, C., Poirel, L., Lambert, T.,
and Nordmann, P. (2005b). Con-
tribution of acquired carbapenem-
hydrolyzing oxacillinases
to car-
bapenem resistance in Acinetobac-
ter baumannii. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 49, 3198–3202.

Héritier, C., Poirel, L., and Nordmann,
P. (2006). Cephalosporinase over-
expression resulting from inser-
tion of
ISAba1 in Acinetobacter
baumannii. Clin. Microbiol. Infect.
12, 123–130.

Higgins, P. G., Dammhayn, C.,
Hackel, M., and Seifert, H. (2010).

spread of

Global
carbapenem-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii. J.
Antimicrob. Chemother. 65, 233–238.
Higgins, P. G., Poirel, L., Lehmann,
M., Nordmann, P., and Seifert,
H.
a novel
carbapenem-hydrolyzing class D β-
lactamase in Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
53, 5035–5038.

(2009). OXA-143,

Higgins, P. G., Wisplinghoff, H., Ste-
fanik, D., and Seifert, H. (2004).
Selection of topoisomerase muta-
tions and overexpression of adeB
mRNA transcripts during an out-
break of Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 54,
821–823.

Ho, P. L., Lo, W. U., Yeung, M. K., Lin, C.
H., Chow, K. H., Ang, I., Tong, A. H.,
Bao, J. Y., Lok, S., and Lo, J. Y. (2011).
Complete sequencing of pNDM-
HK encoding NDM-1 carbapen-
emase from a multidrug-resistant
Escherichia coli strain isolated in
Hong Kong. PLoS ONE 6, e17989.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0017989

Houang, E. T., Chu, Y. W., Lo, W.
S., Chu, K. Y., and Cheng, A. F.
(2003). Epidemiology of rifampin
ADP-ribosyltransferase (arr-2) and
metallo-β-lactamase
(blaIMP-4)
gene cassettes in class 1 integrons in
Acinetobacter strains isolated from
blood cultures in 1997 to 2000.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 47,
1382–1390.

Hu, Y., Zhang, W., Liang, H., Liu, L.,
Peng, G., Pan, Y., Yang, X., Zheng,
B., Gao, G. F., Zhu, B., and Hu, H.
(2011). Whole-genome sequence of
a multidrug-resistant clinical isolate
of Acinetobacter lwofﬁi. J. Bacteriol.
193, 5549–5550.

Huang, L. Y., Chen, T. L., Lu, P. L., Tsai,
C. A., Cho, W. L., Chang, F. Y., Fung,
C. P., and Siu, L. K. (2008). Dissemi-
nation of multidrug-resistant, class
1 integron-carrying Acinetobacter
baumannii isolates in Taiwan. Clin.
Microbiol. Infect. 14, 1010–1019.

Huang, L. Y., Lu, P. L., Chen, T. L.,
Chang, F. Y., Fung, C. P., and Siu,
L. K. (2010). Molecular character-
ization of β-lactamase genes and
their genetic structures in Acineto-
bacter genospecies 3 isolates in Tai-
wan. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
54, 2699–2703.

Hujer, K. M., Hamza, N. S., Hujer,
A. M., Perez, F., Helfand, M. S.,
Bethel, C. R., Thomson, J. M.,Ander-
son, V. E., Barlow, M., Rice, L.
B., Tenover, F. C., and Bonomo,
R. A. (2005). Identiﬁcation of a
new allelic variant of the Acineto-
bacter baumannii cephalosporinase,
ADC-7 beta-lactamase: deﬁning a

unique family of class C enzymes.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49,
2941–2948.

Huys, G., Cnockaert, M., Nemec, A.,
and Swings, J. (2005a). Sequence-
based typing of adeB as a potential
tool to identify intraspeciﬁc groups
among clinical strains of multidrug-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii. J.
Clin. Microbiol. 43, 5327–5331.

Huys, G., Cnockaert, M., Vaneechoutte,
M., Woodford, N., Nemec, A., Dijk-
shoorn, L., and Swings, J. (2005b).
Distribution of
tetracycline resis-
tance genes in genotypically related
and unrelated multiresistant Acine-
tobacter baumannii
from
different European hospitals. Res.
Microbiol. 156, 348–355.

strains

Iacono, M., Villa, L., Fortini, D., Bor-
doni, R., Imperi, F., Bonnal, R. J. P.,
Sicheritz-Ponten, T., De Bellis, G.,
Visca, P., Cassone, A., and Carattoli,
A. (2008). Whole-genome pyrose-
quencing of an epidemic multidrug-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii
strain belonging to the European
clone II group. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 52, 2616–2625.

Irie, Y., and Parsek, M. R. (2008). Quo-
rum sensing and microbial bioﬁlms.
Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 322,
67–84.

Jacobs, A. C., Hood, I., Boyd, K. L.,
Olson, P. D., Morrison, J. M., Car-
son, S., Sayood, K., Iwen, P. C., Skaar,
E. P., and Dunman, P. M. (2010).
Inactivation of phospholipase D
diminishes Acinetobacter bauman-
nii pathogenesis. Infect. Immun. 78,
1952–1962.

Jarrell, K. F., and McBride, M. J. (2008).
The surprisingly diverse ways that
prokaryotes move. Nat. Rev. Micro-
biol. 6, 466–476.

Jawad, A., Heritage, J., Snelling, A. M.,
Gascoyne-Binzi, D. M., and Hawkey,
P. M. (1996). Inﬂuence of relative
humidity and suspending menstrua
on survival of Acinetobacter spp. on
dry surfaces. J. Clin. Microbiol. 34,
2881–2887.

Jawad, A., Seifert, H., Snelling, A., Her-
itage, J., and Hawkey, P. (1998). Sur-
vival of Acinetobacter baumannii on
dry surfaces: comparison of out-
break and sporadic isolates. J. Clin.
Microbiol. 36, 1938–1941.

Jiang, Z., Vasil, A. I., Gera, L., Vasil, M.
L., and Hodges, R. S. (2011). Ratio-
nal design of alpha-helical antimi-
crobial peptides to target Gram-
negative pathogens, Acinetobacter
baumannii and Pseudomonas aerug-
inosa: utilization of charge, ‘speci-
ﬁcity determinants,’ total hydropho-
bicity, hydrophobe type and location
as design parameters to improve the

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 24

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

therapeutic ratio. Chem. Biol. Drug
Des. 77, 225–240.

Jin, J. S., Kwon, S. O., Moon, D. C.,
Gurung, M., Lee, J. H., Kim, S.
I., and Lee, J. C. (2011). Acine-
tobacter baumannii secretes cyto-
toxic outer membrane protein A
via outer membrane vesicles. PLoS
ONE 6, e17027. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0017027.g001

Jones, R. N. (2010). Microbial etiologies
of hospital-acquired bacterial pneu-
monia
and ventilator-associated
bacterial pneumonia. Clin. Infect.
Dis. 51(Suppl. 1), S81–S87.

Kaase, M., Nordmann, P.,Wichelhaus, T.
A., Gatermann, S. G., Bonnin, R. A.,
and Poirel, L. (2011). NDM-2 car-
bapenemase in Acinetobacter bau-
mannii from Egypt. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 66, 1260–1262.

Kang, Y. S., and Park, W. (2010a). Con-
tribution of quorum-sensing sys-
tem to hexadecane degradation and
bioﬁlm formation in Acinetobacter
sp. strain DR1. J. Appl. Microbiol.
109, 1650–1659.

Kang,Y. S., and Park, W. (2010b). Trade-
off between antibiotic resistance and
biological ﬁtness in Acinetobacter sp.
strain DR1. Environ. Microbiol. 12,
1304–1318.

Karthikeyan, K., Thirunarayan, M. A.,
and Krishnan, P. (2010). Coexis-
tence of blaOXA-23 with blaNDM-
isolates
1 and armA in clinical
of Acinetobacter baumannii
from
India. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 65,
2253–2254.

Karunasagar, A., Maiti, B., Shekar, M.,
Shenoy, M. S., and Karunasagar,
I. (2011). Prevalence of OXA-type
carbapenemase genes and genetic
heterogeneity in clinical isolates of
Acinetobacter
from Manga-
lore, India. Microbiol. Immunol. 55,
239–246.

spp.

Kim, J. W., Heo, S. T., Jin, J. S., Choi, C.
H., Lee, Y. C., Jeong, Y. G., Kim, S.
J., and Lee, J. C. (2008). Character-
ization of Acinetobacter baumannii
carrying blaOXA-23, blaPER-1 and
armA in a Korean hospital. Clin.
Microbiol. Infect. 14, 716–718.

Kim, S. W., Choi, C. H., Moon, D. C.,
Jin, J. S., Lee, J. H., Shin, J. H., Kim,
J. M., Lee, Y. C., Seol, S. Y., Cho,
D. T., and Lee, J. C. (2009). Serum
resistance of Acinetobacter bauman-
nii through the binding of factor H
to outer membrane proteins. FEMS
Microbiol. Lett. 301, 224–231.

Kitchel, B., Rasheed, J. K., Endimiani,
A., Hujer, A. M., Anderson, K. F.,
Bonomo, R. A., and Patel, J. B.
(2010). Genetic factors associated
with elevated carbapenem resis-
tance in KPC-producing Klebsiella

pneumoniae. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 54, 4201–4207.

Klieve, A. V., Yokoyama, M. T., Forster,
R. J., Ouwerkerk, D., Bain, P. A.,
and Mawhinney, E. L. (2005). Nat-
urally occurring DNA transfer sys-
tem associated with membrane vesi-
cles in cellulolytic Ruminococcus spp.
of ruminal origin. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 71, 4248–4253.

Koh, T. H., Sng, L. H., Wang, G. C.,
Hsu, L. Y., and Zhao, Y. (2007a).
Carbapenemase and efﬂux pump
genes in Acinetobacter calcoaceticus-
Acinetobacter baumannii complex
strains from Singapore. J. Antimi-
crob. Chemother. 60, 1173–1174.

Koh, T. H., Sng, L. H., Wang, G. C., Hsu,
L. Y., and Zhao, Y. (2007b). IMP-4
and OXA β-lactamases in Acineto-
bacter baumannii from Singapore. J.
Antimicrob. Chemother. 59, 627–632.
Koo, S. H., Kwon, K. C., Cho, H.
H., and Sung, J. Y. (2010). Genetic
basis of multidrug-resistant Acine-
tobacter baumannii
iso-
lates from three university hospitals
in Chungcheong Province, Korea.
Korean J. Lab. Med. 30, 498–506.

clinical

Krizova, L., Dijkshoorn, L., and Nemec,
A. (2011). Diversity and evolution of
AbaR genomic resistance islands in
Acinetobacter baumannii strains of
European clone I. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 55, 3201–3206.

Krizova, L., and Nemec, A. (2010). A 63
kb genomic resistance island found
in a multidrug-resistant Acinetobac-
ter baumannii isolate of European
clone I from 1977. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 65, 1915–1918.

Kropec, A., Maira-Litran, T., Jeffer-
son, K. K., Grout, M., Cram-
ton, S. E., Gotz, F., Goldmann, D.
A., and Pier, G. B. (2005). Poly-
N-acetylglucosamine production in
Staphylococcus aureus is essential for
virulence in murine models of sys-
temic infection. Infect. Immun. 73,
6868–6876.
I.,

Kusradze,

S. M.,
Goderdzishvili, M., and Rolain,
J. M. (2011). Molecular detection
of OXA carbapenemase genes in
multidrug-resistant
Acinetobacter
baumannii
isolates from Iraq and
Georgia. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents
38, 164–168.

Diene,

Kwon, S. O., Gho, Y. S., Lee, J. C., and
Kim, S. I. (2009). Proteome analy-
sis of outer membrane vesicles from
a clinical Acinetobacter baumannii
isolate. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 297,
150–156.

Lam, C., Hildebrandt,

J., Schutze,
(1986).
E., and Wenzel, A. F.
Membrane-disorganizing property
of polymyxin B nonapeptide.
J.

Antimicrob. Chemother. 18, 9–15.

(1999). Cloning

Lauretti, L., Riccio, M. L., Mazzariol,
A., Cornaglia, G., Amicosante,
G., Fontana, R., and Rossolini,
and
G. M.
characterization
a
new integron-borne metallo-β-
lactamase gene from a Pseudomonas
aeruginosa clinical isolate. Antimi-
crob.
43,
1584–1590.

Chemother.

blaVIM,

Agents

of

Lee, H., Yong, D., Yum, J. H., Roh, K. H.,
Lee, K., Yamane, K., Arakawa, Y., and
Chong, Y. (2006a). Dissemination
of 16S rRNA methylase-mediated
highly amikacin-resistant isolates of
Klebsiella pneumoniae and Acineto-
bacter baumannii in Korea. Diagn.
Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 56, 305–312.

Lee, J. C., Koerten, H., van den Broek,
P., Beekhuizen, H., Wolterbeek, R.,
van den Barselaar, M., van der
Reijden, T., van der Meer, J., van
de Gevel, J., and Dijkshoorn, L.
(2006b). Adherence of Acinetobac-
ter baumannii
strains to human
bronchial epithelial cells. Res. Micro-
biol. 157, 360–366.

Lee, J. C., Oh, J. Y., Kim, K. S., Jeong, Y.
W., Park, J. C., and Cho, J. W. (2001).
Apoptotic cell death induced by
Acinetobacter baumannii in epithe-
lial cells through caspase-3 activa-
tion. APMIS 109, 679–684.

Lee, K., Kim, M. N., Choi, T. Y., Cho,
S. E., Lee, S., Whang, D. H., Yong,
D., Chong, Y., Woodford, N., and
Livermore, D. M. (2009a). Wide dis-
semination of OXA-type carbapen-
emases in clinical Acinetobacter spp.
isolates from South Korea. Int. J.
Antimicrob. Agents 33, 520–524.

Lee, Y. T., Huang, L. Y., Chen, T. L., Siu,
L. K., Fung, C. P., Cho, W. L., Yu,
K. W., and Liu, C. Y. (2009b). Gene
cassette arrays, antibiotic suscepti-
bilities, and clinical characteristics of
Acinetobacter baumannii bacteremic
strains harboring class 1 integrons.
J. Microbiol. Immunol. Infect. 42,
210–219.

Lee, K., Kim, M. N., Kim, J. S., Hong,
H. L., Kang, J. O., Shin, J. H., Park,
Y. J., Yong, D., Jeong, S. H., and
Chong, Y. (2011a). Further Increases
in carbapenem-, amikacin-, and
ﬂuoroquinolone-resistant isolates of
Acinetobacter spp. and P. aerugi-
nosa in Korea: KONSAR study 2009.
Yonsei Med. J. 52, 793–802.

Lee, Y., Kim, C. K., Lee, H., Jeong, S.
H., Yong, D., and Lee, K. (2011b).
A novel insertion sequence, ISAba10,
inserted into ISAba1 adjacent to the
blaOXA-23 gene and disrupting the
outer membrane protein gene carO
in Acinetobacter baumannii. Antimi-
crob. Agents Chemother. 55, 361–363.

Lee, K., Lee, W. G., Uh, Y., Ha, G. Y.,
Cho, J., and Chong, Y. (2003). VIM-
and IMP-type metallo-β-lactamase-
producing Pseudomonas spp. and
Acinetobacter spp. in Korean hos-
pitals. Emerging
Infect. Dis. 9,
868–871.

Lee, K., Yum, J. H., Yong, D., Lee, H. M.,
Kim, H. D., Docquier, J. D., Rossolini,
G. M., and Chong, Y. (2005). Novel
acquired metallo-β-lactamase gene,
blaSIM-1, in a class 1 integron from
Acinetobacter baumannii clinical iso-
lates from Korea. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 49, 4485–4491.

Lee, M. F., Peng, C. F., Hsu, H. J.,
and Chen, Y. H. (2008). Molecu-
lar characterisation of the metallo-
β-lactamase genes
in imipenem-
resistant Gram-negative bacteria
from a university hospital in south-
ern Taiwan. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents
32, 475–480.

Levin, A. S., Levy, C. E., Man-
rique, A. E., Medeiros, E. A., and
Costa, S. F. (2003). Severe noso-
comial infections with imipenem-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii
treated with ampicillin/sulbactam.
Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 21, 58–62.
(2005).
New aminocoumarin antibiotics
from genetically engineered Strepto-
myces strains. Curr. Med. Chem. 12,
419–427.

Li, S. M., and Heide, L.

Li, X. Z., and Nikaido, H. (2009). Efﬂux-
mediated drug resistance in bacteria:
an update. Drugs 69, 1555–1623.

Liang, W., Liu, X. F., Huang, J., Zhu, D.
M., Li, J., and Zhang, J. (2011). Activ-
ities of colistin- and minocycline-
based combinations against exten-
sive drug resistant Acinetobacter bau-
mannii isolates from intensive care
unit patients. BMC Infect. Dis. 11,
109. doi:10.1186/1471-2334-11-109
Limansky, A. S., Mussi, M. A., and
Viale, A. M. (2002). Loss of a 29-
kilodalton outer membrane protein
in Acinetobacter baumannii is asso-
ciated with imipenem resistance. J.
Clin. Microbiol. 40, 4776–4778.

Lin, L., Ling, B. D., and Li, X. Z. (2009).
Distribution of the multidrug efﬂux
pump genes, adeABC, adeDE and
adeIJK, and class 1 integron genes
in multiple-antimicrobial-resistant
clinical
isolates of Acinetobacter
baumannii-Acinetobacter calcoaceti-
cus complex.
J. Antimicrob.
Agents 33, 27–32.

Int.

Lin,Y. C., Hsia, K. C., Chen,Y. C., Sheng,
W. H., Chang, S. C., Liao, M. H.,
and Li, S. Y. (2010). Genetic basis
of multidrug resistance in Acine-
tobacter clinical isolates in Taiwan.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54,
2078–2084.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 25

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

Livermore, D. M., Hope, R., Brick, G.,
Lillie, M., and Reynolds, R. (2008).
Non-susceptibility trends among
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and other
non-fermentative Gram-negative
bacteria
in
the UK and Ireland, 2001-06. J.
Antimicrob. Chemother. 62(Suppl.
2), ii55–ii63.

from bacteraemias

Loehfelm, T., Luke, N., and Campagnari,
A. (2008). Identiﬁcation and char-
acterization of an Acinetobacter bau-
mannii bioﬁlm-associated protein. J.
Bacteriol. 190, 1036–1044.

Lolans, K., Rice, T. W., Munoz-Price,
L. S., and Quinn,
J. P. (2006).
Multicity outbreak of carbapenem-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii
isolates producing the carbapene-
mase OXA-40. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 50, 2941–2945.

Lopes, B. S., Evans, B. A., and Amyes,
S. G. (2012). Disruption of
the
blaOXA-51-like gene by ISAba16
and activation of the blaOXA-58
gene leading to carbapenem resis-
tance in Acinetobacter baumannii
Ab244. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 67,
59–63.

López-Rojas, R., Docobo-Pérez, F.,
Pachón-Ibánez, M. E., de la Torre,
B. G., Fernández-Reyes, M., March,
C., Bengoechea, J. A., Andreu, D.,
Rivas, L., and Pachón, J. (2011a).
Efﬁcacy of cecropin A-melittin pep-
tides on a sepsis model of infection
by pan-resistant Acinetobacter bau-
mannii. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect.
Dis. 30, 1391–1398.

López-Rojas, R., Domínguez-Herrera,
J., McConnell, M. J., Docobo-Perez,
F., Smani, Y., Fernández-Reyes, M.,
Rivas, L., and Pachón, J. (2011b).
Impaired virulence and in vivo ﬁt-
ness of colistin-resistant Acinetobac-
ter baumannii. J. Infect. Dis. 203,
545–548.

López-Rojas, R., Jiménez-Mejías, M. E.,
Lepe, J. A., and Pachón, J. (2011c).
Acinetobacter baumannii resistant to
colistin alters its antibiotic resistance
proﬁle: a case report from Spain. J.
Infect. Dis. 204, 1147–1148.

Lu, P. L., Doumith, M., Livermore,
D. M., Chen, T. P., and Woodford,
N. (2009). Diversity of carbapenem
resistance mechanisms in Acineto-
bacter baumannii
from a Taiwan
hospital: spread of plasmid-borne
OXA-72 carbapenemase. J. Antimi-
crob. Chemother. 63, 641–647.

Magiorakos, A. P., Srinivasan, A., Carey,
R. B., Carmeli, Y., Falagas, M. E.,
Giske, C. G., Harbarth, S., Hindler, J.
F., Kahlmeter, G., Olsson-Liljequist,
B., Paterson, D. L., Rice, L. B.,
Stelling, J., Struelens, M. J., Vatopou-
los,A.,Weber, J. T., and Monnet, D. L.

(2012). Multidrug-resistant, exten-
sively drug-resistant and pandrug-
resistant bacteria: an international
expert proposal for interim standard
deﬁnitions for acquired resistance.
Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 18, 268–281.
Magnet, S., Courvalin, P., and Lambert,
T. (2001). Resistance-nodulation-
cell division-type
efﬂux pump
involved in aminoglycoside resis-
tance in Acinetobacter baumannii
strain BM4454. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 45, 3375–3380.

Maisetta, G., Batoni, G., Esin, S., Florio,
W., Bottai, D., Favilli, F., and Campa,
M. (2006).
In vitro bactericidal
activity of human beta-defensin 3
against multidrug-resistant noso-
comial strains. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 50, 806–809.

Mak, J. K., Kim, M. J., Pham, J., Tapsall,
J., and White, P. A. (2009). Antibiotic
resistance determinants in nosoco-
mial strains of multidrug-resistant
Acinetobacter baumannii. J. Antimi-
crob. Chemother. 63, 47–54.

Mammeri, H., Poirel, L., Mangeney, N.,
and Nordmann, P. (2003). Chromo-
somal integration of a cephalospori-
nase gene from Acinetobacter bau-
mannii
into Oligella urethralis as
a source of acquired resistance
to β-lactams. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 47, 1536–1542.

Mangoni, M. L., Maisetta, G., Di Luca,
M., Gaddi, L. M., Esin, S., Florio, W.,
Brancatisano, F. L., Barra, D., Campa,
M., and Batoni, G. (2008). Compara-
tive analysis of the bactericidal activ-
ities of amphibian peptide analogues
against multidrug-resistant nosoco-
mial bacterial strains. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 52, 85–91.

Marchand, I., Damier-Piolle, L., Cour-
valin, P., and Lambert, T. (2004).
Expression of the RND-type efﬂux
pump AdeABC in Acinetobacter bau-
mannii is regulated by the AdeRS
two-component system. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 48, 3298–3304.

Marqué, S., Poirel, L., Héritier, C., Brisse,
S., Blasco, M. D., Filip, R., Coman, G.,
Naas, T., and Nordmann, P. (2005).
Regional occurrence of plasmid-
mediated carbapenem-hydrolyzing
oxacillinase OXA-58 in Acinetobac-
ter spp. in Europe. J. Clin. Microbiol.
43, 4885–4888.

Marr,A. K., Gooderham,W. J., and Han-
cock, R. E. (2006). Antibacterial pep-
tides for therapeutic use: obstacles
and realistic outlook. Curr. Opin.
Pharmacol. 6, 468–472.

Martí, S., Fernández-Cuenca, F., Pas-
cual, A., Ribera, A., Rodríguez-Baño,
J., Bou, G., Miguel Cisneros, J.,
Pachón, J., Martínez-Martínez, L.,
and Vila, J. (2006). Prevalence of

the tetA and tetB genes as mech-
anisms of resistance to tetracycline
and minocycline in Acinetobacter
baumannii clinical isolates. Enferm.
Infecc. Microbiol. Clin. 24, 77–80.

Martí, S., Sánchez-Céspedes, J., Blasco,
M. D., Espinal, P., Ruiz, M., Alba,
V., and Vila, J. (2008a). Characteriza-
tion of the carbapenem-hydrolyzing
oxacillinase OXA-58 in an Acineto-
bacter phenon 6/ct13TU clinical iso-
late. Diagn. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 61,
468–470.

Martí, S., Sánchez-Céspedes, J., Blasco,
M. D., Ruiz, M., Espinal, P., Alba,
V., Fernández-Cuenca, F., Pascual,A.,
and Vila, J. (2008b). Characteriza-
tion of the carbapenem-hydrolyzing
oxacillinase OXA-58 in an Acineto-
bacter genospecies 3 clinical isolate.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 52,
2955–2958.

Mattick, J. S. (2002). Type IV pili
and twitching motility. Annu. Rev.
Microbiol. 56, 289–314.

Mazel, D. (2006). Integrons: agents of
bacterial evolution. Nat. Rev. Micro-
biol. 4, 608–620.

McBride, M. J. (2010). Shining a light
on an opportunistic pathogen. J.
Bacteriol. 192, 6325–6326.

McConnell, M. J., Domínguez-Herrera,
J., Smani, Y., López-Rojas, R.,
Docobo-Pérez, F., and Pachón, J.
(2011a). Vaccination with outer
membrane complexes elicits rapid
protective immunity to multidrug-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii.
Infect. Immun. 79, 518–526.

McConnell, M. J., Rumbo, C., Bou, G.,
and Pachon, J. (2011b). Outer mem-
brane vesicles as an acellular vac-
cine against Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. Vaccine 29, 5705–5710.

McKean, S. C., Davies, J. K., and Moore,
R. J. (2007). Expression of phospho-
lipase D, the major virulence factor
of Corynebacterium pseudotubercu-
losis, is regulated by multiple envi-
ronmental factors and plays a role
in macrophage death. Microbiology
153, 2203–2211.

Meng, H., and Kumar, K.

(2007).
Antimicrobial activity and protease
stability of peptides containing ﬂu-
orinated amino acids. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 129, 15615–15622.

Merino, M., Acosta, J., Poza, M., Sanz,
F., Beceiro, A., Chaves, F., and Bou,
G. (2010). OXA-24 carbapenemase
gene ﬂanked by XerC/XerD-like
recombination sites in different plas-
mids from different Acinetobacter
species isolated during a nosoco-
mial outbreak. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 54, 2724–2727.

Mihara, K., Tanabe, T., Yamakawa, Y.,
Funahashi, T., Nakao, H., Narimatsu,

S., and Yamamoto, S. (2004). Iden-
tiﬁcation and transcriptional orga-
nization of a gene cluster involved
in biosynthesis and transport of
acinetobactin, a siderophore pro-
duced by Acinetobacter baumannii
ATCC 19606T. Microbiology 150,
2587–2597.

Moffatt, J. H., Harper, M., Adler, B.,
Nation, R. L., Li, J., and Boyce,
J. D. (2011).
Insertion sequence
ISAba11 is involved in colistin resis-
tance and loss of lipopolysaccha-
ride in Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 55,
3022–3024.

Moffatt, J. H., Harper, M., Harrison, P.,
Hale, J. D., Vinogradov, E., Seemann,
T., Henry, R., Crane, B., St Michael,
F., Cox, A. D., Adler, B., Nation, R.
L., Li, J., and Boyce, J. D. (2010).
Colistin resistance in Acinetobacter
baumannii is mediated by complete
loss of lipopolysaccharide produc-
tion. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
54, 4971–4977.

Molhoek, E. M., van Dijk, A., Veld-
huizen, E.
J., Haagsman, H. P.,
and Bikker, F. J. (2011). Improved
proteolytic
chicken
cathelicidin-2 derived peptides by
d-amino acid substitutions and
cyclization. Peptides 32, 875–880.

stability of

Morgan, D. J., Weisenberg, S. A., Augen-
braun, M. H., Calfee, D. P., Cur-
rie, B. P., Furuya, E. Y., Holzman,
R., Montecalvo, M. C., Phillips, M.,
Polsky, B., and Sepkowitz, K. A.
(2009). Multidrug-resistant Acine-
tobacter baumannii
in New York
City – 10 years into the epidemic.
Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 30,
196–197.

Motsch, S., Schmitt, R., Avila, P., de
la Cruz, F., Ward, E., and Grinsted,
J. (1985). Junction sequences gen-
erated by ‘one-ended transposition.’
Nucleic Acids Res. 13, 3335–3342.

Moubareck, C., Bremont, S., Con-
roy, M. C., Courvalin, P., and
Lambert, T.
(2009). GES-11, a
novel integron-associated GES vari-
ant
in Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 53,
3579–3581.

Mussi, M. A., Limansky, A. S., and Viale,
A. M. (2005). Acquisition of resis-
tance to carbapenems in multidrug-
resistant clinical strains of Acine-
tobacter baumannii: natural inser-
tional inactivation of a gene encod-
ing a member of a novel family of
β-barrel outer membrane proteins.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49,
1432–1440.

Naas, T., Bogaerts, P., Bauraing, C.,
Degheldre, Y., Glupczynski, Y., and
Nordmann, P. (2006a). Emergence

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 26

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

of PER and VEB extended-spectrum
β-lactamases in Acinetobacter bau-
mannii
in Belgium. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 58, 178–182.

Naas, T., Coignard, B., Carbonne, A.,
Blanckaert, K., Bajolet, O., Bernet,
C., Verdeil, X., Astagneau, P., Des-
enclos, J. C., and Nordmann, P.
(2006b). VEB-1 extended-spectrum
β-lactamase-producing Acinetobac-
ter baumannii, France. Emerging
Infect. Dis. 12, 1214–1222.

(2007).

Poyart, C.,

Naas, T., Namdari, F., Reglier-Poupet,
and Nord-
Panresistant
β-lactamase
Acinetobacter
from New York City.
60,

H.,
mann, P.
extended-spectrum
SHV-5-producing
baumannii
J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
1174–1176.

Naas, T., Poirel, L., and Nordmann, P.
(2008). Minor extended-spectrum
β-lactamases. Clin. Microbiol. Infect.
14(Suppl. 1), 42–52.

Nagano, N., Nagano, Y., Cordevant, C.,
Shibata, N., and Arakawa, Y. (2004).
Nosocomial transmission of CTX-
M-2 β-lactamase-producing Acine-
tobacter baumannii
in a neuro-
surgery ward. J. Clin. Microbiol. 42,
3978–3984.

Naiemi, N. A., Duim, B., Savelkoul, P. H.,
Spanjaard, L., de Jonge, E., Bart, A.,
Vandenbroucke-Grauls, C. M., and
de Jong, M. D. (2005). Widespread
transfer of resistance genes between
bacterial species in an intensive care
unit: implications for hospital epi-
demiology. J. Clin. Microbiol. 43,
4862–4864.

Navia, M. M., Ruiz, J., and Vila, J.
(2002). Characterization of an inte-
gron carrying a new class D β-
lactamase (OXA-37) in Acinetobacter
baumannii. Microb. Drug Resist. 8,
261–265.

Nemec, A., Dolzani, L., Brisse, S., van
den Broek, P., and Dijkshoorn, L.
(2004). Diversity of aminoglycoside-
resistance genes and their associa-
tion with class 1 integrons among
strains of pan-European Acinetobac-
ter baumannii clones. J. Med. Micro-
biol. 53, 1233–1240.

Nemec, A., Krizova, L., Maixnerova, M.,
van der Reijden, T. J., Deschaght,
P., Passet, V., Vaneechoutte, M.,
Brisse, S., and Dijkshoorn, L. (2011).
Genotypic and phenotypic char-
acterization of
the Acinetobacter
calcoaceticus-Acinetobacter bauman-
nii complex with the proposal of
Acinetobacter pittii sp. nov. (for-
merly Acinetobacter genomic species
3) and Acinetobacter nosocomialis
sp. nov.
(formerly Acinetobacter
genomic species 13TU). Res. Micro-
biol. 162, 393–404.

Nemec,A., Maixnerova, M., van der Rei-
jden, T. J., van den Broek, P. J., and
Dijkshoorn, L. (2007). Relationship
between the AdeABC efﬂux system
gene content, netilmicin susceptibil-
ity and multidrug resistance in a
genotypically diverse collection of
Acinetobacter baumannii strains. J.
Antimicrob. Chemother. 60, 483–489.
Nigro, S. J., Post, V., and Hall, R.
M. (2011a). Aminoglycoside resis-
tance in multiply antibiotic-resistant
Acinetobacter baumannii belonging
to global clone 2 from Australian
hospitals. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
66, 1504–1509.

Nigro, S. J., Post, V., and Hall, R. M.
(2011b). The multiresistant Acineto-
bacter baumannii European clone I
type strain RUH875 (A297) carries a
genomic antibiotic resistance island
AbaR21, plasmid pRAY and a cluster
containing ISAba1-sul2-CR2-strB-
strA. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 66,
1928–1930.

Niu, C., Clemmer, K. M., Bonomo, R.
A., and Rather, P. N. (2008). Iso-
lation and characterization of an
autoinducer synthase from Acineto-
bacter baumannii. J. Bacteriol. 190,
3386–3392.

Nordmann, P., Couard, J. P., Sansot, D.,
and Poirel, L. (2012). Emergence of
an autochthonous and community-
acquired NDM-1-producing Kleb-
siella pneumoniae in Europe. Clin.
Infect. Dis. 54, 150–151.

Nordmann, P., Poirel, L., Toleman, M.
A., and Walsh, T. R. (2011). Does
broad-spectrum β-lactam resistance
due to NDM-1 herald the end of
the antibiotic era for treatment of
infections caused by Gram-negative
bacteria? J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
66, 689–692.

Ostorhazi, E., Holub, M. C., Rozgonyi,
F., Harmos, F., Cassone, M., Wade, J.
D., and Otvos, L. Jr. (2011). Broad-
spectrum antimicrobial efﬁcacy of
peptide A3-APO in mouse models
of multidrug-resistant wound and
lung infections cannot be explained
by in vitro activity against
the
pathogens involved. Int. J. Antimi-
crob. Agents 37, 480–484.

Ostorhazi, E., Rozgonyi, F., Sztodola,
A., Harmos, F., Kovalszky, I., Szabo,
D., Knappe, D., Hoffmann, R., Cas-
sone, M., Wade, J. D., Bonomo,
R. A., and Otvos, L. Jr. (2010).
Preclinical
intra-
muscularly administered peptide
A3-APO over
existing therapies
in Acinetobacter baumannii wound
infections. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
65, 2416–2422.

advantages of

Ozbek, B., and Senturk, A. (2010).
Postantibiotic effects of tigecycline,

colistin sulfate, and levoﬂoxacin
alone or tigecycline-colistin sulfate
and tigecycline-levoﬂoxacin combi-
nations against Acinetobacter bau-
mannii. Chemotherapy 56, 466–471.
Pachón-Ibánez, M. E., Docobo-Peréz,
F., López-Rojas, R., Domínguez-
Herrera, J., Jiménez-Mejias, M. E.,
García-Curiel, A., Pichardo, C.,
Jiménez, L., and Pachón, J. (2010).
Efﬁcacy of rifampin and its combi-
nations with imipenem, sulbactam,
and colistin in experimental models
of infection caused by imipenem-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54,
1165–1172.

F., Docobo-Pérez,

Pachón-Ibáñez, M. E., Fernández-
Cuenca,
F.,
Pachón, J., and Pascual, A. (2006).
Prevention of rifampicin resistance
in Acinetobacter baumannii
in an
experimental pneumonia murine
model, using rifampicin associated
with imipenem or sulbactam.
J.
Antimicrob. Chemother. 58, 689–692.
Pantophlet, R., Brade, L., Dijkshoorn, L.,
and Brade, H. (1998). Speciﬁcity of
rabbit antisera against lipopolysac-
charide of Acinetobacter.
J. Clin.
Microbiol. 36, 1245–1250.

Papa, A., Koulourida, V., and Souliou,
E. (2009). Molecular epidemiology
of carbapenem-resistant Acinetobac-
ter baumannii in a newly established
Greek hospital. Microb. Drug Resist.
15, 257–260.

Park, Y. K.,

Jung, S.

I., Park, K.
H., Cheong, H. S., Peck, K. R.,
Song, J. H., and Ko, K. S. (2009).
Independent emergence of colistin-
resistant Acinetobacter spp. isolates
from Korea. Diagn. Microbiol. Infect.
Dis. 64, 43–51.

Pasterán, F., Rapoport, M., Petroni, A.,
Faccone, D., Corso, A., Galas, M.,
Vázquez, M., Procopio, A., Toku-
moto, M., and Cagnoni, V. (2006).
Emergence of PER-2 and VEB-1a
in Acinetobacter baumannii strains
in the Americas. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 50, 3222–3224.

Paton, R., Miles, R. S., Hood, J., Amyes,
S. G., Miles, R. S., and Amyes,
S. G. (1993). ARI 1: β-lactamase-
mediated imipenem resistance in
Acinetobacter baumannii.
J.
Antimicrob. Agents 2, 81–87.

Int.

Payne, D. J., Gwynn, M. N., Holmes,
D. J., and Pompliano, D. L. (2007).
Drugs for bad bugs: confronting the
challenges of antibacterial discovery.
Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 6, 29–40.

J. M.,

J., Bell,

Peleg, A. Y., Franklin, C., Walters,
L.
and Spel-
man, D. W. (2006). OXA-58 and
IMP-4 carbapenem-hydrolyzing β-
lactamases in an Acinetobacter junii

blood culture isolate from Australia.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 50,
399–400.

Peleg, A. Y., Seifert, H., and Paterson, D.
L. (2008). Acinetobacter baumannii:
emergence of a successful pathogen.
Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 21, 538–582.

Perez, F., Ponce-Terashima, R., Adams,
M. D., and Bonomo, R. A. (2011).
Are we closing in on an “elusive
enemy?” The current status of our
battle with Acinetobacter baumannii.
Virulence 2, 86–90.

Pfeifer, Y., Wilharm, G., Zander, E.,
Wichelhaus, T. A., Gottig, S., Hun-
feld, K. P., Seifert, H., Witte, W.,
and Higgins, P. G. (2011). Molecular
characterization of blaNDM-1 in an
Acinetobacter baumannii strain iso-
lated in Germany in 2007. J. Antimi-
crob. Chemother. 66, 1998–2001.

Piddock, L. J. (2006). Clinically relevant
chromosomally encoded multidrug
resistance efﬂux pumps in bacteria.
Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 19, 382–402.

Pitart, C., Solé, M., Roca, I., Fàbrega, A.,
Vila, J., and Marco, F. (2011). First
outbreak of a plasmid-mediated
carbapenem-hydrolyzing OXA-48
β-lactamase in Klebsiella pneumo-
niae in Spain. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 55, 4398–4401.

Poirel, L., Cabanne, L., Vahaboglu,
(2005a).
H., and Nordmann, P.
Genetic environment and expres-
sion of the extended-spectrum β-
lactamase blaPER-1 gene in Gram-
negative bacteria. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 49, 1708–1713.

Poirel, L., Marqué, S., Héritier, C.,
Segonds, C., Chabanon, G., and
Nordmann, P.
(2005b). OXA-
58, a novel class D β-lactamase
involved in resistance to carbapen-
ems
in Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49,
202–208.

Poirel, L., Corvec, S., Rapoport, M.,
Mugnier, P., Petroni, A., Pasteran,
F., Faccone, D., Galas, M., Dru-
geon, H., Cattoir, V., and Nord-
mann, P.
Identiﬁcation
of the novel narrow-spectrum β-
lactamase SCO-1 in Acinetobacter
spp.
from Argentina. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 51, 2179–2184.

(2007).

Poirel, L., Dortet, L., Bernabeu, S., and
Nordmann, P. (2011a). Genetic fea-
tures of blaNDM-1-positive Enter-
obacteriaceae. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 44, 5403–5407.

Poirel, L., Schrenzel, J., Cherkaoui, A.,
Bernabeu, S., Renzi, G., and Nord-
mann, P. (2011b). Molecular analysis
of NDM-1-producing enterobacte-
rial isolates from Geneva, Switzer-
land. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 66,
1730–1733.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 27

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

Poirel, L., Figueiredo, S., Cattoir, V.,
Carattoli, A., and Nordmann, P.
(2008a). Acinetobacter radioresistens
as a silent source of carbapenem
resistance for Acinetobacter
spp.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 52,
1252–1256.

Poirel, L., Mansour, W., Bouallegue,
(2008b).
O., and Nordmann, P.
Acineto-
Carbapenem-resistant
bacter baumannii
from
Tunisia producing the OXA-58-like
carbapenem-hydrolyzing
oxacilli-
nase OXA-97. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 52, 1613–1617.

isolates

J.,

Poirel, L., Lagrutta, E., Taylor, P.,
Pham,
and Nordmann, P.
(2010). Emergence of metallo-
β-lactamase
NDM-1-producing
multidrug-resistant Escherichia coli
in Australia. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 54, 4914–4916.

Poirel, L., Lebessi, E., Héritier, C.,
Patsoura, A., Foustoukou, M., and
Nordmann, P.
(2006). Nosoco-
mial
spread of OXA-58-positive
carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter
baumannii isolates in a paediatric
hospital in Greece. Clin. Microbiol.
Infect. 12, 1138–1141.

Poirel, L., Menuteau, O., Agoli, N., Cat-
toen, C., and Nordmann, P. (2003).
Outbreak of extended-spectrum β-
lactamase VEB-1-producing isolates
of Acinetobacter baumannii
in a
French hospital. J. Clin. Microbiol.
41, 3542–3547.

Poirel, L., Mugnier, P. D., Toleman,
M. A., Walsh, T. R., Rapoport,
M. J., Petroni, A., and Nordmann,
P. (2009).
ISCR2, another vehi-
cle for blaVEB gene acquisition.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 53,
4940–4943.

Poirel, L., and Nordmann, P. (2006a).
Carbapenem resistance in Acineto-
bacter baumannii: mechanisms and
epidemiology. Clin. Microbiol. Infect.
12, 826–836.

acquisition
the

Poirel, L., and Nordmann, P. (2006b).
the origin
Genetic structures at
expression
of
and
carbapenem-hydrolyzing
of
blaOXA-58
oxacillinase
in
baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 50,
1442–1448.

gene
Acinetobacter

Post, V., and Hall, R. M. (2009). AbaR5,
a large multiple-antibiotic resis-
tance region found in Acinetobac-
ter baumannii. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 53, 2667–2671.

Post, V., White, P. A., and Hall, R.
M. (2010). Evolution of AbaR-type
genomic resistance islands in mul-
tiply antibiotic-resistant Acineto-
bacter baumannii.
J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 65, 1162–1170.

Potron, A., Munoz-Price, L. S., Nord-
mann, P., Cleary, T., and Poirel, L.
(2011). Genetic features of CTX-
M-15-producing Acinetobacter bau-
mannii
from Haiti. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 55, 5946–5948.

Potron, A., Poirel, L., Croize,

J.,
Chanteperdrix, V., and Nordmann,
P. (2009). Genetic and biochem-
ical characterization of
the ﬁrst
extended-spectrum CARB-type β-
lactamase, RTG-4, from Acinetobac-
ter baumannii. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 53, 3010–3016.

J., and Tsakris, A.

Pournaras, S., Markogiannakis, A.,
Ikonomidis, A., Kondyli, L., Bethi-
mouti, K., Maniatis, A. N., Legakis,
N.
(2006).
Outbreak of multiple clones of
imipenem-resistant
Acinetobacter
baumannii isolates expressing OXA-
58 carbapenemase in an intensive
care unit. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
57, 557–561.

Principe, L., D’Arezzo, S., Capone, A.,
Petrosillo, N., and Visca, P. (2009).
In vitro activity of tigecycline in
combination with various antimi-
crobials against multidrug resistant
Acinetobacter baumannii. Ann. Clin.
Microbiol. Antimicrob. 21, 8–18.

Qi, C., Malczynski, M., Parker, M.,
and Scheetz, M. H. (2008). Char-
acterization of genetic diversity of
carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter
baumannii clinical strains collected
from 2004 to 2007. J. Clin. Microbiol.
46, 1106–1109.

Quale, J., Bratu, S., Landman, D., and
Heddurshetti, R. (2003). Molecular
epidemiology and mechanisms of
carbapenem resistance in Acineto-
bacter baumannii endemic in New
York City. Clin.
Infect. Dis. 37,
214–220.

Queenan, A. M., and Bush, K. (2007).
the versatile β-
Carbapenemases:
lactamases. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 20,
440–458.

Quinteira, S., Grosso, F., Ramos, H., and
Peixe, L. (2007). Molecular epidemi-
ology of imipenem-resistant Acine-
tobacter haemolyticus and Acine-
tobacter baumannii
isolates carry-
ing plasmid-mediated OXA-40 from
a Portuguese hospital. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 51, 3465–3466.

Rajamohan, G., Srinivasan, V. B., and
Gebreyes, W. A. (2010). Molecular
and functional characterization of
a novel efﬂux pump, AmvA, medi-
ating antimicrobial and disinfectant
resistance in Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 65,
1919–1925.

Ramírez, M. S., Bello, H., González
and
(2010a). Tn7::In2-8

Rocha, G., Márquez, C.,
Centrón, D.

dispersion in multidrug resistant
isolates of Acinetobacter baumannii
from Chile. Rev. Argent. Microbiol.
42, 138–140.

Ramírez, M. S., Piñeiro, S., and Centrón,
D. (2010b). Novel
insights about
class 2 integrons from experimental
and genomic epidemiology. Antimi-
crob. Agents Chemother. 54, 699–706.
Rasko, D. A., and Sperandio, V. (2010).
Anti-virulence strategies to combat
bacteria-mediated disease. Nat. Rev.
Drug Discov. 9, 117–128.

Ravasi, P., Limansky, A. S., Rodriguez,
R. E., Viale, A. M., and Mussi, M. A.
(2011). ISAba825, a functional inser-
tion sequence modulating genomic
plasticity and blaOXA-58 expres-
sion in Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 55,
917–920.

Ribera, A., Roca, I., Ruiz, J., Gibert, I.,
and Vila, J. (2003a). Partial charac-
terization of a transposon contain-
ing the tet(A) determinant in a clin-
ical isolate of Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 52,
477–480.

Ribera, A., Ruiz, J., and Vila, J. (2003b).
Presence of the Tet M determinant
in a clinical isolate of Acinetobac-
ter baumannii. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 47, 2310–2312.

Riccio, M. L., Franceschini, N., Boschi,
L., Caravelli, B., Cornaglia, G.,
Fontana, R., Amicosante, G., and
Rossolini, G. M. (2000). Character-
ization of the metallo-β-lactamase
determinant of Acinetobacter bau-
mannii AC-54/97 reveals the exis-
tence of blaIMP allelic variants car-
ried by gene cassettes of differ-
ent phylogeny. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 44, 1229–1235.

Roberts, A. P., Chandler, M., Courvalin,
P., Guedon, G., Mullany, P., Pem-
broke, T., Rood, J. I., Smith, C. J.,
Summers,A. O., Tsuda, M., and Berg,
D. E. (2008). Revised nomenclature
for transposable genetic elements.
Plasmid 60, 167–173.

Robledo, I. E., Aquino, E. E., Santé, M. I.,
Santana, J. L., Otero, D. M., León, C.
F., and Vázquez, G. J. (2010). Detec-
tion of KPC in Acinetobacter spp.
in Puerto Rico. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 54, 1354–1357.

Roca, I., Espinal, P., Marti, S., and
Vila, J. (2011). First identiﬁcation
and characterization of an AdeABC-
like efﬂux pump in Acinetobacter
genomospecies 13TU. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 55, 1285–1286.

Roca, I., Marti, S., Espinal, P., Mar-
I., and Vila,
tinez, P., Gibert,
facil-
J.
itator
efﬂux pump
associated with chloramphenicol

(2009). CraA, a major

superfamily

resistance in Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
53, 4013–4014.

Rodríguez-Baño, J., Martí, S., Soto, S.,
Fernández-Cuenca, F., Miguel Cis-
neros, J., Pachón, J., Pascual, A.,
Martínez-Martínez, L., McQueary,
C., Actis, L., Vila, J., and Spanish
Group for the Study of Nosocomial
Infections (GEIH). (2008). Bioﬁlm
formation in Acinetobacter bauman-
nii: associated features and clinical
implications. Clin. Microbiol. Infect.
14, 276–278.

Rodríguez-Hernández, M. J., Cuberos,
L., Pichardo, C., Caballero, F. J.,
Moreno, I., Jiménez-Mejías, M. E.,
García-Curiel, A., and Pachón, J.
(2001). Sulbactam efﬁcacy in exper-
imental models caused by suscep-
tible and intermediate Acinetobac-
ter baumannii strains. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 47, 479–482.

Rodríguez-Hernández, M. J., Saugar, J.,
Docobo-Peréz, F., de la Torre, B.
G., Pachón-Ibánez, M. E., García-
Curiel, A., Fernández-Cuenca, F.,
Andreu, D., Rivas, L., and Pachón,
J. (2006). Studies on the antimicro-
bial activity of cecropin A-melittin
hybrid peptides in colistin-resistant
clinical isolates of Acinetobacter bau-
mannii. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
58, 95–100.

Rolain, J. M., Roch, A., Castanier, M.,
Papazian, L., and Raoult, D. (2011).
Acinetobacter baumannii resistant to
colistin with impaired virulence: a
case report from France. J. Infect. Dis.
204, 1146–1147.

Rose, A. (2010). TnAbaR1: a novel Tn7-
related transposon in Acinetobacter
baumannii that contributes to the
accumulation and dissemination of
large repertoires of resistance genes.
Biosci. Horizons 3, 40–48.

Rossolini, G. M., and Mantengoli, E.
(2008). Antimicrobial resistance in
Europe and its potential impact on
empirical therapy. Clin. Microbiol.
Infect. 14(Suppl. 6), 2–8.

Ruiz, M., Marti, S., Fernandez-Cuenca,
F., Pascual, A., and Vila, J. (2007).
High prevalence of carbapenem-
hydrolysing oxacillinases
in epi-
demiologically related and unrelated
Acinetobacter baumannii clinical iso-
lates in Spain. Clin. Microbiol. Infect.
13, 1192–1198.

Rumbo, C., Fernandez-Moreira, E.,
Merino, M., Poza, M., Mendez, J. A.,
Soares, N. C., Mosquera, A., Chaves,
F., and Bou, G. (2011). Horizontal
transfer of the OXA-24 carbapene-
mase gene via outer membrane vesi-
cles: a new mechanism of dissem-
ination of carbapenem resistance
genes in Acinetobacter baumannii.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 28

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 55,
3084–3090.

Russo, T. A., Luke, N. R., Beanan, J. M.,
Olson, R., Sauberan, S. L., MacDon-
ald, U., Schultz, L. W., Umland, T. C.,
and Campagnari, A. A. (2010). The
K1 capsular polysaccharide of Acine-
tobacter baumannii strain 307-0294
is a major virulence factor. Infect.
Immun. 78, 3993–4000.

Russo, T. A., MacDonald, U., Beanan,
J. M., Olson, R., MacDonald, I.
J., Sauberan, S. L., Luke, N. R.,
Schultz, L. W., and Umland, T.
C. (2009). Penicillin-binding pro-
tein 7/8 contributes to the survival
of Acinetobacter baumannii in vitro
and in vivo.
Infect. Dis. 199,
513–521.

J.

Russo, T. A., Page, M. G., Beanan, J.
M., Olson, R., Hujer, A. M., Hujer,
K. M., Jacobs, M., Bajaksouzian,
S., Endimiani, A., and Bonomo, R.
A. (2011). In vivo and in vitro
activity of the siderophore mono-
sulfactam BAL30072 against Acine-
tobacter baumannii. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 66, 867–873.

Ruzin, A., Keeney, D., and Bradford, P.
A. (2007). AdeABC multidrug efﬂux
pump is associated with decreased
susceptibility to tigecycline in Acine-
tobacter
calcoaceticus-Acinetobacter
baumannii complex. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 59, 1001–1004.

Sarkar, S., and Chakraborty, R. (2008).
Quorum sensing in metal tolerance
of Acinetobacter junii BB1A is associ-
ated with bioﬁlm production. FEMS
Microbiol. Lett. 282, 160–165.

Sauer, F. G., Mulvey, M. A., Schilling,
J. D., Martinez, J. J., and Hultgren,
S. J. (2000). Bacterial pili: molecular
mechanisms of pathogenesis. Curr.
Opin. Microbiol. 3, 65–72.

Saugar,

J. M., Alarcón, T., López-
Hernández, S., López-Brea, M.,
Andreu, D., and Rivas, L. (2002).
Activities of polymyxin B and
cecropin A-,melittin peptide CA(1-
8)M(1-18) against a multiresistant
strain of Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 46,
875–878.

Sauvage, E., Kerff, F., Terrak, M., Ayala,
J. A., and Charlier, P. (2008). The
penicillin-binding proteins: struc-
ture and role in peptidoglycan
biosynthesis. FEMS Microbiol. Rev.
32, 234–258.

Schild, S., Nelson, E. J., and Camilli,
A. (2008). Immunization with Vib-
rio cholerae outer membrane vesicles
induces protective
immunity in
mice. Infect. Immun. 76, 4554–4563.
J.
(1998). Molecular
epidemiol-
ogy of quinolone resistance in

J., and Towner, K.

Seward, R.

Acinetobacter spp. Clin. Microbiol.
Infect. 4, 248–254.

Shaikh, F., Spence, R. P., Levi, K.,
Ou, H. Y., Deng, Z., Towner, K. J.,
and Rajakumar, K. (2009). ATPase
genes of diverse multidrug-resistant
Acinetobacter baumannii isolates fre-
quently harbour integrated DNA. J.
Antimicrob. Chemother. 63, 260–264.
Shakil, S., and Khan, A. U. (2010).
Detection of CTX-M-15-producing
and carbapenem-resistant Acine-
tobacter baumannii
from
urine from an Indian hospital. J.
Chemother. 22, 324–327.

strains

Siguier, P., Perochon, J., Lestrade, L.,
Mahillon,
J., and Chandler, M.
(2006). ISﬁnder: the reference cen-
tre for bacterial insertion sequences.
Nucleic Acids Res. 34, D32–D36.

Siroy, A., Cosette, P., Seyer, D., Lemaitre-
Guillier, C., Vallenet, D., Van Dorsse-
laer, A., Boyer-Mariotte, S., Jouenne,
T., and Dé, E. (2006). Global com-
parison of
the membrane sub-
proteomes between a multidrug-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii
strain and a reference strain. J. Pro-
teome Res. 5, 3385–3398.

Siroy, A., Molle, V., Lemaitre-Guillier,
C., Vallenet, D., Pestel-Caron, M.,
Cozzone, A. J., Jouenne, T., and Dé,
E. (2005). Channel formation by
CarO, the carbapenem resistance-
associated outer membrane pro-
tein of Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49,
4876–4883.
Smith, C. A.,

and Baker, E. N.
(2002). Aminoglycoside antibiotic
resistance by enzymatic deactiva-
tion. Curr. Drug Targets Infect. Dis-
ord. 2, 143–160.

Smith, M. G., Des Etages, S. G., and Sny-
der, M. (2004). Microbial synergy via
an ethanol-triggered pathway. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 24, 3874–3884.

Smith, M. G., Gianoulis, T. A., Pukatzki,
S., Mekalanos, J. J., Ornston, L. N.,
Gerstein, M., and Snyder, M. (2007).
New insights into Acinetobacter bau-
mannii pathogenesis revealed by
high-density pyrosequencing and
transposon mutagenesis. Genes Dev.
21, 601–614.

Snitkin, E. S., Zelazny, A. M., Montero,
C. I., Stock, F., Mijares, L., Program,
N. C. S., Murray, P. R., and Segre, J.
A. (2011). Genome-wide recombi-
nation drives diversiﬁcation of epi-
demic strains of Acinetobacter bau-
mannii. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
108, 13758–13763.

Solé, M., Pitart, C., Roca, I., Fàbrega,
A., Salvador, P., Muñoz, L., Oliveira,
I., Gascón, J., Marco, F., and Vila,
J. (2011). First description of an
Escherichia coli
strain producing

NDM-1 carbapenemase in Spain.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 55,
4402–4404.

Spence, R. P., and Towner, K. J. (2003).
Frequencies and mechanisms of
resistance to moxiﬂoxacin in noso-
comial isolates of Acinetobacter bau-
mannii. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
52, 687–690.

the SMR family of

Srinivasan, V. B., Rajamohan, G., and
Gebreyes, W. A.
(2009a). Role
of AbeS, a novel efﬂux pump
of
trans-
porters, in resistance to antimicro-
bial agents in Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
53, 5312–5316.

Srinivasan, V. B., Rajamohan, G., Pan-
choli, P., Stevenson, K., Tadesse,
D., Patchanee, P., Marcon, M., and
Gebreyes, W. A. (2009b). Genetic
relatedness and molecular character-
ization of multidrug resistant Acine-
tobacter baumannii isolated in cen-
tral Ohio, USA. Ann. Clin. Microbiol.
Antimicrob. 8, 21.

Stanley, N., and Lazazzera, B. A.
(2004). Environmental signals and
regulatory pathways that inﬂuence
bioﬁlm formation. Mol. Microbiol.
52, 917–924.

Su, X. Z., Chen, J., Mizushima, T.,
Kuroda, T., and Tsuchiya, T. (2005).
AbeM, an H+-coupled Acineto-
bacter baumannii multidrug efﬂux
pump belonging to the MATE family
of transporters. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 49, 4362–4364.

Sutherland,

I.

(2001).
a

Bioﬁlm
exopolysaccharides:
strong
and sticky framework. Microbiology
147, 3–9.

Taneja, N., Singh, G., Singh, M., and
Sharma, M. (2011). Emergence of
tigecycline & colistin resistant Acine-
tobacter baumanii in patients with
complicated urinary tract infections
in north India. Indian J. Med. Res.
133, 681–684.

Tian, G. B., Adams-Haduch, J. M., Bog-
danovich, T., Pasculle, A. W., Quinn,
J. P., Wang, H. N., and Doi, Y. (2011).
Identiﬁcation of diverse OXA-40
group carbapenemases, including a
novel variant, OXA-160, from Acine-
tobacter baumannii in Pennsylvania.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 55,
429–432.

Toleman, M. A., Bennett, P. M., and
Walsh, T. R. (2006). ISCR elements:
novel gene-capturing systems of the
21st century? Microbiol. Mol. Biol.
Rev. 70, 296–316.

Tomaras, A., Dorsey, C., Edelmann, R.,
and Actis, L. (2003). Attachment
to and bioﬁlm formation on abi-
otic surfaces by Acinetobacter bau-
mannii:
involvement of a novel

chaperone-usher pili assembly sys-
tem. Microbiology 149, 3473–3484.

Towner, K. J. (2009). Acinetobacter: an
old friend, but a new enemy. J. Hosp.
Infect. 73, 355–363.

Towner, K. J., Gee, T., and Boswell,
T. (2002). An unwanted import
to the UK: a carbapenem-resistant
clinical
isolate of Acinetobacter
baumannii producing metallo-β-
lactamase. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
50, 1092–1093.

Tsakris, A., Ikonomidis, A., Poulou,
A., Spanakis, N., Vrizas, D., Diomi-
dous, M., Pournaras, S., and Markou,
F. (2008). Clusters of
imipenem-
resistant Acinetobacter baumannii
clones producing different
car-
bapenemases in an intensive care
unit. Clin. Microbiol.
Infect. 14,
588–594.

Tsakris, A., Ikonomidis, A., Pournaras,
S., Tzouvelekis, L. S., Soﬁanou, D.,
Legakis, N. J., and Maniatis, A. N.
(2006). VIM-1 metallo-β-lactamase
in Acinetobacter baumannii. Emerg-
ing Infect. Dis. 12, 981–983.

Turton, J. F., Ward, M. E., Wood-
ford, N., Kaufmann, M. E., Pike,
R., Livermore, D. M., and Pitt,
T. L. (2006). The role of ISAba1
in expression of OXA carbapene-
mase genes in Acinetobacter bau-
mannii. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 258,
72–77.

Urban, C., Go, E., Mariano, N., and
Rahal, J. J. (1995). Interaction of sul-
bactam, clavulanic acid and tazobac-
tam with penicillin-binding pro-
teins of imipenem-resistant and -
susceptible Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 125,
193–197.

Vahaboglu, H., Ozturk, R., Aygun,
G., Coskunkan, F., Yaman, A.,
Kaygusuz, A., Leblebicioglu, H.,
Balik, I., Aydin, K., and Otkun,
M. (1997). Widespread detection
of PER-1-type extended-spectrum
β-lactamases
among nosocomial
Pseudomonas
Acinetobacter
and
in Turkey: a
aeruginosa isolates
nationwide multicenter
study.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 41,
2265–2269.

Valentine, S. C., Contreras, D., Tan,
S., Real, L. J., Chu, S., and Xu, H.
H. (2008). Phenotypic and molec-
ular characterization of Acinetobac-
ter baumannii clinical isolates from
nosocomial outbreaks in Los Ange-
les County, California. J. Clin. Micro-
biol. 46, 2499–2507.

Vallenet, D., Nordmann, P., Barbe, V.,
Poirel, L., Mangenot, S., Bataille, E.,
Dossat, C., Gas, S., Kreimeyer, A.,
Lenoble, P., Oztas, S., Poulain, J.,
Segurens, B., Robert, C., Abergel, C.,

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 29

Roca et al.

The Acinetobacter baumannii oxymoron

Claverie, J. M., Raoult, D., Medigue,
C., Weissenbach, J., and Cruveiller,
S. (2008). Comparative analysis of
Acinetobacters: three genomes for
three lifestyles. PLoS ONE 3, e1805.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001805

Vidal, R., Domínguez, M., Urrutia, H.,
Bello, H., González, G., García, A.,
and Zemelman, R. (1996). Bioﬁlm
formation by Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. Microbios 86, 49–58.

Vila,

Vila, J., Martí, S., and Sánchez-Céspedes,
(2007). Porins, efﬂux pumps
J.
and multidrug resistance in Acine-
tobacter baumannii. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 59, 1210–1215.
J., Navia, M., Ruiz,

J., and
Casals, C. (1997a). Cloning and
nucleotide sequence analysis of a
gene encoding an OXA-derived β-
lactamase in Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
41, 2757–2759.

Vila, J., Ruiz, J., Goni, P., and Jimenez
de Anta, T. (1997b). Quinolone-
resistance mutations in the topoi-
somerase IV parC gene of Acine-
tobacter baumannii. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 39, 757–762.

Vila,

J., Ruiz,

J., Goni, P., Mar-
cos, A., and Jimenez de Anta, T.
(1995). Mutation in the gyrA gene
of quinolone-resistant clinical iso-
lates of Acinetobacter baumannii.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 39,
1201–1203.

Vila, J., Sánchez-Céspedes, J., Sierra, J.
M., Piqueras, M., Nicolás, E., Freixas,
J., and Giralt, E. (2006). Antibacterial
evaluation of a collection of nor-
ﬂoxacin and ciproﬂoxacin deriva-
tives against multiresistant bacteria.
Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 28, 19–24.
Vila-Farrés, X., García de la Maria, C.,
López-Rojas, R., Pachón, J., Giralt,
E. and Vila, J. (2012). In vitro activ-
ity of several antimicrobial pep-
tides against colistin-susceptible and
colistin-resistant Acinetobacter bau-
mannii. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 18,
383–387.

Vincent, J. L., Rello, J., Marshall, J.,
Silva, E., Anzueto, A., Martin, C.
D., Moreno, R., Lipman, J., Gom-
ersall, C., Sakr, Y., and Reinhart, K.
(2009). International study of the
prevalence and outcomes of infec-
tion in intensive care units. JAMA
302, 2323–2329.

Visca, P., Seifert, H., and Towner, K. J.
(2011). Acinetobacter infection – an
emerging threat to human health.
IUBMB Life 63, 1048–1054.

Wang, H., Guo, P., Sun, H., Wang,
H., Yang, Q., Chen, M., Xu, Y.,

(2007). Molecular
and Zhu, Y.
epidemiology of clinical
isolates
of carbapenem-resistant Acinetobac-
ter
from Chinese hospitals.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 51,
4022–4028.

spp.

Wareham, D. W., Gordon, N. C., and
Hornsey, M. (2011). In vitro activ-
ity of teicoplanin combined with
colistin versus multidrug-resistant
strains of Acinetobacter bauman-
nii. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 66,
1047–1051.

imipenem resistance

Watanabe, M., Iyobe, S., Inoue, M.,
and Mitsuhashi, S. (1991). Trans-
ferable
in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antimi-
crob. Agents Chemother. 35, 147–151.
Wendt, C., Dietze, B., Dietz, E., and
Ruden, H. (1997). Survival of Acine-
tobacter baumannii on dry surfaces.
J. Clin. Microbiol. 35, 1394–1397.

Whitehead, N. A., Barnard, A. M.,
Slater, H., Simpson, N.
J., and
Salmond, G. P. (2001). Quorum-
sensing in Gram-negative bacteria.
FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 25, 365–404.

Wisplinghoff, H., Bischoff, T., Tallent,
S. M., Seifert, H., Wenzel, R. P.,
and Edmond, M. B. (2004). Nosoco-
mial bloodstream infections in US
hospitals: analysis of 24,179 cases
from a prospective nationwide sur-
veillance study. Clin. Infect. Dis. 39,
309–317.

Wisplinghoff, H., Decker, M., Haefs,
C., Krut, O., Plum, G., and Seifert,
H. (2003). Mutations in gyrA and
parC associated with resistance to
ﬂuoroquinolones in epidemiologi-
cally deﬁned clinical strains of Acine-
tobacter baumannii. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 51, 177–180.

Wong, E. W., Yusof, M. Y., Mansor, M.
B., Anbazhagan, D., Ong, S. Y., and
Sekaran, S. D. (2009). Disruption
of adeB gene has a greater effect
on resistance to meropenems than
adeA gene in Acinetobacter spp. iso-
lated from University Malaya Med-
ical Centre. Singapore Med. J. 50,
822–826.

Wroblewska, M., Sawicka-Grzelak, A.,
Luczak, M., and Sivan, A. (2008).
Bioﬁlm production by
clinical
strains of Acinetobacter baumannii
isolated from patients hospitalized
in two tertiary
care hospitals.
FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 53,
140–144.

Wroblewska, M. M., Towner, K.

Marchel, H.,
(2007). Emergence
of
of Acinetobacter baumannii

J.,
and Luczak, M.
and spread
strains
in a

carbapenem-resistant

tertiary-care hospital
in Poland.
Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 13, 490–496.
Yamamoto, M., Nagao, M., Matsumura,
Y., Matsushima, A., Ito, Y., Takakura,
S., and Ichiyama, S. (2011). Inter-
species dissemination of a novel
class 1 integron carrying blaIMP-
19 among Acinetobacter species in
Japan. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 66,
2480–2483.

Yamamoto, S., Okujo, N., and Sakak-
ibara, Y. (1994). Isolation and struc-
ture elucidation of acinetobactin, a
novel siderophore from Acinetobac-
ter baumannii. Arch. Microbiol. 162,
249–254.

Yamane, K., Wachino,

J., Doi, Y.,
Kurokawa, H., and Arakawa, Y.
(2005). Global spread of multi-
ple aminoglycoside resistance genes.
Emerging Infect. Dis. 11, 951–953.

Yin, X. L., Hou, T. W., Xu, S.
B., Ma, C. Q., Yao, Z. Y., Li,
W., and Wei, L. (2008). Detection
of drug resistance-associated genes
of multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter
baumannii. Microb. Drug Resist. 14,
145–150.

Yong, D., Toleman, M. A., Giske, C. G.,
Cho, H. S., Sundman, K., Lee, K.,
and Walsh, T. R. (2009). Characteri-
zation of a new metallo-β-lactamase
gene, blaNDM-1, and a novel ery-
thromycin esterase gene carried on
a unique genetic structure in Kleb-
siella pneumoniae
sequence type
14 from India. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 53, 5046–5054.

Yu, Y. S., Zhou, H., Yang, Q., Chen,
Y. G., and Li, L. J. (2007). Wide-
spread occurrence of aminoglyco-
side resistance due to ArmA methy-
lase in imipenem-resistant Acineto-
bacter baumannii isolates in China. J.
Antimicrob. Chemother. 60, 454–455.
Yum, J. H., Yi, K., Lee, H., Yong, D.,
Lee, K., Kim, J. M., Rossolini, G.
M., and Chong, Y. (2002). Mole-
cular characterization of metallo-
β-lactamase-producing Acinetobac-
ter baumannii and Acinetobacter
genomospecies 3 from Korea: iden-
tiﬁcation of
two new integrons
carrying the blaVIM-2 gene cas-
settes. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 49,
837–840.

Yun, S. H., Choi, C. W., Kwon, S. O., Park,
G. W., Cho, K., Kwon, K. H., Kim, J.
Y.,Yoo, J. S., Lee, J. C., Choi, J. S., Kim,
S., and Kim, S. I. (2011). Quantita-
tive proteomic analysis of cell wall
and plasma membrane fractions
from multidrug-resistant Acineto-
bacter baumannii. J. Proteome Res.
10, 459–469.

Zarrilli, R., Crispino, M., Bagattini,
M., Barretta, E., Di Popolo, A.,
Triassi, M., and Villari, P. (2004).
Molecular epidemiology of sequen-
tial outbreaks of Acinetobacter bau-
mannii
in an intensive care unit
shows the emergence of carbapenem
resistance.
J. Clin. Microbiol. 42,
946–953.

Zhao, W. H., and Hu, Z. Q. (2011).
IMP-type metallo-β-lactamases in
Gram-negative bacilli: distribution,
phylogeny, and association with
integrons. Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 37,
214–226.

Zhao, W. H., and Hu, Z. Q. (2012).
Acinetobacter: a potential reservoir
and dispenser for β-lactamases. Crit.
Rev. Microbiol. 38, 30–51.

Zhou, H., Zhang, T., Yu, D., Pi, B.,
Yang, Q., Zhou, J., Hu, S., and
Yu, Y. (2011). Genomic analysis
the multidrug-resistant Acine-
of
tobacter baumannii
strain MDR-
ZJ06 widely
spread in China.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 55,
4506–4512.

Zimbler, D. L., Penwell, W. F., Gaddy,
J. A., Menke, S. M., Tomaras, A.
P., Connerly, P. L., and Actis, L. A.
(2009). Iron acquisition functions
expressed by the human pathogen
Acinetobacter baumannii. Biometals
22, 23–32.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 11 November 2011; paper
pending published: 29 January 2012;
accepted: 28 March 2012; published
online: 23 April 2012.
Citation: Roca I, Espinal P, Vila-Farrés
X and Vila J (2012) The Acinetobacter
baumannii oxymoron: commensal hos-
pital dweller turned pan-drug-resistant
menace. Front. Microbio. 3:148. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00148
This article was
submitted to Fron-
tiers in Antimicrobials, Resistance and
Chemotherapy, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Roca, Espinal, Vila-
Farrés and Vila. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 148 | 30

