ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 10 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00139

Excretion of antibiotic resistance genes by dairy calves fed
milk replacers with varying doses of antibiotics

Callie H. Thames 1, Amy Pruden2*, Robert E. James 1, Partha P. Ray 1 and Katharine F. Knowlton1

1 Department of Dairy Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA
2 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA

Edited by:
Rustam I. Aminov, University of
Aberdeen, UK
Reviewed by:
Jun Lin, The University of Tennessee,
USA
Ludek Zurek, Kansas State University,
USA
Peter Pristas, Slovak Academy of
Sciences, Slovak Republic
Jun Liu, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, USA
*Correspondence:
Amy Pruden, Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Virginia
Tech, 403 Durham Hall (0246),
Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA.
e-mail: apruden@vt.edu

Elevated levels of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in soil and water have been linked to
livestock farms and in some cases feed antibiotics may select for antibiotic resistant gut
microbiota. The purpose of this study was to examine the establishment of ARGs in the
feces of calves receiving milk replacer containing no antibiotics versus subtherapeutic or
therapeutic doses of tetracycline and neomycin.The effect of antibiotics on calf health was
also of interest. Twenty-eight male and female dairy calves were assigned to one of the
three antibiotic treatment groups at birth and fecal samples were collected at weeks 6,
7 (prior to weaning), and 12 (5 weeks after weaning). ARGs corresponding to the tetracy-
cline (tetC, tetG, tetO, tetW, and tetX), macrolide (ermB, ermF), and sulfonamide (sul1,
sul2) classes of antibiotics along with the class I integron gene, intI1, were monitored
by quantitative polymerase chain reaction as potential indicators of direct selection, co-
selection, or horizontal gene transfer of ARGs. Surprisingly, there was no signiﬁcant effect
of antibiotic treatment on the absolute abundance (gene copies per gram wet manure)
of any of the ARGs except ermF, which was lower in the antibiotic-treated calf manure,
presumably because a signiﬁcant portion of host bacterial cells carrying ermF were not
resistant to tetracycline or neomycin. However, relative abundance (gene copies normal-
ized to 16S rRNA genes) of tetO was higher in calves fed the highest dose of antibiotic
than in the other treatments. All genes, except tetC and intI1, were detectable in feces
from 6 weeks onward, and tetW and tetG signiﬁcantly increased (P < 0.10), even in con-
trol calves. Overall, the results provide new insight into the colonization of calf gut ﬂora
with ARGs in the early weeks. Although feed antibiotics exerted little effect on the ARGs
monitored in this study, the fact that they also provided no health beneﬁt suggests that
the greater than conventional nutritional intake applied in this study overrides previously
reported health beneﬁts of antibiotics.The results suggest potential beneﬁt of broader man-
agement strategies, and that cost and risk may be avoided by minimizing incorporation of
antibiotics in milk replacer.

Keywords: antibiotic resistance genes, manure, dairy calves, milk replacer

INTRODUCTION
The extensive use of antibiotics in animal agriculture and the
development of antibiotic resistant bacteria have been cause for
increasing concern. Livestock operations are often cited as a reser-
voir for resistant bacteria and antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs;
Chee-Sanford et al., 2001; Smith et al., 2004; Sawant et al., 2007;
McKinney et al., 2010); and antibiotic use has implications for
both animal and human health. Antibiotics are fed to livestock
at subtherapeutic levels for both growth promotion and disease
prevention, because their use can reduce morbidity and mortality
(e.g., Wileman et al., 2009). However, the unintentional selection
of bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics could have important
human health consequences, with several studies noting identi-
cal resistance elements in both humans and food animals (e.g.,
Boerlin et al., 2001; Lauderdale et al., 2002; Ho et al., 2010).

Based on concerns about human health effects, subtherapeutic
use of antibiotics was banned in the European Union in the late

1990s (Boerlin et al., 2001). A major trigger for earlier bans in Den-
mark and other Nordic countries, was linkage of avoparcin use in
broiler chickens and swine to vancomycin resistant Enterococcal
infections (VRE) in humans (Bager et al., 1997; Bates, 1997). In
the United States (U.S.), the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
recently issued new rules limiting antibiotic use in milk replacers
for calves (21CFR §520.1484; 21CFR §520.1660d). The precise
effects of antibiotics in milk replacer is currently unknown, and
the general consequences of antibiotic amendment in livestock
feed are complex (Marshall and Levy, 2011). In the 3-years follow-
ing the European ban, a slight decrease in antibiotic resistance was
observed in rectal swabs collected from food animals at slaugh-
ter, and a documentable decrease in acquired fecal enterococci
resistance in humans was also observed (Casewell et al., 2003).
Following the Taiwan avoparcin ban in chickens in 2000, the inci-
dence of VRE decreased signiﬁcantly (Lauderdale et al., 2007).
However, VRE did still persist following the ban and resistance to

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 139 | 1

Thames et al.

Antibiotic resistance genes in calf feces

other classes of antibiotics, including tetracyclines and macrolides,
stayed the same or even increased. In support of this observation,
vancomycin and macrolide ARGs have been noted to be present
together on the same genetic element from isolates obtained from
Danish pig herds (Aarestrup, 2000). Thus, it is critical to consider
co-selection of resistance across antibiotic classes in evaluating
impacts of feed antibiotics.

Effects of subtherapeutic antibiotic use on animal health have
been difﬁcult to assess. Based on medicated feed prescription rates,
decreased rates of respiratory infections were observed in Swiss
piglets and fattening pigs in the 3-years following the antibiotic
ban relative to the 3-years prior, but gastrointestinal tract infec-
tions appeared to go up (Arnold et al., 2004). A marked increase
in necrotic enteritis was noted in broiler chickens in Norway
following the avoparcin ban, but this seemed to be ameliorated
by the subsequent approval of narisin as a feed additive (Grave
et al., 2004). Also, while therapeutic antibiotic use rates did indeed
decrease in Switzerland (Arnold et al., 2004), Norway, and Swe-
den (Grave et al., 2006) following the E.U. ban, therapeutic use
increased in weaning piglets in Denmark (Grave et al., 2006). Gen-
erally, a comprehensive examination of banning subtherapeutic
antibiotic use in piglets, beef cattle, and poultry in Sweden, indi-
cated that although temporary health problems and increases in
antibiotic uses were noted, strategic management practices make
possible competitive animal production and reduced antibiotic
use (Wierup, 2001). Few controlled studies have examined the
effects of antibiotic use on health (Berge et al., 2009a) or antibi-
otic resistance (Langford et al., 2003; Berge et al., 2006a; Kaneene
et al., 2008; Pereira et al., 2011) in pre-weaned calves, and none
have incorporated culture-independent techniques to quantify the
establishment of ARGs in calf manure.

The objective of this study was to compare the establishment
of a cross-section of ARGs in the feces of calves receiving milk
replacer dosed with subtherapeutic and therapeutic antibiotics and
their effect on overall health. In particular, the effect of oxytetra-
cycline and neomycin in the milk replacer and weaning to starter
grain containing monensin were of interest as typical practices in
the U.S. The inclusion of oxytetracycline and neomycin in milk
replacer for young calves is one of the most common uses of sub-
therapeutic antibiotics in the U.S. dairy industry. Neomycin is
absorbed only very slightly by the animal (Aschbacher and Feil,
1994) and thus remains in the digestive tract where it controls
growth of pathogenic organisms. Oxytetracycline, in contrast, is
highly absorbed, so is considered useful for prevention and treat-
ment of respiratory illnesses. One intentional contrast to conven-
tional dairy practice incorporated in this study was feeding calves
>2 times more protein than in traditional feeding programs, and
>1.5 times more fat. This is because while conventional U.S. milk
replacer feeding rates generally provide sufﬁcient nutrients only
for maintenance and modest growth [National Research Coun-
cil (NRC), 2001], which could bias the evaluation of the health
beneﬁts of antibiotics.

In this study, 28 male and female dairy calves were assigned
to control, subtherapeutic, or therapeutic antibiotic treatment
groups at birth and fecal samples were collected at weeks 6, 7
(prior to weaning), and 12 (5 weeks after weaning). The abundance
of a representative range of tetracycline (tet O, tetW, tet C, tet G,

and tet X), sulfonamide (sul1 and sul2), and macrolide (ermB and
ermF) ARGs as well as a class 1 transferable genetic element (int I1)
was quantiﬁed in the calf feces as a culture-independent assess-
ment of resistance. The speciﬁc ARGs examined were selected as
indicators of direct antibiotic selection (i.e., tet ARGs) as well as
potential co-selection of resistance to clinically relevant antibiotics
(i.e., sul and erm ARGs) and overall horizontal gene transfer poten-
tial (i.e., int I1). Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)
was incorporated to provide a culture-independent assessment of
the overall resistance potential incurred by these ARGs. Identify-
ing factors that affect fecal excretion of ARGs by dairy calves will
help assess the contribution of dairy farms to the overall loading
of anthropogenic sources of antibiotic resistance to the environ-
ment and provide insight into effective management strategies for
limiting the spread of antibiotic resistance.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
EXPERIMENTAL TREATMENTS
Forty-one newborn calves were blocked according to breed
(Holstein or crossbred), birth order (two blocks), and gen-
der. Crossbred calves were either Holstein- or Jersey-sired and
out of Jersey× Holstein, Jersey× Holstein× Brown Swiss, or Jer-
sey× Holstein× Swedish Red dams. Within each block, calves
were randomly assigned to treatments at birth, resulting in the
assignments summarized in Table A1 in Appendix. Treatments
were control (containing no antibiotics in the milk replacer), sub-
therapeutic (neomycin sulfate and oxytetracycline hydrochloride
each fed at 10 mg/calf/day provided from day 1 until weaning),
and therapeutic (no antibiotics in the milk replacer until day 36,
then neomycin sulfate and oxytetracycline hydrochloride each fed
at 1000 mg/calf/day for 14 day). All protocols and procedures were
approved by the Virginia Tech Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee.

MANAGEMENT OF NEWBORN CALVES
Within 2 h of birth, calves were moved from the calving pen to
individual stalls in an enclosed barn. Calf navels were dipped in
a 7% tincture of iodine, and calves were vaccinated intranasally
with Nasalgen (Merck Animal Health, Millsboro, DE). Birth date,
weight, and identity of the dam were recorded. Calves received
1.89 l of high quality thawed colostrum as soon as possible after
birth, usually within 2 h. A second feeding of 1.89 l of colostrum
was administered 6 h after the ﬁrst feeding and calf navels were
dipped a second time.

FEEDING AND HOUSING
Calves were enrolled and treatments were imposed at 1 day of age.
Calves were fed milk replacer (Cow’s Match, Land O’Lakes Animal
Products Co., Arden Hills, MN, USA) twice daily, at 6:00 AM and
6:00 PM. Milk replacer contained 28% crude protein and 20% fat,
with whey protein as the protein source and human grade edi-
ble lard as the fat source. Milk replacer powder was reconstituted
with water to contain 17.6% solids and fed individually to calves
via nipple buckets. Amount of liquid fed provided 1.1–0.68 kg
of dry matter per calf, depending upon birth weight, resulting
in feeding 2.1–3.4 times more protein and 1.5–2.4 times more
fat than traditional feeding programs. This feeding rate has been

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 139 | 2

Thames et al.

Antibiotic resistance genes in calf feces

termed “intensive feeding” is higher than conventional calf feed-
ing programs, which deliver only 0.454 kg of milk replacer dry
matter containing 20% fat and 20% protein. The intensive feed-
ing program thus more closely approaches amounts calves would
consume if allowed free choice to liquid diets. Antibiotic treat-
ments were added directly to the nipple buckets, which were used
exclusively for a speciﬁc treatment to avoid cross-contamination.
Calves were supervised during feeding, and 15 min was allowed
for consumption. After feeding, all equipment was thoroughly
cleaned. Calves were fed starter grain (Intensity −22% crude
protein, 10.13 mg/kg of monensin, Southern States Cooperative,
Richmond, VA, USA) beginning at 1 day of age.
Calves were housed at the Virginia Tech Dairy Cattle Center
in individual ﬁberglass or plastic hutches (1.83 m× 1.37 m) with
metal hog panels to create a fenced area (∼2.5 m2). Bull calves
were housed in hutches until 39 day, when they were moved into
metabolism crates to facilitate total feces and urine collection
(described below). After the total collection period was com-
plete, bull calves were moved back to their original hutches until
weaned.

Weaning was initiated at day 50 by reducing milk replacer
offered by 50% and feeding only once daily at 6:00 AM. Calves
were initially fed 0.22 kg of starter grain, and the amount offered
increased in 0.22 kg increments as consumption increased. When
starter grain consumption reached 1.81 kg daily, calves were fully
weaned (59± 2 day of age). Post-weaning, calves were housed in
the calf hutches for 7 days then were housed in small groups in a
3-sided barn with access to a drylot. Weaned calves were group-
fed ﬁrst cutting alfalfa hay and 22% crude protein starter grain
ad lib. Starter grain contained monensin at a concentration of
10.13 mg/kg.

SAMPLE AND DATA COLLECTION
Following the 6:00 AM feeding, body temperatures, fecal scores,
and respiratory scores (Larson et al., 1977) were recorded daily.
Calves were weighed at birth and at weaning to calculate average
daily gain.
Bull calves were housed in metabolism crates (1.2 m× 0.6 m)
to facilitate total collection of feces beginning at 39 day of age, for
3 day of adaptation to the stall followed by 7 day of total collection.
Trays were placed under the metabolism crates to collect excreted
feces. Feces were collected daily, weighed, and subsampled. Because
heifer calves are anatomically ill-suited for total collection of feces
uncontaminated by urine, grab samples of feces were collected
from heifer calves at 6:00 AM, 2:00 PM, 8:00 PM, and 12:00 AM
for 7 day beginning at 6 weeks of age. Fecal samples were col-
lected from the gravel surface if a fresh sample was available at
collection time. If no fresh sample was available, calves were rec-
tally stimulated to produce a fresh sample. After weaning, samples
were collected weekly from calves (now group-housed) via rectal
palpation.

REMOVED CALVES
A total of 13 calves were removed from the study (3, 7, and 3 were
on control, subtherapeutic, and therapeutic treatments, respec-
tively), because of health problems requiring clinical antibiotic
treatment.

SAMPLE ANALYSIS
Feces samples were frozen immediately at −20˚C after collection.
Samples collected from heifer calves were thawed and pooled by
date collected on an equal wet weight basis. Pooling was not nec-
essary for bull calf feces samples because one sample was collected
of each day’s total excretion. DNA was extracted from 500 mg of
wet feces per calf from week 6, 7, and 12. The FastDNA® Spin
Kit for soil was applied across all samples. The FastPrep® instru-
ment (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA, USA) was employed with
homogenization for 40 s at a speed of 6.0. The DNA was suspended
in puriﬁed water and aliquots were stored in 0.5 ml cryovials at
−80˚C.

Previously reported qPCR protocols were implemented to
quantify the following ARGs: ermB, ermF (Chen et al., 2007), sul1,
sul2 (Pei et al., 2006), tet C, tet G (Aminov et al., 2002), tet O, tetW
(Aminov et al., 2001), and tet X (Ng et al., 2001) as well as int I1
(Hardwick et al., 2008) and 16S rRNA (Suzuki et al., 2000) genes.
Primer sequences are provided in Table A2 in Appendix. The 9-
μl per reaction master mix consisted of 2.8 μl of sterile water,
0.6 μl (5 M) of forward primer, 0.6 μl (5 M) of reverse primer, and
5 μl of SsoFastEvaGreen (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) with 1 μl
of diluted DNA extract added. A dilution series qPCR was con-
ducted for each gene and each sample matrix, through which it
was determined that a 1:70 dilution provided the most consistent
results across all samples. All qPCR were conducted in triplicate
on a CFX-96 (Bio-Rad). Calibration curves were constructed from
serial dilutions of positive controls over seven orders of magnitude.
Positive controls were obtained from cloned PCR products of tar-
get genes veriﬁed by DNA sequencing. Gene copies for any samples
with numbers of gene copies below the limit of quantiﬁcation were
recorded as 0 for the purposes of statistical analysis.

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Fecal scores, respiratory scores, and body temperatures were ana-
lyzed using the Mixed procedure of SAS (9.2, 2008) with the
model:

Y = μ + Di + Tj + Bk + Gl + BGkl + T Bjk + T Gjl + eijkl

where:

tic);

μ= overall mean;
D = effect of day (i = 1–65);
T = effect of treatment (j = control, subtherapeutic, therapeu-
B = effect of breed (k = crossbred, Holstein);
G = effect of gender (l = bull, heifer); and
e = error (interaction of day, treatment, breed, and gender).
Average daily gains were analyzed using the Mixed procedure

of SAS (9.2, 2008) with the model:

Y = μ + Ti + Bj + Gk + BGjk + T Bij + T Gik + eijk

where:

μ= overall mean;
T = effect of treatment (i = control, subtherapeutic, therapeu-
B = effect of breed (j = crossbred, Holstein);

tic);

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 139 | 3

Thames et al.

Antibiotic resistance genes in calf feces

G = effect of gender (k = bull, heifer); and
e = error (interaction of treatment, breed, and gender).
Because they were not normally distributed, ARG data were
log-transformed prior to statistical analysis to determine signif-
icance of main effects and interactions. Log-transformed values
were used to calculate LSM. All gene data were analyzed using the
GLIMMIX procedure of SAS (9.2, 2008) with the model:

Y = μ + Ti + Bj + Gk + Wl + T Bij + T Gik + BGjk + W Til

+ W Bjl + W Gkl + eijkl

where:

tic);

μ= overall mean;
T = effect of treatment (i = control, subtherapeutic, therapeu-
B = effect of breed (j = crossbred, Holstein);
G = effect of gender (k = bull, heifer);
W = effect of week (l = 6, 7, 12); and
e = error (interaction of treatment, breed, gender, and week).
After the log-transformed data set was used to determine sig-
niﬁcance, contrasts were performed to separate means for signif-
icant effects and interactions. All data are reported as LSM± SE.
Signiﬁcance was determined at P < 0.10.

RESULTS
EFFECT OF ANTIBIOTICS ON GROWTH AND HEALTH
No effects of antibiotic treatment, breed or gender were
observed on average daily gain (1.30± 0.13 kg/day), fecal scores
(2.5± 0.17), respiratory scores (1.2± 0.04), or body temperature
(102.2˚± 0.95).
EFFECT OF ANTIBIOTICS ON ARGs IN FECES
Two of the analyzed genes (tet C and int I1) were not detected in
fecal samples of any calves. Four genes encoding resistance to tetra-
cyclines were detected in feces (tet G, tet O, tetW, tet X; Figure 1)
as were two genes encoding resistance to sulfonamides (sul1, sul2)
and two genes encoding resistance to erythromycin (ermB, ermF).
All calves harbored at least one of the tet genes in the feces by
week 12, and multiple ARGs related to tetracyclines were present
in nearly all of the fecal samples analyzed. ARGs corresponding
to antibiotics not fed to calves were less abundant across all three
treatments (Figure 2). About one third of the calves did not have
sul1 present in their feces at any individual sampling point.

Feeding milk replacer with subtherapeutic or therapeutic doses
of neomycin and oxytetracycline had no effect on the absolute
abundance (log copy per gram wet weight) of tet G, tet O, tetW,
tet X, sul1, sul2, or ermB in manure, but calves fed medicated
milk replacers yielded reduced abundance of ermF as compared
to control calves (Table 1). The relative abundance (ARG per 16S
rRNA; normalized) of ermF was not different between antibiotic
fed and non-antibiotic control groups (Table 2). Calves fed the
higher (therapeutic) dose of antibiotics resulted in increased rela-
tive abundance of tet O as compared to subtherapeutic and control
calves (Table 2).

EFFECT OF OTHER FACTORS ON ARG ABUNDANCE
Abundance of the ARGs analyzed was not different between gen-
ders or between breeds, but abundance of all tet ARGs except

FIGURE 1 | Effect of time on abundance of tetracycline ARGs in calf
feces. Bars represent the pooled averages across calves fed medicated or
non-medicated milk replacers. Letters above the bars indicate signiﬁcantly
different LSM groupings (P < 0.10).

FIGURE 2 | Effect of antibiotics in milk replacer on abundance of
tetracycline (tet), macrolide (erm), and sulfonamide (sul ) classes of
ARGs. Bars represent the pooled averages of the total ARGs quantiﬁed
within each class. Letters above the bars indicate signiﬁcantly different LSM
groupings (P < 0.10).

tet O increased with time in all treatments (Figure 1), includ-
ing the no antibiotic control. For tet G and tet X, gene abun-
dance increased between weeks 6 and 12. For tetW, the increase
in abundance occurred during the period following weaning,
and was detected at the week 12 sampling point. Effects of
time on tet ARGs were no longer observed when the data were

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 139 | 4

Thames et al.

Antibiotic resistance genes in calf feces

Table 1 | Effect of milk replacer medication, breed, gender, week, and the interaction of milk replacer with these on abundance of selected
antibiotic resistance genes in the feces of dairy calves.

Log gene copies per gram wet feces

SE4

P <

Control1

Subtherapeutic2

Therapeutic3

Trt

Breed

Gender

Day

Interactions5

12
7.40
9.18
8.89
7.47
6.29
6.78
7.20
7.91

7
7.29
9.10
8.80
7.70
5.88
6.64
7.31
7.36

9
7.17
9.13
8.43
6.99
6.34
6.61
6.82
6.95

n
tetG
tetO
tetW
tetX
sul1
sul2
ermB
ermF
1Control milk replacer containing no antibiotics fed from day 2 to weaning (59± 2 day).
2Medicated milk replacer containing 10 mg/calf/day of tetracycline and neomycin fed from day 2 to weaning.
3Medicated milk replacer containing 1000 mg/calf/day of tetracycline and neomycin fed from day 36 to weaning.
4SE for treatment LS means.
5Signiﬁcant (P < 0.10) two and three way interactions of treatment, breed, gender, and week.

0.18
0.34
0.28
0.34
0.28
0.23
0.37
0.32

NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
0.04

NS
NS
NS
NS
0.10
NS
NS
NS

NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS

0.06
NS
0.07
NS
NS
NS
NS
0.003

Trt*gender; breed*gender
NS
NS
NS
Trt*gender; gender*week
NS
NS
NS

Table 2 | Effect of milk replacer medication, breed, gender, week, and the interaction of milk replacer with these on selected antibiotic
resistance genes in the feces of dairy calves.

Gene copies/16S rRNA

SE4

P <

Control1

Subtherapeutic2

Therapeutic3

Trt

Breed

Gender

Day

Interactions5

0.65
2.27
10.3
0.50
0.13
0.06
0.89
0.66

13.5
5.35
1.84
0.88
1.11
0.13
0.67
0.16

0.90
2.13
4.00
0.69
0.12
0.06
0.78
0.09

tetG
tetO
tetW
tetX
sul1
sul2
ermB
ermF
1Control milk replacer containing no antibiotics fed from day 2 to weaning (59± 2 day).
2Medicated milk replacer containing 10 mg/calf/day of tetracycline and neomycin fed from day 2 to weaning.
3Medicated milk replacer containing 1000 mg/calf/day of tetracycline and neomycin fed from day 36 to weaning.
4SE for treatment LS means.
5Other signiﬁcant (P < 0.10) two and three way interactions of treatment, breed, gender, and week.

NS
0.02
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS

NS
NS
NS
0.03
NS
NS
NS
NS

NS
NS
0.07
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS

14.3
1.53
9.13
0.68
0.58
0.12
0.99
0.75

NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
NS
0.004

NS
NS
NS
Trt*gender; breed*gender; breed*week
Gender*week
Breed*week
NS
NS

expressed per unit of 16S rRNA gene (Table 2). However, rel-
ative abundance of ermF was observed to increase with time
across treatments, only when expressed per unit of 16S rRNA gene
(Figure 3).

For the majority of the ARGs, breed, gender, and week did
not have any effect except that crossbred and bull calves har-
bored reduced relative abundance of tet X and tetW, respectively
(Table 2). Interaction of treatment with breed, gender, and week
of treatment had no signiﬁcant effects on gene abundance for
the majority of the analyzed genes. The interactions of treat-
ment and gender were signiﬁcant for tet G and sul1 (Table 1).
Among control calves, heifers harbored higher abundance of

tet G more than did bulls; that was reversed in the subthera-
peutic group but the difference was not signiﬁcant (Figure 4).
There was no effect of gender on abundance of sul1 among
calves fed the subtherapeutic milk replacer, but among control
calves, heifers had far more copies of sul1 in their feces than
did bulls (Figure 5). The interaction of week and gender was
signiﬁcant for sul1 (Table 1). Heifers had higher abundance of
sul1 at week 6 than did bulls, (Figure 6). The interaction of
breed with gender was signiﬁcant for tet G (Table 1). Cross-
bred bulls had the higher abundance of tet G than crossbred
heifers; there was no effect of gender among Holstein calves
(Figure 7).

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 139 | 5

Thames et al.

Antibiotic resistance genes in calf feces

FIGURE 3 | Effect of time on relative abundance of ermF ARGs in calf
feces. Bars represent the pooled averages across calves fed medicated or
non-medicated milk replacers. Letters above the bars indicate signiﬁcantly
different LSM groupings (P < 0.10).

FIGURE 6 | Effect of the gender by time interaction on abundance of
sul1 ARGs in calf feces. Bars represent the pooled averages across calves
fed medicated or non-medicated milk replacers. Letters above the bars
indicate signiﬁcantly different LSM groupings (P < 0.10).

FIGURE 4 | Effect of the gender and antibiotic treatment interaction on
abundance of tetG ARGs in calf feces. Bars represent the pooled
averages across the three sampling events. Letters above the bars indicate
signiﬁcantly different LSM groupings (P < 0.10).

FIGURE 7 | Effect of gender by breed interaction on abundance of tetG
ARGs in calf feces. Bars represent the pooled averages across calves fed
medicated or non-medicated milk replacers and over the three sampling
events. Letters above the bars indicate signiﬁcantly different LSM
groupings (P < 0.10).

DISCUSSION
EFFECT OF ANTIBIOTICS ON GROWTH AND HEALTH
The lack of effect of milk replacer medication on growth and health
is in contrast to some observations (Quigley and Drew, 2000; Berge
et al., 2005; Stanton et al., 2010), probably because calves in the
current study were fed a more nutrient-dense diet with higher
intake than in most early research. Consequently, calves complet-
ing the course of the study were relatively healthy and grew quickly.
Notably, of the 13 calves that were removed due to health problems,
7 were in the subtherapeutic treatment group. Health problems
that were observed in calves in the current study were largely due
to protozoan and viral microorganisms, which are not susceptible
to antibiotics. Langford et al. (2003) observed no effect of peni-
cillin content of milk in calves fed ad libitum; they also attributed
the lack of effect of antibiotic to the nutritional beneﬁts to the calf
of offering an unlimited supply of milk. Interestingly, Berge et al.
(2009a) actually observed antibiotic addition to pasteurized waste

FIGURE 5 | Effect of the gender and antibiotic treatment interaction on
abundance of sul1 ARGs in calf feces. Bars represent the pooled
averages across the three sampling events. Letters above the bars indicate
signiﬁcantly different LSM groupings (P < 0.10).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 139 | 6

Thames et al.

Antibiotic resistance genes in calf feces

milk to be associated with a higher percentage of diarrhea days in
calves compared to no antibiotic addition, while respiratory scores
were equivalent between the two treatments. They partially attrib-
uted this effect to adequate passage of immunity via colostrum,
as advocated in their parallel studies (Berge et al., 2009b). Their
study also highlights potentially negative effects of antibiotics on
gastrointestinal ﬂora. Kaneene et al. (2008) similarly observed no
health beneﬁts of adding oxytetracycline and neomycin to milk
replacer and also noted substantial colostrum provisions to the
calves. Thus, nutritional status and overall health may override
beneﬁts provided by subtherapeutic antibiotic treatment.

study represents

EFFECT OF ANTIBIOTICS ON ABUNDANCE OF ARGs IN FECES
The present
the ﬁrst controlled, culture-
independent evaluation of the effect of antibiotic addition in milk
replacer on antibiotic resistance in calf feces through weaning. The
results provide an indication of the effects of subtherapeutic and
therapeutic tetracycline and neomycin treatments typical in the
U.S. Among the eight ARGs examined across three classes, tet O
was the only one to exhibit an increase in response to antibiotic
treatment, but only when normalized to 16S rRNA genes. The
results were somewhat unexpected, given reports of feed antibi-
otics increasing resistance in manure of mature cattle (Alexander
et al., 2009) and other livestock (Marshall and Levy, 2011). In
a prior study of calves fed “waste milk” containing penicillin
residues, resistance of fecal bacteria to penicillin increased with
increasing dose fed (Langford et al., 2003). One possible cause for
discrepancy is that of the 25 known tetracycline ARGs (Aminov
et al., 2001, 2002; Yang et al., 2004), only ﬁve were quantiﬁed in this
study. Although these represented the three main classes of resis-
tance (efﬂux, ribosomal protection, and degradation) and have
previously been reported to be found in cattle waste (Storteboom
et al., 2007; Alexander et al., 2009; Dahshan et al., 2010; McKin-
ney et al., 2010), it is quite possible that key tetracycline ARGs
responding to antibiotic treatment in this study were overlooked.
Interestingly, though tet X was previously reported to be conﬁned
within the genus Bacteroides (Yang et al., 2004), its abundance was
comparable with that of tet G, with recent reports suggesting it
is more widespread than previously thought (Ghosh et al., 2009).
Regardless, the results of this study suggest that removal of chlorte-
tracycline and neomycin from milk replacer will not eliminate
shedding of ARGs into the environment. McKinney et al. (2010)
similarly observed only a very modest reduction of tet and sul
ARG abundance in waste lagoons on organic dairy farms relative
to those of conventional dairies.

The reduced abundance of ermF observed in feces of calves fed
antibiotics as compared to control calves was intriguing. Macrolide
and sulfonamide ARGs were examined in this study as potential
indicators of co-selection of resistance to antibiotics other than the
oxytetracycline and neomycin administered in the milk replacer.
(cid:2)
In particular, sul1 is carried within the 3
conserved region of
class 1 integrons (Mazel, 2006), while tetracycline resistance has
been noted to be prevalent in macrolide-resistant Streptococcus
pyogenes (Nielsen et al., 2004). In a study by Berge et al. (2006a)
it was found that milk replacer containing neomycin sulfate and
tetracycline HCl selected for E. coli resistant to classes of antimi-
crobials not used, including: aminoglycosides, chloramphenicol,

and sulfonamides. The reduced abundance of ermF in the current
study may be explained by effects of medicated milk replacer on
speciﬁc populations of excreted bacteria. For example, Berge et al.
(2006b) observed that medicated milk replacer decreased fecal
shedding of Salmonella enterica by dairy calves. Decreased fecal
shedding of certain bacteria could explain the decreased num-
bers of gene copies of ermF with antibiotic feeding; the species of
bacteria carrying erythromycin resistance being shed in the feces
was unknown in this study. It seems probable that one of the two
antibiotics fed in the milk replacer were effective against fecal bac-
teria carrying the ermF gene. Interestingly, the effect of antibiotic
treatment was no longer observed when ermF was normalized to
16S rRNA genes (Table 2). Normalization to the 16S rRNA gene,
present in all bacteria, provides an indication of the proportion
of the bacterial community carrying the ARG of interest and also
aids in accounting for minor variations in sample processing. The
similarity in relative abundance (ARGs per 16S rRNA; normal-
ized) of ermF between antibiotic fed and non-antibiotic control
groups suggests that there was a decrease in overall fecal bacterial
shedding in antibiotic-treated groups. Reduced 16S rRNA genes
in the manure of antibiotic-treated calves would also be consistent
with the tet O increase only being signiﬁcant when normalized to
16S rRNA genes. However, the range of 16S rRNA gene concen-
trations encountered among the fecal samples was wide, and there
was no signiﬁcant effect found of antibiotic treatment on overall
16S rRNA gene abundance.

ESTABLISHMENT OF ARGs IN CALF FECES WITH TIME
The increased absolute abundance of tet and relative ermF ARGs
with time in all calves in the current study (including calves not
fed antibiotics) suggests that the calf gut environment itself was
amenable to the establishment of resistance regardless of antibi-
otic content of the feed. Berge et al. (2006a) similarly reported an
age-related increase in antibiotic resistance of E. coli (measured
phenotypically) even in non-treated calves. On the other hand, no
effect of time on tet ARGs was observed when data were expressed
per unit of 16S rRNA. This suggests that the overall bacterial pop-
ulation density increased in corresponding samples with time and
that the bacteria carrying tet ARGs were neither negatively nor
positively impacted. However, the range of 16S rRNA gene con-
centrations was again wide and a statistically signiﬁcant increase
with time was not identiﬁed as a general phenomenon.

Few studies have speciﬁcally characterized the establishment
of antibiotic resistance in calf manure with time. Similar to the
present study, increased overall resistance to 12 antimicrobials was
noted among fecal E. coli isolates over the ﬁrst 4 months of life in
calves not receiving antibiotics (Berge et al., 2006a). A recent study
by Pereira et al. (2011) examined the antibiotic resistance patterns
of E. coli isolates on day 2 and day 6 of calves from two farms
that did not administer antibiotics in the feed milk as compared
to a third farm that administered both chlortetracycline and sul-
famethazine. Odds of resistance to most antibiotics observed for
the farm administering antibiotics was higher compared to con-
trol farms. The inclusion of sulfonamide, rather than neomycin,
could have been the driving factor in the effects observed relative
to the present study. While neomycin was included in this study
because of its widespread implementation in the U.S., neo ARGs

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 139 | 7

Thames et al.

Antibiotic resistance genes in calf feces

(i.e., aminoglycoside phosphotransferases) were not monitored.
Nonetheless, as neomycin is rarely used in humans, the present
study did provide insight into potential effects of common prac-
tice on resistance to three classes of antibiotics of high clinical
relevance, in addition to the clinically relevant integron, int I1 (Hall
and Collis, 1998). Also important to consider, in comparison to
the Pereira et al. (2011) study, is that in a study design in which the
antibiotic treatments are geographically isolated, the actual estab-
lished microbiota of the farm, rather than the antibiotic present
in the milk, could be an overarching factor. The present study
thus has value in its focus of the effects of the three controlled
treatments on a single farm.

Of note, as is routine practice in the U.S., monensin was
included in the grain fed to all calves. While very little grain
was consumed during the early weeks, the monensin-containing
grain became the sole source of nutrition post-weaning (7 weeks).
Tet ARGs did generally increase with time, tet G and tetW prior
to weaning and tet X 5 weeks post-weaning. It is not possible to
determine from this study whether monensin was related to the
observed increases of tet ARGs; however, all signiﬁcant increases
with time were lost when normalized to 16S rRNA genes. There-
fore, it can be concluded that monensin did not generally suppress
the total bacterial density to produce the observed effect. Co-
selection of bacteria carrying tet ARGs by monensin is one possible
explanation for their increase with time; however, acquired resis-
tance of bacteria to monensin has not previously been observed
(Butaye et al., 2001). Furthermore, bacteria that are tolerant of
monensin have been observed to be no more or less sensitive
to medically important antibiotics than monensin-susceptible
bacteria (Houlihan and Russell, 2003).

OTHER FACTORS AND THEIR INTERACTIONS
The effects of interactions of time, treatment, gender, and/or breed
are not easily explained. They may be attributed to the small num-
ber of observations associated with each interaction, although each
individual group was comprised of n ranging from six to eight. If
the effects observed across the gender and breed interactions are
indeed real, they highlight the complexity of factors governing
the microbial ecology of the bovine gut and the establishment of
antibiotic resistance.

ADVANTAGES AND LIMITATIONS OF MOLECULAR-BASED APPROACH
To our knowledge, this study provides the ﬁrst insight into the
establishment of antibiotic resistance in calf feces in the early weeks
using qPCR to directly quantify ARGs. This approach is advanta-
geous in that it circumvents biases associated with culturing and
thus enables broad quantiﬁcation of resistance elements, includ-
ing those harbored by unculturable strains. However, molecular
techniques possess their own limitations, which must be consid-
ered in interpreting the ﬁndings of this study. Firstly, although
10 genes were quantiﬁed by qPCR, these likely only scratch the
surface of the full array of resistance elements present in calf
feces. Indeed, recent examination of the human gut microbiome
has revealed a vast array of resistance elements, most of which
not previously described (Sommer et al., 2009). Thus, it is quite
possible that ARGs not monitored or detectable in this study
did in fact respond strongly to antibiotic treatment. Secondly,

qPCR is limited by the quality of the DNA extraction. While no
ideal DNA extraction method exists, we viewed the FastDNA®
Spin Kit for soil to be the best option. While kits speciﬁcally
formulated to manure are available, head to head comparison
has actually indicated downstream detection of a broader range
of bacteria when the soil kit was applied to extract DNA from
feces (Ariefdjohan et al., 2010). Further, the FastPrep® instru-
ment applied in this study was noted to result in the least
DNA damage, relative to other cell lysis techniques. The FastD-
NA® Spin Kit for soil was successfully applied for qPCR analysis
of a range of manures by Layton et al. (2006), although they
employed a 1:10 dilution prior to extraction, while our study
did not. A potential consequence of undiluted samples is over-
loading of the extraction column and thus lower overall DNA
yield. Normalization to 16S rRNA genes should help account
for such variation. Also important to note is that our methods
were able to detect signiﬁcant absolute difference in ARGs in sev-
eral instances, which would not be expected to be discernible if
extraction column overloading was the dominant factor driving
the results.

MULTIPLE DRUG RESISTANCE VERSUS ABUNDANCE OF MULTIPLE
ARGs
Up to 80% of E. coli isolates obtained from mature heifers have
been observed to be multi-drug resistant (resistant to three to six
drugs), typically displaying resistance to tetracycline, ampicillin,
ceftiofur, ﬂorfenicol, chloramphenicol, spectinomycin, and strep-
tomycin (Sawant et al., 2007). However, the effect of antimicrobial
use on multiple antimicrobial resistance has only recently been
studied in calves. Pereira et al. (2011) noted that 81% of the E. coli
isolates obtained from both medicated and non-medicated calves
were resistant to three or more antibiotics already within the ﬁrst
6 days of life. Berge et al. (2006a) observed that tetracycline and
neomycin in the feed were associated with higher levels of mul-
tiple antimicrobial resistant fecal E. coli in calves monitored up
to 4 weeks of age. The same research group (Berge et al., 2010)
further noted that fecal E. coli were more likely to be resistant
to multiple antibiotics in older calves (14- or 28-2) than in new-
born calves if calves were fed antimicrobials in milk. In the current
study, 8 of the 10 target ARGs were detected in the feces of the
experimental calves. Fecal samples from all calves carried multiple
types of ARGs within the same sample. Also, feces of all calves
carried at least one gene encoding resistance to each of the three
classes of antibiotics of interest (tetracyclines, sulfonamides, ery-
thromycins), but class 1 integrons (int I1) were not detected in any
of the fecal samples. In contrast, bacterial strains carrying class 1
integrons were isolated from dairy manure-impacted soil, but not
from a corresponding unimpacted soil (Srinivasan et al., 2008).
Class 1 integrons were also detected in 10% of samples from scour-
ing calves (Ahmed et al., 2009); calves in the current study were
not diarrheic during sample collections. Wu et al. (2011) observed
that sulfonamide use was associated with higher occurrence of
int I1 genes among tetracycline resistant E. coli from beef cattle.
That int I1 was not detectable but that multiple ARGs were present
in feces of all calves is intriguing. It is plausible that the ARGs
identiﬁed were carried by different bacterial species in the feces
sample, but also the analyzed genes may be carried by the same

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 139 | 8

Thames et al.

Antibiotic resistance genes in calf feces

bacterial species, without linkage to a transferable element such
as int I1. Thus, conclusive evidence of multiple drug resistance in
the calf manure was not obtained in this study. Nonetheless, mul-
tiple drug resistance has been observed to be signiﬁcantly higher
in dairy manure-impacted environments, such as soils (Srinivasan
et al., 2008), thus the evolution of antibiotic resistance from calf
to mature cow to the environment remains an important issue.

CONCLUSION
Improved calf health and growth commonly observed with feed-
ing of medicated milk replacers were not observed, likely because
the calves in this experiment were maintained on a high plane
of nutrition. In situations where management or nutrition is not
optimal, health differences may be more apparent. Genes related to
tetracycline resistance increased over time regardless of treatment,
thus the calf gut itself appears to be an environment conducive
to the proliferation of certain ARGs. Genes encoding resistance to
antibiotics that were not administered were less abundant, thus

co-selection was not observed in this study. However, macrolide
and sulfonamide ARGs were still present and persisted in the feces
of these experimental calves. Other ARGs not examined were also
likely present and may have responded to antibiotic treatment.
The results have important management implications, indicat-
ing that if nutritional requirements are appropriately managed,
the cost and risk of subtherapeutic antibiotic use may not be
necessary. Nonetheless, ARGs across three classes persisted and
increased with time, even in the feces of calves not administered
antibiotics. Thus, comprehensive management strategies that limit
cross-dissemination between animals and control transport of
manure from farms, in addition to prudent use of antibiotics,
are called for.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial support was provided by the Virginia Agricultural Coun-
cil. The authors wish to thank Chad McKinney for technical
assistance.

REFERENCES
Aarestrup, F. M.

(2000). Charac-
terization of glycopeptide-resistant
Enterococcus faecium (GRE) from
broilers and pigs
in Denmark:
genetic evidence that persistence
of GRE in pig herds is associated
with coselection by resistance to
macrolides. J. Clin. Microbiol. 38,
2774–2777.

Ahmed, A. M., Younis, E. E. A., Osman,
S. A., Ishida, Y., El-khodery, S. A.,
and Shimamoto, T. (2009). Genetic
analysis of antimicrobial resistance
in Escherichia coli isolated from diar-
rheic neonatal calves. Vet. Microbiol.
136, 397–402.

Alexander, T. W., Reuter, T., Sharma, R.,
Yanke, L. J., Topp, E., and McAllis-
ter, T. A. (2009). Longitudinal char-
acterization of resistant Escherichia
coli in fecal deposits from cattle fed
subtherapeutic levels of antimicro-
bials. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75,
7125–7134.

Aminov, R. I., Chee-Sanford, J. C., Gar-
rigues, N., Teferedegne, B., Krapac,
I. J., White, B. A., and Mackie,
R.
I. (2002). Development, val-
idation and application of PCR
primers for detection of tetracycline
efﬂux genes of Gram-negative bac-
teria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68,
1786–1793.

Aminov, R. I., Garrigues-Jeanjean, N.,
and Mackie, R. I. (2001). Molec-
ular ecology of tetracycline resis-
tance: development and validation
of primers for detection of tetra-
cycline resistance genes encoding
ribosomal protection proteins. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 67, 22–32.

Ariefdjohan, M. W., Savaiano, D. A., and
Nakatsu, C. H. (2010). Comparison
of DNA extraction kits for PCR-
DGGE analysis of human intestinal

microbial communities from fecal
specimens. Nutr. J. 9, 23.

Arnold, S., Gassner, B., Giger, T.,
and wahlen, R. Z. (2004). Ban-
ning antimicrobial growth promot-
ers in feedstuffs does not result in
increased therapeutic use of antibi-
otics in medicated feed in pig farm-
ing. Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf.
13, 323–331.

Aschbacher, P. W., and Feil, V. J. (1994).
Neomycin metabolism in calves. J.
Anim. Sci. 72, 683–689.

Bager, F., Madsen, M., Christensen,
J., and Aarestrup, F. M. (1997).
Avoparcin used as a growth pro-
moter is associated with the occur-
rence of vancomycin-resistant Ente-
rococcus faecium on Danish poultry
and pig farms. Prevent. Vet. Med. 31,
95–112.

Bates,

J.

(1997). Epidemiology of
vancomycin-resistant enterococci in
the community and the relevance of
farm animals to human infection. J.
Hosp. Infect. 37, 89–101.

Berge, A. C., Epperson, W. B., and
Pritchard, R. H. (2005). Assessing
the effect of a single dose ﬂorfeni-
col treatment in feedlot cattle on the
antimicrobial resistance patterns in
fecal Escherichia coli. Vet. Res. 36,
723–734.

farm and

Berge, A. C., Hancock, D. D., Sischo,
W. M., and Besser, T. E. (2010).
Geographic,
animal
factors associated with multiple
antimicrobial
resistance in fecal
Escherichia
from
cattle
in the Western United
States. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 236,
1338–1344.

isolates

coli

Berge, A. C., Moore, D. A., Besser, T. E.,
and Sischo, W. M. (2009a). Targeting
therapy to minimize antimicrobial
use in preweaned calves: effects on

health, growth, and treatment costs.
J. Dairy Sci. 92, 4704–4714.

Berge, A. C., Besser, T. E., Moore, D. A.,
and Sischo, W. M. (2009b). Evalua-
tion of the effects of oral colostrum
supplementation during the ﬁrst
fourteen days on the health and per-
formance of preweaned calves. J.
Dairy Sci. 92, 286–295.

Berge, A. C., Moore, D. A., and Sischo,
W. M. (2006a). Field trial evaluat-
ing the inﬂuence of prophylactic and
therapeutic antimicrobial adminis-
tration on antimicrobial resistance
of
in dairy
calves. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72,
3872–3878.

fecal Escherichia coli

Berge, A. C., Moore, D. A., and Sischo,
W. M.
(2006b). Prevalence and
antimicrobial resistance patterns of
Salmonella enterica in preweaned
calves from dairies and calf ranches.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 67, 1580–1588.

Boerlin, P., Wissing, A., Aarestrup, F.
M., Frey, J., and Nicolet, J. (2001).
Antimicrobial
promoter
ban and resistance to macrolides
and vancomycin in enterococci
from pigs. J. Clin. Microbiol. 39,
4193–4195.

growth

Butaye, P., Devriese, L. A., and Hae-
sebrouck, F.
(2001). Differences
in antibiotic resistance patterns of
Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococ-
cus faecium strains isolated from
farm and pet animals. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 45, 1374–1378.

Casewell, M., Friis, C., Marco, E.,
McMullin, P., and Phillips, I. (2003).
The European ban on growth-
promoting antibiotics and emerging
consequences for human and animal
health. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 52,
159–161.

Chee-Sanford, J. C., Aminov, R. I., Kra-
pac, I. J., Garrigues-Jeanjean, N., and

Mackie, R. I. (2001). Occurrence and
diversity of tetracycline resistance
genes in lagoons and groundwater
underlying two swine production
facilities. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
67, 1494–1502.

Chen,

J., Yu, Z., Michel, F. C.,
Wittum, T., and Morrison, M.
(2007). Development and applica-
tion of real-time PCR assays for
quantiﬁcation of erm genes con-
ferring resistance to macrolides-
lincosamides-streptogramin B in
livestock manure and manure man-
agement
systems. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 73, 4407–4416.

(2010). Genetic

Dahshan, H., Shahada, F., Chuma,
and Okamoto,
T., Moriki, H.,
analysis of
K.
Salmonella
multidrug-resistant
enterica
and
serovars
Typhimurium from cattle. Vet.
Microbiol. 145, 76–83.

Stanley

Ghosh, S., Sadowsky, M. J., Roberts,
M. C., Gralnick, J. A., and LaPara,
T. M.
(2009). Sphingobacterium
sp strain PM2-P1-29 harbours
a functional
tet(X) gene encod-
ing for the degradation of tetra-
cycline.
J. Appl. Microbiol. 106,
1336–1342.

Grave, K.,

Jensen, V. F., Odensvik,
K., Wierup, M., and Bangen, M.
(2006). Usage of veterinary thera-
peutic antimicrobials in Denmark,
Norway and Sweden following ter-
mination of antimicrobial growth
promoter use. Prevent. Vet. Med. 75,
123–132.

Grave, K., Kaldhusdal, M., Krused, H.,
Fevang Harre, L. M., and Flat-
landsmo, K. (2004). What has hap-
pened in Norway after the ban of
avoparcin? Consumption of antimi-
crobials by poultry. Prevent. Vet.
Med. 62, 59–72.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 139 | 9

Thames et al.

Antibiotic resistance genes in calf feces

Hall, R., and Collis, C. (1998). Antibiotic
resistance in Gram-negative bacte-
ria: the role of gene cassettes and
integrons. Drug Resist. Updat. 1,
109–119.

Hardwick, S. A., Stokes, H. W., Find-
lay, S., Taylor, M., and Gillings, M.
R. (2008). Quantiﬁcation of class 1
integron abundance in natural envi-
ronments using real-time quantita-
tive PCR. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 278,
207–212.

Ho, P. L., Wong, R. C., Lo, S. W.,
Chow, K. H., Wong, S. S., and Que,
T. L. (2010). Genetic identity of
aminoglycoside-resistance genes in
Escherichia coli isolates from human
and animal sources. J. Med. Micro-
biol. 59, 702–707.

Houlihan, A. J., and Russell, J. B. (2003).
The susceptibility of
ionophore-
resistant Clostridium aminophilum F
to other antibiotics. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 52, 623–628.

Kaneene, J. B., Warnick, L. D., Bolin, C.
A., Erskine, R. J., May, K., and Miller,
R. A. (2008). Changes in tetracycline
susceptibility of enteric bacteria fol-
lowing switching to nonmedicated
milk replacer for dairy calves. J. Clin.
Microbiol. 46, 1968–1977.

Langford, F. M., Weary, D. M., and
Fisher, L. (2003). Antibiotic resis-
tance in gut bacteria from dairy
calves: a dose response to the level of
antibiotics fed in milk. J. Dairy Sci.
86, 3963–3966.

Larson, L. L., Owen, F. G., Albright, J.
L., Appleman, R. D., Lamb, R. C.,
and Muller, L. D. (1977). Guide-
lines toward more uniformity in
measuring and reporting calf exper-
imental data.
J. Dairy Sci. 60,
989–991.

Lauderdale, T. L., McDonald, L. C.,
Shiau, Y. R., Chen, P. C., Wang,
H. Y., Lai,
J. F., and Ho, M.
(2002). Vancomycin-resistant ente-
rococci
from humans and retail
chickens in Taiwan with unique
VanB phenotype-vanA genotype
incongruence. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 46, 525–527.

Lauderdale, T. L., Shiau, Y. R., Wang, H.
Y., Lai, J. F., Huang, I. W., Chen, P.
C., Chen, H. Y., Lai, S. S., Liu, Y. F.,
and Ho, M. (2007). Effect of banning
vancomycin analogue avoparcin on

vancomycin-resistant enterococci in
chicken farms in Taiwan. Environ.
Microbiol. 9, 819–823.

Layton, A., McKay, L., Williams, D., Gar-
rett, V., Gentry, R., and Sayler, G.
(2006). Development of bacteroides
16S rRNA gene TaqMan-based real-
time PCR assays for estimation of
total, human, and bovine fecal pollu-
tion in water. Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 72, 4214–4224.

Marshall, B. M., and Levy, S. B. (2011).
Food animals and antimicrobials:
impacts on human health. Clin.
Microbiol. Rev. 24, 718.

Mazel, D. (2006). Integrons: agents of
bacterial evolution. Nat. Rev. Micro-
biol. 4, 608–620.

McKinney, C. W., Loftin, K. A., Meyer,
M. T., Davis, J. G., and Pruden,
A. (2010).
tet and sul antibiotic
resistance genes in livestock lagoons
of various operation type, con-
ﬁguration, and antibiotic occur-
rence. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44,
6102–6109.

National Research Council

(NRC).
(2001). Nutrient Requirements of
Dairy Cattle, 7th Edn. Washington,
DC: The National Academies Press.
Ng, L. K., Martin, I., Alfa, M., and Mul-
vey, M. (2001). Multiplex PCR for
the detection of tetracycline resis-
tant genes. Mol. Cell. Probes 15,
209–215.

Nielsen, H. U. K., Hammerum, A.
M., Ekelund, K., Bang, D., Palle-
sen, L. V., and Frimodt-Moller, N.
(2004). Tetracycline and macrolide
co-resistance in Streptococcus pyo-
genes: co-selection as a reason for
increase in macrolide-resistant S-
pyogenes? Microb. Drug Resist. 10,
231–238.

Pei, R., Kim, S. C., Carlson, K. H., and
Pruden, A. (2006). Effect of river
landscape on the sediment concen-
trations of antibiotics and corre-
sponding antibiotic resistance genes
(ARG). Water Res. 40, 2427–2435.

Pereira, R. V. V., Santos, T. M. A., Bicalho,
M. L., Caixeta, L. S., Machado, V. S.,
and Bicalho, R. C. (2011). Antimi-
crobial resistance and prevalence
of virulence factor genes in fecal
Escherichia coli of Holstein calves fed
milk with and without antimicro-
bials. J. Dairy Sci. 94, 4556–4565.

Quigley, J. D., and Drew, M. D. (2000).
Effects of oral antibiotics or bovine
plasma on survival, health and
growth in dairy calves challenged
with Escherichia coli. Food Agric.
Immunol. 12, 311–318.

Sawant,A. A., Hegde, N. V., Straley, B. A.,
Donaldson, S. C., Love, B. C., Knabel,
S. J., and Jayarao, B. M. (2007).
Antimicrobial-resistant enteric bac-
teria from dairy cattle. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 73, 156–163.

Smith, M. S., Yang, R. K., Knapp,
C. W., Niu, Y., Peak, N., Han-
felt, M. M., Galland, J. C., and
Graham, D. W. (2004). Quantiﬁca-
tion of tetracycline resistance genes
in feedlot
lagoons by real-time
PCR. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70,
7372–7377.

Sommer, M. O., Danatas, A. G., and
Church, G. M. (2009). Functional
characterization of
the antibiotic
resistance reservoir in the human
microﬂora. Science 325, 1128–1131.
Srinivasan, V., Nam, H.-M., Sawant, A.
A., Headrick, S. I., Nguyen, L. I.,
and Oliver, S. P. (2008). Distrib-
ution of tetracycline and strepto-
mycin resistance genes and class 1
integrons in Enterobacteriaceae iso-
lated from dairy and nondairy farm
soils. Microb. Ecol. 55, 184–193.

Stanton, A. L., Kelton, D. F., LeBlanc,
S. J., Millman, S. T., Wormuth, J.,
Dingwell, R. T., and Leslie, K. E.
(2010). The effect of treatment with
long-acting antibiotic at postwean-
ing movement on respiratory disease
and on growth in commercial dairy
calves. J. Dairy Sci. 93, 574–581.

Storteboom, H. N., Kim, S. C., Doesken,
K., Davis, J., Carlson, K. H., and Pru-
den, A. (2007). Response of antibi-
otics and resistance genes to high-
intensity and low-intensity manure
management. J. Environ. Qual. 36,
1695–1703.

Suzuki, M. T., Taylor, L. T., and DeLong,
E. F. (2000). Quantitative analy-
sis of small-subunit rRNA genes
in mixed microbial populations via
(cid:2)
-nuclease assays. Appl. Environ.
5
Microbiol. 66, 4605–4614.

Wierup, M. (2001). The Swedish expe-
rience of
the 1986 year ban of
antimicrobial growth promoters,
with special reference to animal

health, disease prevention, produc-
tivity, and usage of antimicrobials.
Microb. Drug Resist. 7, 183–190.

Wileman, B. W., Thomson, D. U.,
Reinhardt, C. D.,
and Renter,
D. G. (2009). Analysis of mod-
ern technologies commonly used
in beef cattle production: con-
ventional beef production versus
nonconventional production using
meta-analysis.
J. Anim. Sci. 87,
3418–3426.

Wu, R. B., Alexander, T. W., Li, J. Q.,
Munns, K., Sharma, R., and McAl-
lister, T. A. (2011). Prevalence and
diversity of class 1 integrons and
resistance genes in antimicrobial-
resistant Escherichia coli originating
from beef cattle administered sub-
therapeutic antimicrobials. J. Appl.
Microbiol. 111, 511–523.

Yang, W. R., Moore, I. F., Koteva, K.
P., Bareich, D. C., Hughes, D. W.,
and Wright, D. G. (2004). TetX
is a ﬂavin-dependent monooxyge-
nase conferring resistance to tetracy-
cline antibiotics. J. Biol. Chem. 279,
52346–52352.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 02 November 2011; accepted: 23
March 2012; published online: 10 April
2012.
Citation: Thames CH, Pruden A, James
RE, Ray PP and Knowlton KF (2012)
Excretion of antibiotic resistance genes by
dairy calves fed milk replacers with vary-
ing doses of antibiotics. Front. Microbio.
3:139. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00139
This article was
submitted to Fron-
tiers in Antimicrobials, Resistance and
Chemotherapy, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Thames, Pruden,
James, Ray and Knowlton. This is an
open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 139 | 10

Thames et al.

APPENDIX

Table A1 | Gender and breed distribution across antibiotic treatment groups.

Antibiotic resistance genes in calf feces

Calf

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

Treatment

Control
Control
Control
Control
Control
Control
Control
Control
Control
Control
Control
Control
Subtherapeutic
Subtherapeutic
Subtherapeutic
Subtherapeutic
Subtherapeutic
Subtherapeutic
Subtherapeutic
Therapeutic
Therapeutic
Therapeutic
Therapeutic
Therapeutic
Therapeutic
Therapeutic
Therapeutic
Therapeutic

Breed

Crossbred
Crossbred
Crossbred
Holstein
Holstein
Holstein
Crossbred
Crossbred
Crossbred
Holstein
Holstein
Holstein
Crossbred
Crossbred
Holstein
Crossbred
Crossbred
Holstein
Holstein
Crossbred
Crossbred
Holstein
Holstein
Holstein
Crossbred
Crossbred
Holstein
Holstein

Gender

Heifer
Heifer
Heifer
Heifer
Heifer
Heifer
Bull
Bull
Bull
Bull
Bull
Bull
Heifer
Heifer
Heifer
Bull
Bull
Heifer
Bull
Heifer
Heifer
Heifer
Heifer
Heifer
Bull
Bull
Bull
Bull

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 139 | 11

Thames et al.

Antibiotic resistance genes in calf feces

Table A2 | Primers and annealing temperatures used in this study.
Primer sequence (5(cid:2)–3(cid:2))

Target gene

Primer

Annealing temperature (˚C)

Reference

sul1-Fw
sul1-Rv
sul2-Fw
sul2-Rv
erm(B)-Fw
erm(B)-Rv
erm(F)-Fw
erm(F)-Rv
tet(C)-Fw
tet(C)-Rv
tet(G)-Fw
tet(G)-Rv
tet(O)-Fw
tet(O)-Rv
tet(W)-Fw
tet(W)-Rv
tet(X)-Fw
tet(X)-Rv
HS463a
HS464
1369F
1492R

sul1

sul2

erm( B)

erm(F)

tet(C)

tet(G)

tet(O)

tet(W)

tet(X)

intI1

16S rRNA

CGCACCGGAAACATCGCTGCAC
TGAAGTTCCGCCGCAAGGCTCG
TCCGGTGGAGGCCGGTATCTGG
CGGGAATGCCATCTGCCTTGAG
GATACCGTTTACGAAATTGG
GAATCGAGACTTGAGTGTGC
CGACACAGCTTTGGTTGAAC
GGACCTACCTCATAGACAAG
GCGGGATATCGTCCATTCCG
GCGTAGAGGATCCACAGGACG
GCAGAGCAGGTCGCTGG
CCYGCAAGAGAAGCCAGAAG
ACGGARAGTTTATTGTATACC
TGGCGTATCTATAATGTTGAC
GAGAGCCTGCTATATGCCAGC
GGGCGTATCCACAATGTTAAC
CAATAATTGGTGGTGGACCC
TTCTTACCTTGGACATCCCG
CTGGATTTCGATCACGGCACG
ACATGCGTGTAAATCATCGTCG
CGGTGAATACGTTCYCGG
GGWTACCTTGTTACGACTT

69.9

67.5

58

56

70

64.2

50.3

60

64.5

60

60

Pei et al. (2006)

Pei et al. (2006)

Chen et al. (2007)

Chen et al. (2007)

Aminov et al. (2002)

Aminov et al. (2002)

Aminov et al. (2001)

Aminov et al. (2001)

Ng et al. (2001)

Hardwick et al. (2008)

Suzuki et al. (2000)

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 139 | 12

