REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 19 March 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00092

IRES-dependent translational control during virus-induced
endoplasmic reticulum stress and apoptosis

Paul J. Hanson, Huifang M. Zhang, Maged Gomaa Hemida, Xin Ye,Ye Qiu and Decheng Yang*

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Institute for Heart and Lung Health, St. Paul’s Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada

Edited by:
Akio Adachi, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Japan
Reviewed by:
Chris Sullivan, University of Texas at
Austin, USA
Dahlene N. Fusco, Massachusetts
General Hospital, USA
*Correspondence:
Decheng Yang, The James Hogg
Research Center, St. Paul’s Hospital,
University of British Columbia, 1081
Burrard Street, Vancouver, BC,
Canada V6Z 1Y6.
e-mail: decheng.yang@hli.ubc.ca

Many virus infections and stresses can induce endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response,
a host self-defense mechanism against viral invasion and stress. During this event, viral and
cellular gene expression is actively regulated and often encounters a switching of the trans-
lation initiation from cap-dependent to internal ribosome-entry sites (IRES)-dependent.This
switching is largely dependent on the mRNA structure of the 5(cid:2) untranslated region (5(cid:2)
UTR) and on the particular stress stimuli. Picornaviruses and some other viruses contain
IRESs within their 5(cid:2) UTR of viral genome and employ an IRES-driven mechanism for
translation initiation. Recently, a growing number of cellular genes involved in growth con-
trol, cell cycle progression and apoptosis were also found to contain one or more IRES
within their long highly structured 5(cid:2) UTRs. These genes initiate translation usually by
a cap-dependent mechanism under normal physiological conditions; however, in certain
environments, such as infection, starvation, and heat shock they shift translation initiation
to an IRES-dependent modality. Although the molecular mechanism is not entirely under-
stood, a number of studies have revealed that several cellular biochemical processes are
responsible for the switching of translation initiation to IRES-dependent. These include
the cleavage of translation initiation factors by viral and/or host proteases, phosphoryla-
tion (inactivation) of host factors for translation initiation, overproduction of homologous
proteins of cap-binding protein eukaryotic initiation factors (eIF)4E, suppression of cap-
binding protein eIF4E expression by speciﬁc microRNA, activation of enzymes for mRNA
decapping, as well as others. Here, we summarize the recent advances in our understand-
ing of the molecular mechanisms for the switching of translation initiation, particularly for
the proteins involved in cell survival and apoptosis in the ER stress pathways during viral
infections.

Keywords: internal ribosome-entry site, endoplasmic reticulum stress, microRNA, apoptosis, picornavirus, transla-
tion control, coxsackievirus

(cid:2)

INTRODUCTION
Translation initiation is a rate-limiting step of protein synthesis.
It is highly regulated by different mechanisms, depending on the
structural distinction of mRNAs. Most cellular mRNAs are trans-
lated by a cap-dependent mechanism that requires the binding of
the trimeric complex eukaryotic initiation factors (eIF)4F, com-
prised of eIF4G, eIF4E, and eIF4A, to the 7-methyl GpppN cap
structure at the 5
end of the mRNA. Some viral and cellular
mRNAs have evolved a cap-independent mechanism of transla-
tion initiation that uses the internal ribosome-entry site (IRES)
(cid:2)
sequence that is located in the 5
UTR) of
mRNA (Holcik and Sonenberg, 2005). The IRES was discovered
ﬁrst in poliovirus (a typical member of picornaviruses) and later in
other viruses such as hepatitis C virus (HCV), HIV, Herpesviruses,
etc., and also in many cellular mRNAs (Jang et al., 1988; Pelletier
and Sonenberg, 1988; Labadie et al., 2004; Locker et al., 2011). The
cellular physiological conditions dictate when a given mRNA uses
cap-dependent or IRES-dependent translation initiation. Under
normal conditions, cellular mRNAs translation is initiated by a
cap-dependent manner; however, under stress conditions, such as

untranslated region (5

(cid:2)

starvation, irradiation, heat shock, hypoxia, toxin, and viral infec-
tion, the translation initiation is switched from cap-dependent to
an IRES-driven mechanism (Komar and Hatzoglou, 2005; Spriggs
et al., 2005).

(cid:2)

Many viral infections trigger endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress
responses in a variety of ways inside the host cell. One of the most
signiﬁcant effects is the shutting off cap-dependant translation,
which results in activation of IRES-dependent translational mech-
anisms. This is quite apparent in picornaviruses because their viral
mRNA does not contain a cap structure at the 5
end and its IRES
(cid:2)
located in the 5
UTR recruits ribosomes and other factors, which
then scan to reach the initiation codon without the requirement of
the eIF4E (Jang, 2006; Jang et al., 2009). These viruses are able to
beneﬁt from the ER stress response, enhancing protein synthesis,
and thus enhancing their self-defense capability. The mechanisms
by which the virus infections and other stress signals achieve inhi-
bition of cap-dependent translation of cellular mRNAs include: (i)
speciﬁc cleavage of cellular translational initiation factors, such as
the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4GI (eIF4GI) by picor-
naviral and HIV proteases (Etchison et al., 1982; Lamphear et al.,

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 1

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

1993; Ohlmann et al., 2002; Chau et al., 2007; Castello et al., 2009)
or by cellular caspases (Marissen and Lloyd, 1998). (ii) Phospho-
rylation of eIF2α and other co-factors of translation. The cleavage
or modiﬁcation of the translation factors does not affect IRES-
driven translation, instead promotes IRES-containing mRNA to
utilize speciﬁc IRES transacting factors (ITAF) for their translation
(Morley et al., 2005; Raught and Gringas, 2007). (iii) Overpro-
duction of homologous proteins of cap-binding protein eIF4E
(e.g., 4E-BP), which competes with eIF4G for binding (Marcotri-
giano et al., 1999) to eIF4E (iv) suppression of eIF4E expression
by certain microRNAs (miRNA; Mathonnet et al., 2007; Ho et al.,
2011).

The rapid inhibition of cellular cap-dependent protein synthe-
sis has been demonstrated as a critical precursor to cell fate, in this
context, it is noteworthy that the IRES-containing cellular mRNAs
are found to be preferentially involved in the control of cell fate
by functioning to promote cell growth and survival or apoptosis
(Spriggs et al., 2005; Sonenberg and Hinnebusch, 2009; Jackson
et al., 2010). These genes include; Beta-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2)
family proteins, apoptotic protease activating factor 1 (Apaf-1),
checkpoint homolog kinase 1(Chk-1), eIF4GII, p53, p58IPK, and
78 kDa Glucose-regulated protein 78 or Binding immunoglobulin
protein (GRP78/BiP), etc. (Komar and Hatzoglou, 2005; Spriggs
et al., 2005). Cellular genes containing IRESs in their mRNA
are continually being newly discovered. However, to date, all of
these genes are involved in apoptosis/proliferation, stress response,
and/or cell cycle regulation. It was therefore suggested that IRES-
mediated translation plays critical roles in regulation of cell fate
(Spriggs et al., 2005). Previous studies have indicated that the
cell fate decision is made based on the severity and duration of
the stress signal. Under a transient stress or infection, the IRES
will mediate translation initiation of genes promoting cell sur-
vival/growth, which enhance cellular capability to combat viral
infection. However, under a severe or prolonged stress such as
persistent infection of picornaviruses and others, translation ini-
tiation will selectively express the genes responsible for inducing
cell apoptosis (Henis-Korenblit et al., 2002; Lewis et al., 2008),
effectively destroying the host cells, and limiting viral infection of
surrounding cells. In any circumstance, the host cell will employ
an alternate way to defend itself. In this review we will discuss the
recent advances in the understanding of IRES-mediated transla-
tional control of genes under stress conditions, particularly focus
on ER stress caused by picornaviral and other viral infections.

VIRAL INDUCED ER STRESS RESPONSE PATHWAYS
Endoplasmic reticulum stress response is a major component
of disease (Tabas and Ron, 2011). Many viral infections induce
ER stress and have adapted mechanisms to modulate the stress
response and its effectors. On the cellular level, ER stress may be
triggered by many factors, including serum starvation, hypoxia,
changes in calcium homeostasis, and viral infections as well as
other perturbations (Chakrabarti et al., 2011). In general, ER
stress is triggered by the accumulation of misfolded or unfolded
proteins in the ER lumen. In response to this stress, a coordi-
nated adaptive program termed the unfolded protein response
(UPR) is activated and serves to minimize the accumulation and
aggregation of misfolded proteins (Chakrabarti et al., 2011). The

molecules and signaling pathways of the UPR may vary slightly
dependant upon cell type. The stress response or UPR is regulated
by master regulatory protein, BiP or GRP78. The initial phase of
the ER stress response acts to increase the removal and folding of
misfolded or unfolded proteins. In its non-stressed state, BiP is
bound to the ER-luminal domain of the transmembrane proteins
including PKR-like ER kinase (PERK), inositol requiring enzyme
1 (IRE1), and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6; Chakrabarti
et al., 2011). These are the three major arms of the UPR. Viral
infection causes the rapid accumulation of viral and other cellular
proteins trafﬁcked to the ER. When excess proteins accumulate
in the ER lumen, BiP dissociates from its three transmembrane
sensors, which results in the initiation of the functional activation
of the three major arms of the UPR. PERK and IRE1 are acti-
vated and undergo homodimerization and auto-phosphorylation
(Liu et al., 2000; Bollo et al., 2010; Oikawa and Kimata, 2011),
triggering their downstream genes. The activation of the IRE1
pathway leads to the splicing of X box binding protein 1 (XBP1; Lee
et al., 2002). This spliced form of XBP1 mRNA encodes an active
transcription factor that binds to the promoter of unfold protein
response element (UPRE) to induce expression of a subset of genes
encoding protein degradation enzymes, resulting in ER-associated
misfolded protein degradation (Lee et al., 2003). The activation
of PERK results in the phosphorylation of eIF2 on its α subunit
(Raven and Koromilas, 2008). This effectively shuts down global,
cap-dependant protein synthesis, and causes a shift in translation
to that of cellular mRNA containing IRESs, reducing the burden
of accumulating proteins in the ER (Harding et al., 2002). This
constitutes a translational switch to IRES-mediated translation
initiation. UPR activation also involves ATF6 activation, resulting
in its migration to the Golgi apparatus, where it is cleaved by S1P
and S2P proteases, releasing a soluble fragment that enters the
nucleus and bind to promoters containing the ER stress response
elements (ERSE) and ATF/cAMP response elements (CREs) to
activate ER chaperone genes, such as BiP, GRP94, and calreticulin
(Yoshida et al., 2001). These newly synthesized chaperones refold
misfolded proteins in the ER in an effort to relieve ER stress. ATF6
also promotes XBP1 splicing (Lee et al., 2002), which indicates the
interconnectedness of the three branches of the UPR. The shift
from cap-dependant to cap-independent translation mediated by
ER stress is critical to both cell fate and viral infection produc-
tivity. Many viruses, particularly RNA viruses, such as members
of the Picornaviridae family, have evolved to replicate through
cap-independent mechanisms, thus the shut-off of global protein
synthesis induced by ER stress is of major strategic importance.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress when chronic or prolonged may
lead to the induction of ER mediated apoptosis (Tabas and Ron,
2011). As is the case in viral infection, viral proteases also inhibit
select cellular translational components, which may be initiated
by ER stress. Our group has demonstrated that coxsackievirus
B3 (CVB3) protease 2A and 3C can cleave eIFGI and induce cell
apoptosis (Chau et al., 2007). Viral proteins, such as picornaviral
protein 2B, have been shown to contribute to the depletion of cal-
cium stores within the ER (Wang et al., 2011a), furthering the viral
life cycle by contributing to viral release. Prolonged and sustained
severe ER stress eventually drives the cell to apoptosis (Mekahli
et al., 2011). Although signiﬁcant progress in our understanding of

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 2

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

apoptosis initiated by ER stress has been made in recent years, the
molecular mechanisms of ER induced apoptosis are yet to be fully
elucidated. The functions of the three branches of the UPR (IRE1,
ATF6, PERK) act in concert during prolonged/severe ER stress to
induce apoptosis. During these conditions, the endonuclease activ-
ity of IRE1 becomes less speciﬁc. As a result IRE1 contributes to
the degradation of membrane associated mRNA, termed regulated
IRE1 dependant degradation (RIDD). RIDD activation and XBP1
splicing indicate two distinct functions for IRE1 during ER stress,
the former being pro-apoptotic and the latter generally regarded
as protective (Hollien et al., 2009). Previous studies indicate a
correlation between enhanced ER stress-induced apoptosis and
the induction of RIDD activity. RIDD activity requires the nucle-
ase domain of IRE1 to be activated whereas IRE1 induced XBP1
splicing is modulated by IRE1 kinase domain activation (Hollien
et al., 2009). IRE1 has also been shown to bind Bcl-2 homologous
antagonist/killer (Bak) and Bcl-2 associated x protein (Bax; Hetz
et al., 2006), two pro-apoptotic proteins from the Bcl-2 family
previously described in mitochondria derived apoptosis. Recently,
however, it was shown that Bax translocates not only to the mito-
chondria, but also to the ER membrane during prolonged ER stress
(McCullough et al., 2001; Gotoh et al., 2004; Hetz et al., 2006; Wang
et al., 2011b). Once on the ER membrane, Bax permeabilizes the
membrane, and causes the translocation of ER-luminal proteins
to the cytosol (Wang et al., 2011b). Normally anti-apoptotic in
function, BiP, once in the cytoplasm translocates to the plasma
membrane where it becomes an apoptotic inducing receptor for
prostate apoptosis response-4 (Par-4; Wang et al., 2011a). Par-4 has
been shown to co-localize with BiP in the ER. The binding of Par-4
to membrane bound BiP activates the extrinsic apoptotic cas-
cade through FADD, caspase-8, and caspase-3 (Burikhanov et al.,
2009). Interestingly, the secretion of Par-4 is activated by TRAIL
(Hart and El-Deiry, 2009). Several viruses including avian H5N1
and HIV have been shown promote cell death through TRAIL
activated apoptosis in macrophages by enhancing TRAIL induced
caspase-10 activation (Ekchariyawat et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2011).
In addition, during prolonged and severe ER stress, PERK also
enhances the translation of speciﬁc downstream genes, including
activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4; Fels and Koumenis, 2006).
ATF4 is able to activate pro-apoptotic C/EBP homologous protein
(CHOP) in conditions of prolonged, severe ER stress (Ma et al.,
2002). CHOP acts to induce apoptosis by promoting constitutively
expressed Bax translocation to the mitochondria through inhibi-
tion of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 transcription, as Bcl-2 functions to
inhibit Bax in pro-survival conditions (McCullough et al., 2001;
Gotoh et al., 2004). Here we see a connection between apoptosis
mediated by IRE1 (by binding to Bax/Bak) and by PERK-mediated
CHOP activation through ATF4, stressing the importance of cross
talk between the three arms of the UPR. Interestingly, CHOP acts
as a negative regulator of eIF2α phosphorylation as well (Novoa
et al., 2001). The importance of these pathways in both global
translation attenuation and apoptosis has made them the target
of manipulation of many viruses. For example, hepatitis E virus
(HEV) open reading frame 2 protein (ORF-2) is able to modulate
ER stress-induced apoptosis by increasing eIF2α phosphoryla-
tion and activation of CHOP, simultaneously (John et al., 2011).
Our lab also obtained a similar result in studying CVB3-induced

apoptosis through phosphorylation of eIF2α and activation of
CHOP; however, this activation is not through ATF4 but through
ATF6 (Zhang et al., 2011b). For HEV, during infection, CHOP,
which normally induces apoptosis and translocation of Bax to the
mitochondria, is unable to perform this pro-apoptotic function.
This is due to the simultaneous activation and interaction of heat
shock proteins Hsp70B, Hsp72, and Hsp40 by HEV protein ORF-2
(John et al., 2011). Several members of the heat shock protein fam-
ily, including Hsp70, have been demonstrated to contain an IRES
(cid:2)
element in its long 5
UTR region of mRNA (Ahmed and Duncan,
2004; Hernandez et al., 2004). This strategic modulation of pro-
apoptosis and pro-survival proteins occurs presumably to delay
apoptosis, while allowing the viral replication cycle to continue
to completion. This demonstrates the careful strategic interplay
between the virus and host translational factors as well as host cell
components of the UPR. In doing so, the virus is able to modulate
the delicate balance between apoptosis and survival.

(cid:2)

STRUCTURES OF IRES
CLASSIFICATION OF VIRAL IRESs
Internal ribosome-entry sites-dependant translation initiation was
(cid:2)
ﬁrst described in 1988 in the 5
UTR of the RNA genome of
poliovirus (PV; Pelletier and Sonenberg, 1988). Since this orig-
inal discovery, IRES elements have been identiﬁed in the long,
highly structured 5
UTR of almost all picornaviruses, includ-
ing encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV; Lindeberg and Ebendal,
1999), Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV; Ohlmann and Jack-
son, 1999), CVB3 (Yang et al., 1997) human rhinoviruses (HRV;
Rojas-Eisenring et al., 1995), and other viruses, such as, Hepati-
tis A (Ali et al., 2001), HIV (Weill et al., 2010), and DNA viruses
such as Kaposi’s sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV; Bieleski et al., 2004).
Inherit to viral strategy viruses must utilize cellular translational
machinery in order for translation and replication occur. Transla-
tion initiation is the rate-limiting step of translation, which is the
reason that it has evolved as a key strategic process, vital to viral
strategy. Picornaviral mRNA, like many RNA viruses, is uncapped
terminal m7GpppN cap structure found in cel-
or lacks the 5
lular mRNAs (Belsham, 2009). Instead, picornaviruses and other
IRES translating viruses contain a small, virus-encoded peptide
or VPg (Jang et al., 1990). The discovery of IRES elements across
a variety of viruses also identiﬁed distinct structural and func-
tional differences amongst them, leading to the implementation
of an IRES classiﬁcation scheme. Viral IRESs are subdivided into
four categories based on their structure, function, and mechanism
of initiation of translation. All four IRES types commonly share
the necessity of (on some level) involving non-canonical transla-
tional factors that interact with IRES and replace the function of
some canonical translation initiation factors. The factors involved
vary, dependent upon the IRES, the structure, degree of interac-
tion, and factors involved form the basis for IRES designation and
classiﬁcation.

(cid:2)

Type I IRESs (Figure 1) comprise enteroviruses and rhi-
noviruses. These IRESs contain a tetra-loop, which is cloverleaf
structure in stem-loop position I that resembles the four-way junc-
tion of tRNA. This structure interacts with host cellular protein
poly(rC)-binding protein 2 (PCBP2) and viral protein 3CD to
form a bridge between the 5
ends to facilitate multiple

and 3

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 3

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

FIGURE 1 | Schematic of proposed secondary structure of viral IRESs. (A)
Type I IRES represented by PV-1 (adapted from Jang, 2006) (B) Type II IRES
represented by EMCV (adapted from Jang, 2006) (C) Type III IRES
represented by HCV (adapted from Beales et al., 2003 (D) Type IV IRES

represented by Plautia stali intestine virus (PSIV; adapted from Kanamori and
Nakashima, 2001) (E) DNA virus IRES represented by Kaposi’s sarcoma
herpesvirus (KSHV; adapted from Beales et al., 2003) (F) HIV IRES, represent
by HIV-2 (adapted from Locker et al., 2011).

rounds of viral replication (Fernandez-Miragall et al., 2009).
Downstream of the cloverleaf stem-loop at position I are three
distinctive C-rich motifs that precede the stem-loop at position II.
Two more C-rich regions are present in domain IV. There is also
a pyrimidine tract motif located downstream of domain V, with
a silent AUG region found 10–15 bases further downstream. The

functional AUG initiation codon is traditionally further down-
stream from the silent AUG in type I IRESs, so the ribosome must
scan downstream to the next AUG to begin translation initiation.
Unlike cap-dependant translation initiation, there are binding
sites for the eIF4G region absent the N-terminal, eIF4E-binding
domain. It is this feature that allows the ribosome to be recruited

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 4

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

independent of the cap structure, which is the hallmark of IRES-
dependent translation. N-terminal deﬁcient eIF4G is the integral
translation initiation factor in the recruitment of the 43S riboso-
mal subunit, a process that is further enhanced by eIF4A. In fact,
mutations made to the eIF4G-binding domain of the poliovirus
IRES are the basis for the mutation of the PV strain given as the
vaccine, further stressing the importance of translation initiation
as a rate-limiting step (Malnou et al., 2004). All together, type I
IRESs contain six stem loops termed stem loops I–VI. The authen-
tic IRES structure is located in the stem loop II–VI region, which
facilitates initiation and translation of the viral genome (Pelletier
and Sonenberg, 1988). Many of the canonical translation initia-
tion factors with the exception of eIF4E and the N-terminal region
of eIF4G are necessary for type I and II IRES translation. For this
reason, viral modulation of these cap-dependant translation ini-
tiation factors has been identiﬁed as a vital component to viral
strategy. Type I and II IRESs also utilize non-canonical transla-
tion initiation factors, termed IRES transacting factors (ITAFs).
Examples of ITAFs include La autoantigen, pyrimidine tract bind-
ing (PTB) protein, and upstream of N-Ras (UNR; Costa-Mattioli
et al., 2004; Cornelis et al., 2005; Verma et al., 2010). ITAFs allow
for the bypass of canonical translation initiation factors that are
likely the target of viral strategy, either through direct proteolytic
cleavage or modulation of pathways (such as UPR modulation)
that negate their function.

(cid:2)

Type II IRESs (Figure 1) comprise the cardio- and aph-
thoviruses of the Picornaviridae family. There are several distinc-
tive features of the IRES structure which differentiates the type II
from that of the type I IRES. The 5
UTR are signiﬁcantly longer
than their type I counterparts. In place of the cloverleaf struc-
ture at stem-loop position I, there is a hairpin or S structure.
Just downstream of the S structure is an ∼200 bp C-tract that
separates the S structure from the coding region. In between the
C-rich tract and the coding region there are three structural dis-
tinct regions. The ﬁrst are two to four pseudoknots, next is the
cis-acting replication element (cre) and lastly the IRES element,
which spans stem loops II–V, also termed H–L. Just downstream
are two AUG triplets that actively initiate protein synthesis. Inter-
estingly, each produces a unique version of the leader protein.
Type II IRESs require many of the canonical translation initia-
tion factors. eIF4G, eIF4A, and eIF4B have been demonstrated to
interact with the SL J/K/L regions of the type II IRESs, with muta-
tions to theses domains causing reductions in IRES activity (Jang,
2006). As mentioned above, IRES often utilizes ITAFs, which fur-
ther enhance translation in the absence of the canonical translation
factors. The variability of ITAFs and canonical translation factors
seen amongst the four types of IRESs is indicative of differences
amongst IRES structural components, which are able mimic the
function of both.

Type III and IV IRES (Figure 1) structures demonstrate a new
level of IRES-mediated translation initiation in which they are
able to induce conformational changes directly to the ribosome
that inﬂuence its entry, position, and stability (Hellen, 2009). Fla-
viviruses, such as HCV, IRES are prototypical representatives of
type III IRESs. The HCV IRES contains three distinctive domains;
II, III, and IV. Domain II is an irregular shaped, long stem-loop
structure. Domain III is a pseudoknot that also contains several

i.

hairpin-structured sub-domains, IIIa–IIIf, whereas domain IV is a
short hairpin structure containing the initiation codon. The HCV
IRES, like all other type III IRESs, is able to directly and inde-
pendently bind the 40S subunit, thereby bypassing the need for
canonical eIFs 4A, 4B, 4F, 1, and 1A. HCV has been shown to
require eIF3 and the eIF2 · GTP/Met - tRNAMet
ternary complex
to bind sequentially for translation initiation. However, some type
III IRESs, such as the simian picornavirus type 9 (SPV9) IRES,
have been shown to promote Met-tRNAMet
i recruitment to the
ribosome independent of eIF2 (de Breyne et al., 2008). Therefore
negating the need for eIF2, which is quite often phosphorylated
(i.e., translationally inactivated) during viral infection due to
interferon activation of PKR or PERK, which induce subsequent
phosphorylation of the eIF2α subunit. Type III IRES-containing
viral mRNA has been demonstrated to be more resistant to trans-
lation inhibition caused by eIF2α phosphorylation than that of the
cap-dependent cellular mRNAs (Pestova et al., 2008).

Type IV IRESs (Figure 1) initiate translation on the intergenic
region (IGR) by direct binding of the 40S subunit or to the 80S
ribosome. They are represented by the dicistroviruses, particu-
larly the cricket paralysis virus (CrPV), which contain the smallest
regions for internal ribosomal entry. Structurally, its IRES consist
of three distinct domains. Each domain contains a pseudoknot
and may or may not contain a hairpin like structure in stem-loop
3. Type IV IRESs translation initiation occurs without the involv-
ing any canonical initiation factors, initiator tRNA or a proper
AUG start codon. In contrast to conventional AUG codon for
IRES translation initiation, the start codon of type IV IRESs may
be GCU, GCA, GCC, or CAA. In fact, studies have shown that
translation initiation of CrPV IRES is impaired by the promo-
tion of the eIF2 · GTP/Met - tRNAMet
ternary complex to the 40S
subunit. This may be an evolutionary advancement of conditions
where the eIF2α is phosphorylated, such as during ER stress and
viral infection (Hellen, 2009).

i.

IRES OF LENTIVIRUSES
The HIV IRESs (Figure 1) represent yet another new class of IRES,
not previously characterized. On one hand, it displays type III
IRES properties possessing the ability to directly and indirectly
bind to 40S and eIF3 (Locker et al., 2011). On the other hand,
it requires all eIF’s except for eIF4E and eIF1, a property of class
I and II IRESs (Locker et al., 2011). The structure of the HIV
(cid:2)
IRES is highly complex. It contains a long 5
UTR harboring a
Tar stem-loop, Poly-(A), PBS, DIS, SD, and Psi regions (Vallejos
et al., 2011). Interestingly, in contrast to its type I, II, and III IRES
counterparts, the HIV IRES appears to be resistant to structural
mutations which to date have been unable to alter its function
(Vallejos et al., 2011). Also unique is its ability to recruit three ini-
tiation complexes to a single RNA molecule (Locker et al., 2011).
The translational requirements of HIV IRESs lend themselves
to the notion that, while able to be translated cap-dependently,
HIV RNA possesses and indeed utilizes IRESs as part of a tightly
regulated and conserved method of cap-independent translation.
The redundant of ability of HIV to translate through a variety of
mechanisms highlights the importance of translation being a key,
highly regulated process of the viral lifecycle. The utilization of
the HIV IRESs takes place relatively late in the viral life cycle, in

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 5

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

fact, it is regulated by the G2/M phase of the cell cycle and also
activated by osmotic stress (Vallejos et al., 2011). This is particu-
larly interesting given that cap-dependent translation is shut-off
during the cell cycle, leading to the notion of a new level of evolu-
tionary complexity exempliﬁed by the ability of HIV to modulate
translation between cap-dependant and independent translation
based on cell physiology. The HIV IRES also utilizes a subset of
ITAFs that are exclusively available during the G2/M phase (Valle-
jos et al., 2011). The utilization of its IRES is thought to regulate
the transition between translation and encapsidation. The HIV-2
virus is only able to be encapsidated once the cognate form of it
is translated, versus HIV-1 that can be either translated or prop-
agated as a genome and encapsidated into virons (Locker et al.,
2011). This is suggestive of a possible role of generation of struc-
tural/functional proteins in correlation with its IRES. In fact, the
gag polyprotein encoded by the Gag IRES associates with 5
UTR
of HIV mRNA, forming a gRNA–Gag complex that inhibits ribo-
somal scanning, decreases translation, and increases encapsidation
(Chamond et al., 2010). The ability to switch from cap-dependent
to IRES-dependant translation by HIV is most closely related to
that of cellular IRES-containing mRNA, which will be addressed
in the next section.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

IRES OF CELLULAR mRNA
While many of the viral IRES-containing mRNAs have been stud-
ied quite extensively, much less is known about cellular IRES-
containing mRNA. It is estimated that ∼10–15% of cellular mRNA
possesses the ability to translate via cap-independent mechanisms
(Johannes et al., 1999; Qin and Sarnow, 2004; Spriggs et al., 2008;
Graber et al., 2010). The cellular genes that contain IRESs in their
mRNAs usually code for proteins that are involved in growth, pro-
liferation, apoptosis, stress response, differentiation, and cell cycle
regulation (Komar and Hatzoglou, 2011). Cellular IRESs often
are found in mRNA containing long 5
UTRs that are rich in
GC and have complex secondary structures (Holcik and Sonen-
berg, 2005). Often, in the mRNA structure there are also multiple
short modules whose combined effects are IRES activation, as
well as pseudoknots, that are believed to be inhibitory in function
(Stoneley and Willis, 2004). However, to date there is no consensus
structural or conformational motifs that are conserved among cel-
lular IRES that would make them easily identiﬁable. Unlike their
structurally stable viral counterparts, cellular IRESs identiﬁed to
date follow a pattern of less structure corresponding to enhanced
IRES activation (Filbin and Kieft, 2009). Like their viral counter-
parts, cellular IRESs are able to initiate translation without many
of the canonical translational factors, particularly cap-binding fac-
tors such as eIF4E (Hellen and Sarnow, 2001). Cellular IRESs also
utilize ITAFs to replace canonical translational factors rendered
unavailable. Many of the ITAFs utilized by the cell are also uti-
lized by viruses, including PTB, UNR, poly-(rC)-binding protein 1
(PCBP1), La autoantigen, and hnRNPC1/C2, many of which shut-
tle between the nucleus and cytoplasm (Stoneley and Willis, 2004).
Dicistronic cellular mRNA containing IRESs were inactive when
introduced directly into the cytoplasm, suggesting the possibility
of prerequisite nuclear ITAF–IRES complex formation for IRES
activation, at least for apoptotic genes (Spriggs et al., 2005). Inter-
estingly, much like the highly evolved HIV IRES, the G2/M phase

of the cell cycle (where cap-dependent protein synthesis is inhib-
ited) is important for cell cycle regulatory gene’s IRES activation
as well, including p58PITSLRE (Stoneley and Willis, 2004).

DNA VIRUS IRES
Much less studied are the DNA viruses, which transcribe mRNA
containing an IRES that translates certain proteins independent
of the cap structure, much like there cellular IRES counter-
parts. To date, there are six known DNA viruses known to con-
tain IRESs, four of which belong to the Herpesviridae family
(http://iresite.org/), particularly the latent gammaherpesviruses
(Coleman et al., 2003). The most well documented DNA viral
IRES is that of the Kaposi’s sarcoma herpes virus (KSHV; Figure 1;
Bieleski and Talbot, 2001) while others include Herpes simplex
virus (Grifﬁths and Coen, 2005) and Marek’s disease virus (Tahiri-
Alaoui et al., 2009) to name a few. The KSHV IRES is representative
of most IRESs in the Herpesviridae family in that it is similar in
structure to that of HCV, containing two major stem loops (Beales
et al., 2003). Although most IRESs identiﬁed are located in the
(cid:2)
5
UTR, the KSHV IRES is found in the coding sequence of the
upstream cistron, vCyclin (Bieleski and Talbot, 2001). Interest-
ingly, the KSHV IRES is translational active during viral latency
and codes for a viral Fas-associated death domain (FADD)-like
interleukin-1 beta-converting enzyme (FLICE)-inhibitory pro-
tein, vFLIP (Flice inhibitory protein homolog), which inhibits
caspase activation and also promotes proliferation (Bieleski
and Talbot, 2001). Again, the trend for IRES involved in cell
growth/proliferation is consistent in DNA viruses as well. While
there remains quite a bit yet to be discovered in our understand-
ing of the structure and function of IRES elements in translation
initiation, clearly, the stress-induced shift from cap-dependent to
IRES-dependant translation is a vital strategy for the cell and virus
to survive unfavorable conditions (for a comprehensive review of
current known IRESs, the reader may refer to http://iresite.org/).

MECHANISMS OF SURVIVAL: SWITCHING TRANSLATION
INITIATION FROM CAP-DEPENDENT TO IRES-DEPENDENT
As discussed above, both the cells and viruses use the strategy
for survival through switching translation initiation from cap-
dependent to IRES-dependent. During this process, both the
canonical translation factors and ITAFs utilized by a given virus are
dependent upon IRES structure, as it is highly indicative of func-
tion. For example, structural components found in the mRNA
of HCV IRES are able to mimic the function of certain canoni-
cal translational factors (Sonenberg and Hinnebusch, 2009). HCV
also utilizes litagin and the oncogenes MCT-1/DENR as ITAFs,
supplementing the function canonical factors of eIF1, eIF1A, eIF3,
and eIF3 (Skabkin et al., 2010). Picornaviruses and others have
demonstrated the capability of inﬂuencing the cell and manipulat-
ing its translational components, favoring its own translation and
replication. Viral translation includes modulating not only canon-
ical eukaryotic initiation factors, but also their binding proteins as
well. The eukaryotic translation initiation components modulated
during infection are speciﬁc to a given virus and can vary quite
substantially. On the other hand, host cells utilize highly conserved
mechanisms of defense to a variety of stimuli, including viral infec-
tion, osmotic shock, toxin, heat shock, etc. Here, we summarize

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 6

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

some of the recent advances in our knowledge of the mecha-
nisms utilized by viruses and cells to promote IRES-dependent
translation allowing survival during unfavorable conditions.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

and 3

CLEAVAGE OF TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTORS BY VIRAL
PROTEASES
In order to inﬂuence cellular translation, viral proteases often tar-
get the cellular canonical translation initiation factors for cleavage.
The early identiﬁed such factor is eIF4G (later called eIF4GI).
Along with eIF4E, the scaffolding protein eIF4GI is a critical tar-
geted translational factor during several viral infections. This is
evident by the highly speciﬁc cleavage of eIF4GI during picor-
naviral infection, which generates a truncated C-terminal form
that is unable to bind eIF4E (Svitkin et al., 2005). Another trans-
lation initiation factor eIF4GII as well as the Poly-(A) binding
protein (PABP), a protein facilitating the formation of a closed
translation initiation loop by interaction of the 5
ends of
the mRNA, has been reported to be cleaved by picornaviral 2A
(Gradi et al., 1998; Joachims et al., 1999). All these cleavages often
correspond with a translational shift to IRES-dependent trans-
lation (Redondo et al., 2011; Welnowska et al., 2011). Another
group also showed that the shift in translation seen during the
later phase of poliovirus infection is not entirely due to phospho-
rylation (inactivation) of eIF2α (see Discussion in later session),
but may also depend upon protease 3C activation and cleavage of
another translation initiation factor, eIF5B, to a C-terminal trun-
cated version thought to replace eIF2 during translation (White
et al., 2011). In all these cleavage events, viral protein synthesis was
increased during periods of global protein suppression caused by
eIF2α phosphorylation, however the mechanism may likely be a
combination of both 2A and 3C proteolytic activity. The apparent
shift in translation occurs at times during infection when viral pro-
teases are highly expressed. These observations are representative
of viral evolution in correspondence to cellular anti-viral mecha-
nisms. Other factors such as FMDV protease 3C mediated speciﬁc
cleavage of eIF4AI but not eIF4AII highlight the target speciﬁcity
that has quite often evolved to be viral speciﬁc (Li et al., 2001).

CLEAVAGE OF TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTORS BY CASPASES
Like their viral counterparts, the cell utilizes a subset of pro-
teases, the caspases, to cleave some translation initiation factors.
The activation of the caspases often corresponds to the induc-
tion of apoptosis (Cohen, 1997). It has been demonstrated in
cells committed to apoptosis that caspases cleave eIF4E-BP1,
which enhances its capability to bind and inhibit eIF4E, thereby
inhibiting cap-dependant translation (Tee and Proud, 2002). eIF2
is cleaved at its α subunit by caspase-3, further implicating its crit-
ical role in translational control (Satoh et al., 1999). Caspase-3
was also shown to cleave scaffolding protein eIF4GI, inhibiting
its eIF4E-binding capabilities, as well as cleaving its homolog
death associated protein 5 (DAP5, also called NAT1/p97), both
during conditions of apoptosis (Marissen and Lloyd, 1998; Henis-
Korenblit et al., 2000). Perhaps not surprisingly, viral strategy
targets many of the same canonical translation initiation factors
(including all of those mentioned here) and is reﬂective of a simi-
lar strategy used by the cell defense system, marking a translational
switch to cap-independent translation during stress.

PHOSPHORYLATION OF EUKARYOTIC INITIATION FACTORS AND
CO-FACTORS
The cell has multiple signaling mechanisms that it utilizes to inﬂu-
ence translation. Phosphorylation is perhaps the one of most
common forms and conserved method utilized by the cell. Protein
kinases involved in cellular stress response regulation such as PKR,
PERK, GCN2, and HRT (heme-regulated kinases) all conserva-
tively deactivate eIF2 on its α subunit in response to their respective
stress stimulus, inﬂuencing the shift to cap-independent trans-
lation (Sonenberg and Hinnebusch, 2009). This multi-faceted
capability of the cell to redundantly suppress cap-dependant trans-
lation initiation through phosphorylation of eIF2α is quite intrigu-
ing and spans multiple disease and stress conditions. This high-
lights the critical importance of translation initiation in cell fate
and physiology. eIF4E also is a highly targeted translation factor
during viral infection as well as during other conditions of stress,
such as heat shock, ER stress, oxidative stress, etc. In fact, eIF4E
and its regulatory protein eIF4E-BP have been utilized as predictive
biomarkers in breast cancer (Coleman et al., 2009). This is because
it functions as the cap-binding translation initiation factor thought
to be the rate-limiting step of translation and therefore is a key
component to cap-dependent translation (Gingras et al., 1999).
The availability of eIF4E (which is highly cytoplasmic) to partic-
ipate in cap-dependent translation is regulated by several factors,
the most apparent being 4E-BP, which binds eIF4E and is involved
in its localization to the nucleus and in stress granules, rendering it
inactive (Sukarieh et al., 2009). 4E-BP is regulated by phosphoryla-
tion by the highly conserved serine/threonine kinase [mammalian
target of rapamycin (mTOR), which decreases its afﬁnity to eIF4E
(Kimball and Jefferson, 2004], thus resulting in increased levels of
protein translated cap-dependently due to increased availability of
cap-binding protein eIF4E. However, hypophosphorylated 4E-BPs
binds strongly to eIF4E and thus attenuates cap-dependent trans-
lation. Similarly, eIF4G has been shown to be phosphorylated by
protein kinase C (PKCα) through the Ras–ERK pathway, resulting
in increase afﬁnity for eIF4E binding and enhanced eIF4E-mnk1
modulating capabilities (Dobrikov et al., 2011). Therefore, phos-
phorylation modulated by stress stimulus (i.e., heat shock, osmotic
stress, ER stress, viral infection) results in stress pathway activa-
tion (ERK, MAPK, PKR, etc.) and subsequent phosphorylation of
a translation initiation component (i.e., eIF4E, eIF4G, eIF2, 4E-
BP) which repress or enhances its function and contributes to the
translational switch between IRES and cap-dependant modes.

(cid:2)

eIF4E-BINDING PROTEINS AND OTHER ASSOCIATED PROTEINS
COMPETE WITH eIF4E TO INHIBIT CAP-DEPENDENT TRANSLATION
Another similar mechanism for controlling the shift of transla-
tion initiation is the up-regulation of 4E-BP production, which
affects the mRNA 5
-cap recognition process of eIF4F. In cap-
dependent translation, eIF4E forms the eIF4F complex along with
translation initiation factors eIF4A, eIF4B, and eIF4G (Merrick,
1992). The interaction between eIF4G and eIF4E in the eIF4F com-
plex is inhibited by 4E-BPs (also called eIF4E homolog). Recently,
it was reported that Argonaut (Ago) protein, a core component of
RNA induced silencing complex (RISC), binds directly to the cap
structure and that this binding competes with eIF4E and results
in inhibition of cap-dependent translation initiation (Kiriakidou

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 7

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

et al., 2007). The central domain of Ago exhibits limited sequence
homology to the eIF4E and contains two aromatic residues that
could function in a similar manner to those in eIF4E in interac-
tion with the cap structure. However, this conclusion has been
questioned by another study (Eulalio et al., 2008). Another fac-
tor eIF6 has been reported to associate with Ago protein and the
large ribosomal subunits (Chendrimada et al., 2007). By binding
to the large ribosomal subunit, eIF6 prevents this subunit from
prematurely joining with the small ribosomal subunit. Thus, if
Ago2 recruits eIF6, then the large and small ribosomal subunits
might not be able to associate, causing translation to be repressed
(Chendrimada et al., 2007). Drosophila Cup also suppresses cap-
dependent translation by binding eIF4E at the same conserved
sequence utilized by 4E-BPs (Nakamura et al., 2004).

(cid:2)

UTR and less so in the 5

THE ROLE OF microRNAs IN TRANSLATIONAL CONTROL
Many viruses also indirectly inﬂuence the availability of cellular
translational components. miRNAs are small (∼20–24 nts) non-
coding RNAs that bind partially complimentary mRNA sequences
(cid:2)
(mostly in the 3
UTR and coding
regions) resulting in translational repression and mRNA degrada-
tion or (in instances of cellular quiescence) translational activation
(Sonenberg and Hinnebusch, 2009; Fabian et al., 2011). They are
loaded onto target mRNA sequences by an RISC, whose major
component proteins are the Ago protein family (Sonenberg and
Hinnebusch, 2009). It was recently shown that Ago proteins are
required for miR-122 activated translation during HCV infec-
tion (Roberts et al., 2011). In addition, as mention earlier, Ago
binds competitively to the cap structure of mRNA to inhibit
cap-dependent initiation of translation. It is not surprising that
miRNA-mediated repression has been shown to be speciﬁc to a
given mRNA containing both a cap structure and poly-(A) tail, in
fact mRNA without a cap structure or poly-(A) tail were resistant
to miRNA-mediated repression (Humphreys et al., 2005). miRNA
modulated repression takes place in processing (P)-bodies that
contain decapping enzymes (see Discussion in a later section), fur-
ther supporting the role of miRNA in suppressing cap-dependent
translation initiation (Sonenberg and Hinnebusch, 2009). Viruses
have been shown to inﬂuence the expression of select miRNAs
(Humphreys et al., 2005; Lei et al., 2010; Ho et al., 2011), which
are often involved in the inhibition of cap-dependent translation
(Humphreys et al., 2005; Walters et al., 2009) lending to a viral
inﬂuenced a shift to IRES-mediated translation. In the early study
of the mechanism of translation suppression using an artiﬁcial
miRNA targeting CXCR4, the cap/4E-BP and the poly-(A) tail of
mRNA were all found to play an important role because they are
each necessary but not sufﬁcient for full miRNA-mediated repres-
sion of translation. Replacing the cap with an IRES of virus impairs
miRNA-mediated suppression. These results suggest that miRNAs
interfere with the initiation step of translation and implicate 4E-
BP as a molecular target (Humphreys et al., 2005). This ﬁnding
was further solidiﬁed by a recent study, which demonstrated that
enterovirus 71 (EV71) infection upregulated miR-141 expression
and resulted in a shift from cap-dependent to cap-independent
translation initiation through targeting 4E-BP. As EV71 RNA con-
tains an IRES, this targeting enhanced EV71 replication (Ho et al.,
2011). Another miRNA, miR-2, has also been reported to utilize a

similar mechanism to target the cap structure (Zdanowicz et al.,
2009). This study screened a library of chemical m7GpppN cap
structures and identiﬁed deﬁned modiﬁcations of the triphosphate
backbone that augment miRNA-mediated inhibition of transla-
tion but are“neutral”toward to general cap-dependent translation.
Interestingly, these caps also augment inhibition by 4E-BP, sug-
gesting that miR-2’s cap targeting is through a mechanism related
to the 4E-BP class of translation regulators (Zdanowicz et al.,
2009).

The above studies clearly support the notion of a virally inﬂu-
enced translational shift favoring cap-independent translation.
This is achieved through several mechanisms including indirectly,
such as; up-regulating the expression of certain miRNAs that
repress cap-binding canonical translation initiation factors in the
eI4F complex (Mathonnet et al., 2007). Here, it is worth men-
tioning that viruses with a nuclear DNA phase, including HIV
and Herpesviruses, during the infection cycle may generate virally
derived miRNAs (Grifﬁths-Jones et al., 2008; Pilakka-Kanthikeel
et al., 2011), however, miRNA derived from HIV is still contentious
as other labs have not been able to verify them experimentally
(Pfeffer et al., 2005; Lin and Cullen, 2007). Intriguingly, the cyto-
plasmic RNA tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV), a member
of the Flaviviridae family, has been shown to encode its own viral
miRNA when a heterlogous miRNA-precursor stem-loop was arti-
ﬁcially introduced into the RNA viral genome (Rouha et al., 2010).
This opens up the possibility of other cytoplasmic RNA viruses
to have similar capabilities. Clearly miRNAs represent an exciting
and newly emerging dimension to our study and understanding of
viruses and their ability to manipulate cellular translation during
infection and other conditions of stress.

ACTIVATION OF DECAPPING ENZYMES
Decapping of mRNA by decapping enzymes represents another
modality by which cap-dependent translation is suppressed by the
cell. To date, two decapping enzymes have been identiﬁed: Dcp2
which cleaves mRNA at the cap site and the scavenger decapping
enzyme (DcpS) that hydrolyzes the cap structure, both function
to facilitate the subsequent degradation of target cap-dependant
mRNA (Li and Kiledjian, 2010). Enzymatic decapping of select
mRNAs is inﬂuenced by miRNA. miRNA-mediated repression
occurs in P bodies where Ago proteins have been shown to
co-immunoprecipitate with decapping enzymes, suggesting their
close association (Parker and Sheth, 2007). P bodies also contain
other proteins including, GW182, the CAF1–CCR4–NOT dead-
enylase complex, the decapping activators (e.g., DCP1, EDC3,
Ge-1), and the RNA helicase RCK/p54, all of which have been
implicated in miRNA function (Eulalio et al., 2007; Parker and
Sheth, 2007). Decapping enzymes functions may also be mod-
ulated by cell signaling pathways and are also found in stress
granules. Indeed, the phosphorylation of the decapping enzyme
DCP2 has been shown to inﬂuence stress granule formation and its
availability in P bodies (Yoon et al., 2010). HCV has been shown
to selectively disrupt P-body components during infection leav-
ing the decapping enzyme DCP2, active and high jacking other
translational machinery for the enhancement of its own trans-
lation (Ariumi et al., 2011). Therefore, not surprisingly, viruses
modulate decapping enzyme activity to favor their translation.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 8

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

CELLULAR IRES-CONTAINING GENES AND THEIR ROLES IN
ER STRESS RESPONSE
The cell too utilizes a subset of genes that have available in their
mRNA an IRES, allowing translation to shift to cap-independent
initiation when under stress. IRES-containing cellular genes typi-
cally code for proteins involved in growth, proliferation, responses
to stress (i.e., virus infection, ER stress, heat shock, osmotic stress,
etc.) cell cycle, and apoptosis. In fact, there is a subset of pro-
survival genes that are activated during transient stress [e.g., Bcl-2,
vascular endothelia growth factor (VEGF), BiP, p58IPK, etc.] that
differs from the pro-apoptotic genes expressed during prolonged
stress (e.g., Apaf-1, DAP5, p53, CHOP, etc.). The following will
discuss several selected representatives from each subset.

BETA-CELL LYMPHOMA 2
The Bcl-2 family represents key regulators of cell proliferation and
death, having both anti-apoptotic (Mcl-1, Bcl-xL, Bcl-2, etc.) and
pro-apoptotic (Bax, Bak, Bad, Bcl-xs, BIM, etc.) protein family
members. Its expression is tightly regulated at the transcriptional,
post transcriptional, and post-translational levels by transcription
factors (e.g., ATF-2), miRNAs, and other factors (i.e., kinases),
all dependant upon the physiological conditions of the cell (Ma
et al., 2007; Willimott and Wagner, 2010). miR-181a has been
shown to repress pro and anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members
(also shown to be repressed by miR-15a and miR-16-1), Mcl-
1 (myeloid leukemia cell differentiation protein 1), and Bcl-2-
11/Bim in ischemic astrocytes where decreasing its levels resulted
in a reduction of apoptosis, oxidative stress, and preservation of
mitochondrial integrity (Willimott and Wagner, 2010; Ouyang
et al., 2012). Like many of the cellular genes that regulate growth,
differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis, Bcl-2, and Bcl-xL also
contains IRESs in their mRNA and is therefore able to switch
modes of translation during conditions where cap-binding ele-
ments are inhibited. The IRES of Bcl-2 has been shown to be
stimulated during mitosis by another IRES-containing cellular
translation factor, DAP5 (Marash et al., 2008).

DEATH ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 5
Death associated protein 5, also termed p97 and NAT1, is an IRES-
containing translation initiation factor (Henis-Korenblit et al.,
2000). It shares homology with the central and C-terminal region
of translation initiation factors of the eIFG family, speciﬁcally the
region that binds eIF4A and eIF3 and the Mnk1 binding site and
also contains an eIF2β bind site (Lee and McCormick, 2006; Lewis
et al., 2008). Perhaps DAP5 can be thought of as performing
the function of eIF4GI/eIF4GII without eIF4E-binding capabil-
ities and is therefore speciﬁc to translation of IRES-containing
mRNA. DAP5 is a key cellular regulator involved in apoptosis,
growth, differentiation as well as involvement in ER stress response
(Marash and Kimchi, 2005; Lewis et al., 2008; Marash et al., 2008).
In its proform (p97), it has been shown to have a protective role
in the cell from apoptosis during the cell cycle. This is accom-
plished by stimulating not only its own IRES, but also acting
as a translation factor (ITAF) to stimulate protective Bcl-2 and
Chk1 (Marash et al., 2008). DAP5 has been shown to undergo
post-translational modiﬁcation by proteolytic cleavage (cell and
virus-mediated; Henis-Korenblit et al., 2000; Lee and McCormick,

2006; Chau et al., 2007). During caspase-mediated apoptosis, it
is cleaved at the C-terminus into an 86-kDa form by caspase-3,
which has been shown to stimulate its afﬁnity for activating a dif-
ferent subset of apoptosis related genes (Henis-Korenblit et al.,
2002). Studies showing the dual nature of pro and anti-apoptotic
translational targets of DAP5 and the multiple mechanisms for its
post-translational regulation are indicative of its tight regulation in
response to changing physiological conditions caused by a variety
of stimuli. Reports have shown the p86 version of DAP5 is capable
of activating IRESs quite distinct from that of the protective p97
form, including anti-apoptotic human inhibitor of apoptosis pro-
tein 2 (HIAP2), x-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP),
and the pro-apoptotic Apaf-1 (Henis-Korenblit et al., 2002; War-
nakulasuriyarachchi et al., 2004). p86 is also able to generate a
positive feedback loop by stimulating its own IRES and thereby
enhancing the apoptotic cascade, lending to the notion that the 86-
kDa form of DAP5 is the more potent isoform (Henis-Korenblit
et al., 2000). Conditions of ER stress increase the translation of
DAP5 and therefore its activity (Lewis et al., 2008). The target genes
whose expression is regulated by DAP5 have not been fully eluci-
dated, thus, newly identiﬁed translational effectors will provide
novel insight into its function in regulation of translation.

p53
p53 is a tumor suppressor and a transcription factor, its up-
regulation can trigger the altered expression of a number of
responsive genes through its binding on the promoter of these
genes (Das et al., 2008). These genes include two major classes,
one that controls cell cycle and the other controls apoptosis. p53
is also a IRES-containing gene (Ray et al., 2006). Like other IRES-
containing genes, its expression is also regulated by many stimuli
such as viral infection. For example, during HIV infection, HIV
protein vpu functions to stabilized p53, which is upregulated late
in HIV infection, leading to p53-induced apoptosis (Verma et al.,
2011). p53 is known to be upregulated during conditions of oxida-
tive stress, which is induced by HIV infection (Kottilil et al., 2001;
Puzio-Kuter, 2011). p53 is expressed in a time dependent manner
during late HIV infection, likely just prior to G2/M arrest and sub-
sequent apoptosis (Verma et al., 2011). Conversely, p53 expression
is down-regulated during picornaviral (CVB3) infection through
virus-induced down regulation of p53 transcriptional activator
activating transcriptional factor 3 (ATF-3; Hwang et al., 2007).
DNA viruses too, have been shown to regulate the expression of
p53. MDV protein meq has been demonstrated to directly inter-
act with p53, inhibiting its transcriptional and apoptotic inducing
capabilities (Deng et al., 2010). Additionally, KSHV protein LANA
binds to the DNA binding domain of p53, contributing to its ubiq-
uitylation and proteasome degradation, subsequently maintaining
viral latency by avoiding p53-induced apoptosis (Suzuki et al.,
2010). p53 has also been shown to play an oncogenic role in some
cancers, including human melanoma where it directly up regulates
miR-191, resulting in increased expression of Mcl-1 (see Beta-Cell
Lymphoma 2 above), thus contributing to apoptotic resistance
(Jin et al., 2011). p53 also binds hypophosphorylated Bcl-2, ren-
dering it incapable of performing its anti-apoptotic function and
decreasing cell survival (Willimott and Wagner, 2010). Therefore,
the function of p53 being pro- or anti-apoptotic is dependant upon

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 9

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

cellular physiology, type of stress, and likely cell type. Understand-
ably, much research has been and is currently being devoted to
the study of p53 during various stress conditions (i.e., cancer, viral
infection; Hwang et al., 2007).

p58IPK
p58IPK, an ER-luminal co-chaperone associated with BiP, is an
another IRES-containing cellular gene actively involved during ER
stress and selectively modulated as part of the strategy of several
viruses during infections, both positively and negatively. During
conditions of ER stress, it functions to negatively regulate the phos-
phorylation of eIF2α induced by both PKR and PERK, achieved
through direct binding of their kinase domains (Yan et al., 2002).
This acts to restore homeostasis and cellular global translation
when a given ER stress is transient and easily corrected by cellular
mechanisms initiated by the UPR (Yan et al., 2002). Knockdown of
p58IPK during ER stress results in increased BiP and CHOP expres-
sion, as well as increased eIF2α phosphorylation (Chakrabarti
et al., 2011). p58IPK has been shown to be regulated both pos-
itively and negatively during such viral infections as inﬂuenza
and CVB3. Due to its ability to negatively regulate PKR, which
elicits the dsRNA induced interferon response, p58IPK’s functions
are indicative of a critical role in viral ability to escape immune
evasion early in the viral lifecycle. The inﬂuenza virus has been
shown to have a reduced translational capability in p58IPK −/−
cells. This translational regulation was shown to be dependant
on its negative regulatory role on PKR and showed little effect
on PERK regulation (Yan et al., 2002). Interestingly, p58IPK has
been shown to be down-regulated at both the protein and mRNA
level in a temporal manner during CVB3 infection (Zhang et al.,
2011b). This suggests that the need to regulate global protein syn-
thesis shut-off and switch to IRES-dependant translation during
CVB3 infection may be accomplished in part through inhibition
of p58IPK (Zhang et al., 2011b). The inhibition of p58IPK dur-
ing the later stages of infection would in theory inhibit cellular
return to homeostasis and global protein synthesis, which may
trigger a possible shift to apoptosis. The regulation (repression by
CVB3 and activation by inﬂuenza) of p58IPK during viral infec-
tion is indicative of viral modulation of downstream components
activated by the UPR, such as mediating the cross talk between
ATF6, IRE1 through selective regulation of PERK (Jin et al., 2011;
Merquiol et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2011b). In the case of CVB3,
down regulation of p58IPK has been demonstrated to activate pro-
apoptotic genes CHOP, SREBP1, and ER mediated caspase-12,
which may explain why it is time dependently suppressed during
the latter stages of CVB3 infection (Zhang et al., 2011b). The time
course of an increase in CHOP, SREBP1 and caspase-12 during
CVB3 infection all correspond to increases in protease (both viral
and cellular) expression promoting conditions of apoptosis (Chau
et al., 2007). Clearly the modulation of the IRES containing, ER
stress related p58IPK provides the critical ability to control other
stress responsive pathways, as is evident here where it is utilized
for viral evasion of host immune response.

HEAT SHOCK PROTEINS
The heat shock family of proteins are a family of chaperone pro-
teins that are translated from IRES-containing mRNAs such as

BiP, heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70), Hsp22 and Hsp27, and non-
IRES-containing Hsp90, which individually are highly functional
and perform separate, integral roles during conditions, such as
cancer (due to their pro-survival nature) and stress (i.e., ER stress,
heat shock; Ahmed and Duncan, 2004; Hernandez et al., 2004;
Behnsawy et al., 2011; Mymrikov et al., 2011). Heat shock pro-
teins such as Hsp90 have also been implemented in the regulation
of cap-dependent translation (Ahmed and Duncan, 2004; Mym-
rikov et al., 2011). Although their name might imply that they
are expressed only as a heat shock responsive subset of proteins,
many of them are in fact ubiquitously expressed (Mymrikov et al.,
2011). Like many of the heat shock proteins, Hsp27 and Hsp22
function to assist in protein folding and preventing the accumu-
lation of protein aggregates, respectively. Functional mutations to
these proteins is believed to be involved in the development of neu-
rodegenerative disorders (Mymrikov et al., 2011). BiP (the major
chaperone protein of the ER) has been shown to play a critical role
in SV-40 and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infections (Geiger
et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2011a) with its translation selectively
enhanced directly through its IRES HCMV infection (Buchkovich
et al., 2010). miR-181 has also been shown to decrease levels of BiP,
further implicating its role in cellular stress regulation (Ouyang
et al., 2012). Hsp70 has been identiﬁed as an anti-apoptotic chap-
erone protein, whose activities include recruitment of refolding
of proteins in an ATP regulated manner (Johnson, 2011). Hsp70
has been shown to protect the cell against a wide of stresses.
siRNA knockdown of Hsp70 resulted in activation of caspase-
9 and caspase-3 (Behnsawy et al., 2011). Hsp70 has been shown
during infection to modulate viral entry, transcription, translation,
nuclear entry, and viron release (Halder et al., 2011; Sugiyama et al.,
2011). A very recent study questioned the previous suggestion and
(cid:2)
indicated that Hsp70 may not have an IRES within its 5
UTR (Sun
(cid:2)
et al., 2011). This is because these authors found that the 5
UTR of
Hsp70 mRNA has little effects in driving translation when placed
in a bicistronic expression construct. However, other studies found
that the 5
UTR of Drosophila Hsp70 mRNA allows efﬁcient trans-
lation at high temperature when other non-heat shock mRNAs are
poorly translated (Klemenz et al., 1985; McGarry and Lindquist,
1985). This raises the question of how the 5
UTR of Hsp70 mRNA
drives the cap-independent translation without acting as an IRES.
It is possible that the presence of a 5
proximal mRNA structure
prevents the direct recruitment of the ribosome by Hsp70 5
UTR
(Sun et al., 2011). Another possibility is that the expression of
several decapping enzymes was enhanced during heat stress (Neef
and Thiele, 2009) and this phenomenon could lead to the selec-
tive translation of Hsp70 mRNA due to the unique features of
the Hsp70 5
UTR in mediating cap-independent translation (Sun
et al., 2011). Hsp90 has been also shown not to harbor an IRES in
(cid:2)
its extensive 5
UTR secondary structure and is sensitive to inhi-
bition of the cap-binding complex, eIF4F (Ahmed and Duncan,
2004). Hsp90 has been shown to enhance binding of eIF4E to
eIF4G and inhibition of Hsp90 has also been shown to decrease the
formation of P bodies (Suzuki et al., 2009). Therefore, Hsp90 is a
critical chaperone protein that appears necessary for eIF4E depen-
dant translation and localization. Clearly the heat shock family of
proteins represents a subset of critical stress regulatory proteins.
While some of these proteins have been studied quite extensively

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 10

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

(i.e., BiP) it is apparent that novel functions for the heat shock
protein family are continually to be discovered.

VASCULAR ENDOTHELIA GROWTH FACTOR
As mentioned previously, during some conditions of growth
and differentiation, cellular translation initiation shifts from cap-
dependent to an IRES-dependent mechanism. The VEGF proteins
represent another family of cellular proteins translated through
an IRES-driven mechanism. These proteins are involved in vas-
culogenesis and angiogenesis (Bornes et al., 2007). The mRNA of
VEGF-A harbors two IRESs (A and B), where A translates through
a traditional AUG start codon and B translates through a CUG start
codon for a higher molecular weight isoform (L-VEGF; Bornes
et al., 2004). The translation of VEGF through the IRES-dependant
mechanism has been shown to be selectively activated during con-
ditions of oxygen deprivation in ischemic muscle and are therefore
activated by stress (Bornes et al., 2007). IRES B of VEGF has
also been shown to be selectively repressed by miR-16 targeting,
whereas IRES-A remained active, lending to the notion that VEGF
isoforms can be selectively expressed from the same mRNA by miR
speciﬁc targeting (Karaa et al., 2009). VEGF expression is upreg-
ulated in HIV-1 or HRV infection, both of which utilize IRES
translation (Psarras et al., 2006; Korgaonkar et al., 2008) suggest-
ing the possibility of related translational mechanisms of their
respective IRESs.

CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
It is clear that more and more newly discovered cellular mRNAs
contain IRESs and can shift translation to IRES-driven initi-
ation during ER stress. One of the most common causes of
ER stress is viral infection, which can globally shut down cap-
dependent translation initiation by different mechanisms. To

adapt in unfavorable stress conditions, both cell and virus (e.g.,
HIV) need to adjust their mode translation initiation by switch-
ing from the cap-dependent to cap-independent mechanism. As
picornaviruses do not have a cap structure, its RNA translation
will not be inhibited; instead it will be enhanced because more
translational machinery is available due to the shut-off of global
cap-dependent translation are by a number of mechanisms. Dur-
ing transient ER stress, the IRES-containing cellular mRNAs that
responsible for cell survival/growth, such as BiP, Bcl-2, VEGF, etc.,
will be selectively translated by the IRES-dependent mechanism
using ITAFs. This mechanism allows cells to respond rapidly to
the transient changes in growth conditions and to delay apopto-
sis. Once the stress condition is removed, the cells will resume the
normal growth. However, during prolonged or severe stress, such
as in persistent infection of picornaviruses, the pro-death genes,
such as Apaf-1, DAP5, CHOP, p53, etc., are also selectively trans-
lated by the same IRES-driven mechanism, allowing the cells to
ﬁne-tune their responses to cellular stress and, if conditions for
cell survival are not restored, to proceed with ﬁnal execution of
apoptosis (Figure 2).

At the present, although some mechanisms on the switch of
the translation initiation and subsequent selective translation have
been described, many questions are still unanswered: for exam-
ple, what are the regulators for selecting the pro-survival or
pro-apoptotic genes? In other words, do these genes contain dif-
ferent binding sequences for their speciﬁc regulators? Previous
studies using a polysome system predicted that ∼10–15% of
the cellular mRNAs contain IRESs (Carter et al., 2000; Qin and
Sarnow, 2004; Graber et al., 2010); thus more IRES-containing
cellular mRNAs will need to be discovered to fully understand
the underlying mechanisms of IRES-dependent translational con-
trol. In the shut-off of global cap-dependent translation, cleavages

FIGURE 2 | The proposed model for the switch of translation initiation from cap-dependent to IRES-dependent during picornaviral infection or other
cellular stresses. Positive and negative feedback loops are indicated by plus and minus signs, respectively.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 11

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

of cellular proteins are known to play an important role. In
this regard, besides the viral proteases and the activated cellu-
lar caspases, other cellular proteases responsible for the cleavage
need to be identiﬁed. In addition, efforts to discover other cel-
lular target proteins that are speciﬁcally cleaved during cellular
stress are another future direction. Identiﬁcation of these target
proteins may uncover the linkage between translational control
and pathogenesis. Recently, miRNAs, as a group of new regula-
tors of gene expression, were found to be involved in regulation
of the shift of translation initiation. However, the research in
this direction is just emerging. More studies on the interactions
between miRNAs and their target mRNAs encoding translation
initiation factors need to be carried out. Indeed, the biological
implications of the selective translation of speciﬁc genes are clearly
important. Since the IRES-mediated translation initiation links
with many pathophysiological conditions, such as hypoxia, heat
shock, toxin, metabolic disorder, viral infection, etc., the failure
of maintaining the balance between the cap-dependent and cap-

independent translation initiation may cause human diseases, such
as heart disease, stroke, diabetes, and viral diseases. Similarly,
dysregulated apoptosis has been associated with many human
disorders, ranging from autoimmune diseases, neurodegeneration
to cancers. Therefore, better understanding how the translational
control determines the cellular response to stresses will provide
novel insights into the molecular pathogenesis of human disor-
ders and might eventually lead to the development of effective
therapeutics.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by grants from the Canadian Insti-
tutes of Health Research and the Heart and Stroke Foundation
of BC and Yukon. Dr. Maged Gomaa Hemida is a recipient of the
CIHR-IMPACT postdoctoral training fellowship and the Heart
and Stroke foundation of Canada postdoctoral training fellow-
ship. Xin Ye is supported by a UGF Award from the University of
British Columbia.

REFERENCES
Ahmed, R.,

and Duncan, R. F.
(2004). Translational
regulation
of Hsp90 mRNA. AUG-proximal
(cid:2)
region elements
5
essential for preferential heat shock
translation.
J. Biol. Chem. 279,
49919–49930.

-untranslated

Ali, I. K., McKendrick, L., Morley, S.
J., and Jackson, R. J. (2001). Activ-
ity of the hepatitis A virus IRES
requires association between the
cap-binding translation initiation
factor (eIF4E) and eIF4G. J. Virol. 75,
7854–7863.

Ariumi, Y., Kuroki, M., Kushima, Y.,
Osugi, K., Hijikata, M., Maki, M.,
Ikeda, M., and Kato, N. (2011).
Hepatitis C virus hijacks P-body
and stress
components
around lipid droplets. J. Virol. 85,
6882–6892.

granule

Beales, L. P., Holzenburg, A., and Row-
lands, D. J. (2003). Viral internal
ribosome entry site structures segre-
gate into two distinct morphologies.
J. Virol. 77, 6574–6579.

and

Fujisawa, M.

Behnsawy, H. M., Miyake, H., Kusuda,
(2011).
Y.,
interfering RNA targeting
Small
heat
shock protein 70 enhances
chemosensitivity in human blad-
der cancer cells. Urol. Oncol. doi:
10.1016/j.urolonc.2011.07.007

Belsham, G. J. (2009). Divergent picor-
navirus IRES elements. Virus Res.
139, 183–192.

Bieleski, L., Hindley, C., and Tal-
bot, S. J. (2004). A polypyrimi-
dine tract facilitates the expression
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus vFLIP through an internal
ribosome entry site. J. Gen. Virol. 85,
615–620.

Bieleski, L., and Talbot, S. J. (2001).
sarcoma-associated her-

Kaposi’s

pesvirus vCyclin open reading frame
contains an internal ribosome entry
site. J. Virol. 75, 1864–1869.

Bollo, M., Paredes, R. M., Holstein, D.,
Zheleznova, N., Camacho, P., and
Lechleiter, J. D. (2010). Calcineurin
interacts with PERK and dephos-
phorylates calnexin to relieve ER
stress in mammals and frogs. PLoS
ONE 5, e11925. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0011925

Bornes, S., Boulard, M., Hieblot, C.,
Zanibellato, C., Iacovoni, J. S., Prats,
H., and Touriol, C. (2004). Control
of the vascular endothelial growth
factor internal ribosome entry site
(IRES) activity and translation ini-
tiation by alternatively spliced cod-
ing sequences. J. Biol. Chem. 279,
18717–18726.

Bornes, S., Prado-Lourenco, L., Bastide,
A., Zanibellato, C., Iacovoni, J. S.,
Lacazette, E., Prats, A. C., Touriol,
C., and Prats, H. (2007). Transla-
tional induction of VEGF internal
ribosome entry site elements during
the early response to ischemic stress.
Circ. Res. 100, 305–308.

Buchkovich, N. J., Yu, Y., Pierciey, F. J.
Jr., and Alwine, J. C. (2010). Human
cytomegalovirus induces the endo-
plasmic reticulum chaperone BiP
through increased transcription and
activation of translation by using the
BiP internal ribosome entry site. J.
Virol. 84, 11479–11486.

Burikhanov, R., Zhao, Y., Goswami,
A., Qiu, S., Schwarze, S. R., and
Rangnekar, V. M. (2009). The tumor
suppressor Par-4 activates an extrin-
sic pathway for apoptosis. Cell 138,
377–388.

Carter, M., Kuhn, K., and Sarnow, P.
(2000). Translational Control of Gene
Expression. New York: Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press.

Castello, A., Franco, D., Moral-Lopez,
J.
J., Alvarez, E.,
P., Berlanga,
Wimmer, E.,
and Carrasco, L.
(2009). HIV- 1 protease inhibits
Cap- and poly(A)-dependent trans-
lation upon eIF4GI and PABP
cleavage. PLoS ONE 4,
e7997.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007997

Chakrabarti, A., Chen, A. W., and
Varner, J. D. (2011). A review of
the mammalian unfolded protein
response. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 108,
2777–2793.

Chamond, N., Locker, N., and Sargueil,
B. (2010). The different pathways of
HIV genomic translation. Biochem.
Soc. Trans. 38, 1548–1552.

Chau, D. H., Yuan, J., Zhang, H., Che-
ung, P., Lim, T., Liu, Z., Sall, A., and
Yang, D. (2007). Coxsackievirus B3
proteases 2A and 3C induce apop-
totic cell death through mitochon-
drial injury and cleavage of eIF4GI
but not DAP5/p97/NAT1. Apoptosis
12, 513–524.

Chendrimada, T. P., Finn, K. J., Ji,
I.,
X., Baillat, D., Gregory, R.
Liebhaber, S. A., Pasquinelli, A.
E., and Shiekhattar, R.
(2007).
MicroRNA silencing through RISC
recruitment of eIF6. Nature 447,
823–828.

Cohen, G. M. (1997). Caspases: the exe-
cutioners of apoptosis. Biochem. J.
326(Pt 1), 1–16.

Coleman, H. M., Brierley, I., and Steven-
son, P. G. (2003). An internal ribo-
some entry site directs translation
of the murine gammaherpesvirus 68
MK3 open reading frame. J. Virol. 77,
13093–13105.

Coleman, L. J., Peter, M. B., Teall,
J., Brannan, R. A., Hanby,
T.
A. M., Honarpisheh, H., Shaa-
ban, A. M., Smith, L., Speirs, V.,
Verghese, E. T., McElwaine, J. N.,

and Hughes, T. A. (2009). Com-
bined analysis of eIF4E and 4E-
binding protein expression predicts
breast cancer survival and estimates
eIF4E activity. Br. J. Cancer 100,
1393–1399.

Cornelis, S., Tinton, S. A., Schepens,
B., Bruynooghe, Y., and Beyaert,
R. (2005). UNR translation can
be driven by an IRES element
that
is negatively regulated by
polypyrimidine
binding
protein. Nucleic Acids Res. 33,
3095–3108.

tract

Costa-Mattioli, M., Svitkin, Y., and
Sonenberg, N. (2004). La autoanti-
gen is necessary for optimal func-
tion of the poliovirus and hepatitis
C virus internal ribosome entry site
in vivo and in vitro. Mol. Cell. Biol.
24, 6861–6870.

Das, S., Boswell, S. A., Aaronson, S. A.,
and Lee, S. W. (2008). P53 promoter
selection: choosing between life and
death. Cell Cycle 7, 154–157.

de Breyne, S., Yu, Y., Pestova, T. V.,
and Hellen, C. U. (2008). Factor
requirements for translation initi-
ation on the simian picornavirus
internal ribosomal entry site. RNA
14, 367–380.

Deng, X., Li, X., Shen, Y., Qiu, Y.,
Shi, Z., Shao, D., Jin, Y., Chen, H.,
Ding, C., Li, L., Chen, P., and Ma,
Z. (2010). The Meq oncoprotein of
Marek’s disease virus interacts with
p53 and inhibits its transcriptional
and apoptotic activities. Virol. J. 7,
348.

Dobrikov, M., Dobrikova, E., Shveygert,
M., and Gromeier, M. (2011). Phos-
phorylation of eukaryotic transla-
tion initiation factor 4G1 (eIF4G1)
by protein kinase C{alpha} regulates
eIF4G1 binding to Mnk1. Mol. Cell.
Biol. 31, 2947–2959.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 12

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

Ekchariyawat, P., Thitithanyanont, A.,
Sirisinha, S., and Utaisincharoen,
P. (2011). Apoptosis
induced by
in human
avian H5N1
virus
monocyte-derived
macrophages
involves TRAIL-inducing caspase-
10 activation. Innate Immun. doi:
10.1177/1753425911410998. [Epub
ahead of print].

Etchison, D., Milburn, S. C., Edery, I.,
Sonenberg, N., and Hershey, J. W.
(1982). Inhibition of HeLa cell pro-
tein synthesis following poliovirus
infection correlates with the prote-
olysis of a 220,000-dalton polypep-
tide associated with eucaryotic ini-
tiation factor 3 and a cap binding
protein complex. J. Biol. Chem. 257,
14806–14810.

Eulalio, A., Behm-Ansmant, I., and Iza-
urralde, E. (2007). P bodies: at the
crossroads of post-transcriptional
pathways. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 8,
9–22.

Eulalio, A., Huntzinger, E., and Iza-
urralde, E. (2008). GW182 inter-
action with argonaute is essential
for miRNA-mediated translational
repression and mRNA decay. Nat.
Struct. Mol. Biol. 15, 346–353.

Fabian, M. R., Sonenberg, N., and Fil-
ipowicz, W. (2011). Regulation of
mRNA translation and stability by
microRNAs. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 79,
351–379.

Fels, D. R., and Koumenis, C. (2006).
The PERK/eIF2alpha/ATF4 module
of the UPR in hypoxia resistance and
tumor growth. Cancer Biol. Ther. 5,
723–728.

Fernandez-Miragall, O., Lopez de
Quinto, S., and Martinez-Salas, E.
(2009). Relevance of RNA structure
for
the activity of picornavirus
IRES elements. Virus Res. 139,
172–182.

Filbin, M. E., and Kieft, J. S. (2009).
Toward a structural understanding
of IRES RNA function. Curr. Opin.
Struct. Biol. 19, 267–276.

Geiger, R., Andritschke, D., Friebe, S.,
Herzog, F., Luisoni, S., Heger, T.,
and Helenius, A. (2011). BAP31 and
BiP are essential for dislocation of
SV40 from the endoplasmic reticu-
lum to the cytosol. Nat. Cell Biol. 13,
1305–1314.

Gingras, A. C., Raught, B., and Sonen-
berg, N. (1999). eIF4 initiation fac-
tors: effectors of mRNA recruit-
ment to ribosomes and regulators of
translation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68,
913–963.

Gotoh, T., Terada, K., Oyadomari,
S., and Mori, M. (2004). Hsp70-
DnaJ chaperone pair prevents nitric
oxide- and CHOP-induced apopto-
sis by inhibiting translocation of Bax

to mitochondria. Cell Death Differ.
11, 390–402.

Graber, T. E., Baird, S. D., and Kao, P.
N., Mathews, M. B., and Holcik, M.
(2010). NF45 functions as an IRES
trans-acting factor that is required
for translation of cIAP1 during
the unfolded protein response. Cell
Death Differ. 17, 719–729.

Gradi, A., Svitkin, Y. V., Imataka, H.,
and Sonenberg, N. (1998). Prote-
olysis of human eukaryotic trans-
lation initiation factor eIF4GII, but
not eIF4GI, coincides with the
shutoff of host protein synthe-
sis after poliovirus infection. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95, 11089–
11094.

Grifﬁths, A., and Coen, D. M. (2005). An
unusual internal ribosome entry site
in the herpes simplex virus thymi-
dine kinase gene. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 102, 9667–9672.

Grifﬁths-Jones,

S.,

Saini, H. K.,
and Enright,
van Dongen, S.,
A. J. (2008). miRBase:
tools for
microRNA genomics. Nucleic Acids
Res. 36, D154–D158.

Halder, U. C., Bagchi, P., Chattopadhyay,
S., Dutta, D., and Chawla-Sarkar, M.
(2011). Cell death regulation dur-
ing inﬂuenza A virus infection by
matrix (M1) protein: a model of
viral control over the cellular sur-
vival pathway. Cell Death Dis. 2,
e197.

Harding, H. P., Calfon, M., Urano, F.,
Novoa, I., and Ron, D. (2002). Tran-
scriptional and translational control
in the mammalian unfolded protein
response. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.
18, 575–599.

Hart, L. S., and El-Deiry, W. S. (2009).
Cell death: a new Par-4 the TRAIL.
Cell 138, 220–222.

Hellen, C. U. (2009). IRES-induced con-
formational changes in the ribo-
some and the mechanism of transla-
tion initiation by internal ribosomal
entry. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1789,
558–570.

Hellen, C. U., and Sarnow, P. (2001).
Internal ribosome entry sites in
eukaryotic mRNA molecules. Genes
Dev. 15, 1593–1612.

Henis-Korenblit, S., Shani, G., Sines, T.,
Marash, L., Shohat, G., and Kim-
chi, A. (2002). The caspase-cleaved
DAP5 protein supports
internal
ribosome entry site-mediated trans-
lation of death proteins. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 5400–5405.

Henis-Korenblit, S., Strumpf, N. L.,
Goldstaub, D., and Kimchi, A.
(2000). A novel
form of DAP5
protein accumulates in apoptotic
cells as a result of caspase cleavage
and internal ribosome entry site-

mediated translation. Mol. Cell. Biol.
20, 496–506.

Hernandez, G., Vazquez-Pianzola, P.,
Sierra, J. M., and Rivera-Pomar, R.
(2004). Internal ribosome entry site
drives cap-independent translation
of reaper and heat shock protein
70 mRNAs in Drosophila embryos.
RNA 10, 1783–1797.

Hetz, C., Bernasconi, P., Fisher, J., Lee,
A. H., Bassik, M. C., Antonsson,
B., Brandt, G. S., Iwakoshi, N. N.,
Schinzel, A., Glimcher, L. H., and
Korsmeyer, S. J. (2006). Proapop-
totic BAX and BAK modulate the
unfolded protein response by a
direct interaction with IRE1alpha.
Science 312, 572–576.

Ho, B. C., Yu, S. L., Chen, J. J., Chang, S.
Y., Yan, B. S., Hong, Q. S., Singh, S.,
Kao, C. L., Chen, H. Y., Su, K. Y., Li, K.
C., Cheng, C. L., Cheng, H. W., Lee, J.
Y., Lee, C. N., and Yang, P. C. (2011).
Enterovirus-induced miR-141 con-
tributes to shutoff of host protein
translation by targeting the transla-
tion initiation factor eIF4E. Cell Host
Microbe 9, 58–69.

Holcik, M., and Sonenberg, N. (2005).
Translational control in stress and
apoptosis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
6, 318–327.

Hollien, J., Lin, J. H., Li, H., Stevens, N.,
Walter, P., and Weissman, J. S. (2009).
Regulated Ire1-dependent decay of
messenger RNAs
in mammalian
cells. J. Cell Biol. 186, 323–331.

Humphreys, D. T., Westman, B. J., Mar-
tin, D. I., and Preiss, T. (2005).
MicroRNAs control translation ini-
tiation by inhibiting eukaryotic ini-
tiation factor 4E/cap and poly(A) tail
function. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
102, 16961–16966.

Hwang, H. Y., Kim, J. Y., Lim, J. Y.,
Chung, S. K., Nam, J. H., and Park,
S. I. (2007). Coxsackievirus B3 mod-
ulates cell death by downregulating
activating transcription factor 3 in
HeLa cells. Virus Res. 130, 10–17.

Jackson, R. J., Hellen, C. U., and Pestova,
T. V. (2010). The mechanism of
eukaryotic translation initiation and
principles of its regulation. Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 11, 113–127.

Jang, C. J., Lo, M. C., and Jan, E. (2009).
Conserved element of the dicistro-
virus IGR IRES that mimics an E-site
tRNA/ribosome interaction medi-
ates multiple functions. J. Mol. Biol.
387, 42–58.

Jang, S. K. (2006). Internal initiation:
IRES elements of picornaviruses and
hepatitis c virus. Virus Res. 119, 2–15.
Jang, S. K., Krausslich, H. G., Nicklin,
M. J., Duke, G. M., Palmenberg, A.
C., and Wimmer, E. (1988). A seg-
nontranslated region
ment of the 5

(cid:2)

of encephalomyocarditis virus RNA
directs internal entry of ribosomes
during in vitro translation. J. Virol.
62, 2636–2643.

Jang, S. K., Pestova, T. V., Hellen, C.
U., Witherell, G. W., and Wimmer,
E. (1990). Cap-independent trans-
lation of picornavirus RNAs: struc-
ture and function of the internal
ribosomal entry site. Enzyme 44,
292–309.

Jin, L., Hu, W. L., Jiang, C. C., Wang,
J. X., Han, C. C., Chu, P., Zhang,
L. J., Thorne, R. F., Wilmott, J.,
Scolyer, R. A., Hersey, P., Zhang, X.
D., and Wu, M. (2011). MicroRNA-
149∗, a p53-responsive microRNA,
functions as an oncogenic reg-
ulator
human melanoma.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108,
15840–15845.

in

Joachims, M., Van Breugel, P. C.,
and Lloyd, R. E. (1999). Cleav-
age of poly(A)-binding protein
by enterovirus proteases concur-
rent with inhibition of translation
in vitro. J. Virol. 73, 718–727.

Johannes, G., Carter, M. S., Eisen, M. B.,
Brown, P. O., and Sarnow, P. (1999).
Identiﬁcation of eukaryotic mRNAs
that are translated at reduced cap
binding complex eIF4F concentra-
tions using a cDNA microarray.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96,
13118–13123.

John, L., Thomas, S., Herchenroder,
O., Putzer, B. M., and Schaefer,
S. (2011). Hepatitis E virus ORF2
protein activates the pro-apoptotic
gene CHOP and anti-apoptotic heat
shock proteins. PLoS ONE 6, e25378.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0025378

Johnson, J. L. (2011). Evolution and
function of diverse Hsp90 homologs
and cochaperone proteins. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1823, 607–613.

Kanamori, Y., and Nakashima, N.
(2001). A tertiary structure model
of the internal ribosome entry site
(IRES) for methionine-independent
initiation of
translation. RNA 7,
266–274.

Karaa, Z. S., Iacovoni, J. S., Bastide, A.,
Lacazette, E., Touriol, C., and Prats,
H. (2009). The VEGF IRESes are
differentially susceptible to transla-
tion inhibition by miR-16. RNA 15,
249–254.

Kimball, S. R., and Jefferson, L. S.
(2004). Regulation of global and
speciﬁc mRNA translation by oral
administration of branched-chain
amino acids. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 313, 423–427.

Kiriakidou, M., Tan, G. S., Lamprinaki,
S., De Planell-Saguer, M., Nelson,
P. T., and Mourelatos, Z. (2007).
An mRNA m7G cap binding-like

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 13

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

motif within human Ago2 represses
translation. Cell 129, 1141–1151.

Klemenz, R., Hultmark, D.,

and
Gehring, W.
J. (1985). Selective
translation of heat shock mRNA in
Drosophila melanogaster depends
on sequence information in the
leader. EMBO J. 4, 2053–2060.

Internal

Komar, A. A., and Hatzoglou, M.
(2005).
ribosome entry
sites in cellular mRNAs: mystery of
their existence. J. Biol. Chem. 280,
23425–23428.

Komar, A. A., and Hatzoglou, M. (2011).
Cellular IRES-mediated translation:
the war of ITAFs in pathophys-
iological
10,
229–240.

states. Cell Cycle

Korgaonkar, S. N., Feng, X., Ross, M.
D., Lu, T. C., D’Agati, V., Iyengar,
R., Klotman, P. E., and He, J. C.
(2008). HIV-1 upregulates VEGF in
podocytes. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 19,
877–883.

Kottilil, S., Bowmer, M.

I., Trahey,
J., Howley, C., Gamberg, J., and
Grant, M. D.
(2001). Fas/FasL-
independent activation-induced cell
death of T lymphocytes from HIV-
infected individuals occurs without
DNA fragmentation. Cell. Immunol.
214, 1–11.

infections

Labadie, K., Pelletier, I., Saulnier, A.,
Martin, J., and Colbere-Garapin, F.
(2004). Poliovirus mutants excreted
by a chronically infected hypogam-
maglobulinemic patient establish
persistent
in human
intestinal cells. Virology 318, 66–78.
Lamphear, B. J., Yan, R., Yang, F., Waters,
D., Liebig, H. D., Klump, H., Kuech-
ler, E., Skern, T., and Rhoads, R. E.
(1993). Mapping the cleavage site
in protein synthesis initiation fac-
tor eIF-4 gamma of the 2A pro-
teases from human Coxsackievirus
and rhinovirus. J. Biol. Chem. 268,
19200–19203.

Lee, A. H., Iwakoshi, N. N., and Glim-
cher, L. H. (2003). XBP-1 regu-
lates a subset of endoplasmic reticu-
lum resident chaperone genes in the
unfolded protein response. Mol. Cell.
Biol. 23, 7448–7459.

Lee, K., Tirasophon, W., Shen, X.,
Michalak, M., Prywes, R., Okada,
T., Yoshida, H., Mori, K., and Kauf-
man, R. J. (2002). IRE1-mediated
unconventional mRNA splicing and
S2P-mediated ATF6 cleavage merge
to regulate XBP1 in signaling the
unfolded protein response. Genes
Dev. 16, 452–466.

Lee,

S. H.,

and McCormick, F.
(2006). p97/DAP5 is a ribosome-
associated factor that facilitates pro-
tein synthesis and cell prolifera-
tion by modulating the synthesis

of cell cycle proteins. EMBO J. 25,
4008–4019.

Lei, X., Bai, Z., Ye, F., Huang, Y., and
Gao, S. J. (2010). Regulation of her-
pesvirus lifecycle by viral microR-
NAs. Virulence 1, 433–435.

Lewis, S. M., Cerquozzi, S., Graber, T.
E., Ungureanu, N. H., Andrews, M.,
and Holcik, M. (2008). The eIF4G
homolog DAP5/p97 supports the
translation of select mRNAs dur-
ing endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Nucleic Acids Res. 36, 168–178.

Li, W., Ross-Smith, N., Proud, C. G.,
and Belsham, G. J. (2001). Cleav-
age of
translation initiation fac-
tor 4AI (eIF4AI) but not eIF4AII
by foot-and-mouth disease virus
3C protease:
identiﬁcation of the
eIF4AI cleavage site. FEBS Lett. 507,
1–5.

Li, Y., and Kiledjian, M. (2010). Reg-
ulation of mRNA decapping. Wiley
Interdiscip. Rev. RNA 1, 253–265.

Lin, J., and Cullen, B. R. (2007). Analy-
sis of the interaction of primate
retroviruses with the human RNA
interference machinery. J. Virol. 81,
12218–12226.

Lindeberg, J., and Ebendal, T. (1999).
Use of an internal ribosome entry
site for bicistronic expression of
Cre recombinase or rtTA trans-
activator. Nucleic Acids Res. 27,
1552–1554.

Liu, C. Y., Schroder, M., and Kaufman,
R. J. (2000). Ligand-independent
dimerization activates
the stress
response kinases IRE1 and PERK
in the lumen of
the endoplas-
mic reticulum. J. Biol. Chem. 275,
24881–24885.

Locker, N., Chamond, N., and Sargueil,
B. (2011). A conserved structure
within the HIV gag open reading
frame that controls translation ini-
tiation directly recruits the 40S sub-
unit and eIF3. Nucleic Acids Res. 39,
2367–2377.

Ma, Q., Li, X., Vale-Cruz, D., Brown,
M. L., Beier, F., and LuValle, P.
(2007). Activating transcription fac-
tor 2 controls Bcl-2 promoter
activity in growth plate
chon-
drocytes.
J. Cell. Biochem. 101,
477–487.

Ma, Y., Brewer, J. W., Diehl, J. A., and
Hendershot, L. M. (2002). Two dis-
tinct stress signaling pathways con-
verge upon the CHOP promoter
during the mammalian unfolded
protein response. J. Mol. Biol. 318,
1351–1365.

Malnou, C. E., Werner, A., Borman,
A. M., Westhof, E., and Kean, K.
M. (2004). Effects of vaccine strain
mutations
the
internal ribosome entry segment

in domain V of

compared in the wild type poliovirus
type 1 context. J. Biol. Chem. 279,
10261–10269.

Marash, L., and Kimchi, A. (2005).
DAP5 and IRES-mediated transla-
tion during programmed cell death.
Cell Death Differ. 12, 554–562.

Marash, L., Liberman, N., Henis-
Korenblit, S., Sivan, G., Reem,
E., Elroy-Stein, O., and Kimchi,
A. (2008). DAP5 promotes cap-
independent
translation of Bcl-2
and CDK1 to facilitate cell sur-
vival during mitosis. Mol. Cell 30,
447–459.

Marcotrigiano, J., Gingras, A. C., Sonen-
berg, N., and Burley, S. K. (1999).
Cap-dependent
translation initia-
tion in eukaryotes is regulated by a
molecular mimic of eIF4G. Mol. Cell
3, 707–716.

Marissen, W. E., and Lloyd, R. E. (1998).
Eukaryotic translation initiation fac-
tor 4G is targeted for proteolytic
cleavage by caspase 3 during inhibi-
tion of translation in apoptotic cells.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 7565–7574.

Mathonnet, G., Fabian, M. R., Svitkin,
Y. V., Parsyan, A., Huck, L., Murata,
T., Biffo, S., Merrick, W. C.,
Darzynkiewicz, E., Pillai, R. S., Fil-
ipowicz, W., Duchaine, T. F., and
Sonenberg, N. (2007). MicroRNA
inhibition of translation initiation
in vitro by targeting the cap-
binding complex eIF4F. Science 317,
1764–1767.

McCullough, K. D., Martindale, J. L.,
Klotz, L. O., Aw, T. Y., and Holbrook,
N. J. (2001). Gadd153 sensitizes cells
to endoplasmic reticulum stress by
down-regulating Bcl2 and perturb-
ing the cellular redox state. Mol. Cell.
Biol. 21, 1249–1259.

McGarry, T.

J., and Lindquist, S.
(1985). The preferential translation
of Drosophila hsp70 mRNA requires
sequences in the untranslated leader.
Cell 42, 903–911.

Mekahli, D., Bultynck, G., Parys, J. B.,
De Smedt, H., and Missiaen, L.
(2011). Endoplasmic-reticulum cal-
cium depletion and disease. Cold
Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 3, doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a004317

Merquiol, E., Uzi, D., Mueller, T., Gold-
enberg, D., Nahmias, Y., Xavier, R. J.,
Tirosh, B., and Shibolet, O. (2011).
HCV causes chronic endoplasmic
reticulum stress leading to adap-
tation and interference with the
unfolded protein response. PLoS
ONE 6, e24660. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0024660

Merrick, W. C. (1992). Mechanism
and regulation of eukaryotic pro-
tein synthesis. Microbiol. Rev. 56,
291–315.

Morley, S.

J., Coldwell, M.

J., and
Clemens, M. J. (2005). Initiation fac-
tor modiﬁcations in the preapop-
totic phase. Cell Death Differ. 12,
571–584.

Mymrikov, E. V., Seit-Nebi, A. S., and
Gusev, N. B. (2011). Large potentials
of small heat shock proteins. Physiol.
Rev. 91, 1123–1159.

Nakamura, A., Sato, K., and Hanyu-
Nakamura, K. (2004). Drosophila
cup is an eIF4E binding protein
that associates with Bruno and reg-
ulates oskar mRNA translation in
oogenesis. Dev. Cell 6, 69–78.

Neef, D. W., and Thiele, D. J. (2009).
Enhancer of decapping proteins 1
and 2 are important for transla-
tion during heat stress in Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae. Mol. Microbiol.
73, 1032–1042.

Novoa, I., Zeng, H., Harding, H. P., and
Ron, D. (2001). Feedback inhibition
of the unfolded protein response by
GADD34-mediated dephosphoryla-
tion of eIF2alpha. J. Cell Biol. 153,
1011–1022.

Ohlmann, T., and Jackson, R. J. (1999).
The properties of chimeric picor-
navirus IRESes show that discrimi-
nation between internal translation
initiation sites is inﬂuenced by the
identity of the IRES and not just the
context of the AUG codon. RNA 5,
764–778.

Ohlmann, T., Prevot, D., Decimo, D.,
Roux, F., Garin, J., Morley, S. J., and
Darlix, J. L. (2002). In vitro cleavage
of eIF4GI but not eIF4GII by HIV-1
protease and its effects on transla-
tion in the rabbit reticulocyte lysate
system. J. Mol. Biol. 318, 9–20.

Oikawa, D., and Kimata, Y. (2011).
Experimental approaches for eluci-
dation of stress-sensing mechanisms
of the IRE1 family proteins. Meth.
Enzymol. 490, 195–216.

Ouyang, Y. B., Lu, Y., Yue, S., Xu, L. J.,
Xiong, X. X., White, R. E., Sun, X.,
and Giffard, R. G. (2012). miR-181
regulates GRP78 and inﬂuences out-
come from cerebral ischemia in vitro
and in vivo. Neurobiol. Dis. 45, 555–
563.

Parker, R., and Sheth, U. (2007). P bod-
ies and the control of mRNA trans-
lation and degradation. Mol. Cell 25,
635–646.

Pelletier, J., and Sonenberg, N. (1988).
Internal initiation of translation of
eukaryotic mRNA directed by a
sequence derived from poliovirus
RNA. Nature 334, 320–325.

Pestova, T. V., de Breyne, S., Pisarev,
A. V., Abaeva, I. S., and Hellen, C.
U. (2008). eIF2-dependent and eIF2-
independent modes of initiation on
the CSFV IRES: a common role

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 14

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

of domain II. EMBO J. 27, 1060–
1072.

Pfeffer, S., Sewer, A., Lagos-Quentana,
M., Sheridan, R., Sander, C., Grasser,
F. A., van Dyk, L. F., Ho, C. K., Shu-
man, S., Chien, M., Russo, J. J., Jy,
J., Randall, G., Lindenbach, B. D.,
Rice, C. M., Simon, V., Ho, D. D.,
Zavolan, M., and Tuschi, T. (2005).
Identiﬁcation of microRNAs of the
herpesvirus family. Nat. Methods 2,
269–276.

Pilakka-Kanthikeel, S., Saiyed, Z. M.,
Napuri, J., and Nair, M. P. (2011).
MicroRNA: implications in HIV, a
brief overview. J. Neurovirol. 17,
416–423.

Psarras, S., Volonaki, E., Skevaki,
C. L., Xatzipsalti, M., Bossios,
A., Pratsinis, H., Tsigkos,
S.,
Gourgiotis, D., Constantopou-
los, A. G., Papapetropoulos, A.,
Saxoni-Papageorgiou,
and
(2006).
Papadopoulos, N. G.
Vascular
growth
factor-mediated induction of angio-
genesis by human rhinoviruses.
J. Allergy Clin.
Immunol. 117,
291–297.

endothelial

P.,

Puzio-Kuter, A. M. (2011). The role of
p53 in metabolic regulation. Genes
Cancer 2, 385–391.

Qin, X., and Sarnow, P. (2004). Prefer-
ential translation of internal ribo-
some entry site-containing mRNAs
during the mitotic cycle in mam-
malian cells. J. Biol. Chem. 279,
13721–13728.

Raught, B., and Gringas, A. C. (2007).
Translational Control in Biology and
Medicine. New York: Cold Springs
Harbor Laboratory Press.

Raven, J. F., and Koromilas, A. E. (2008).
PERK and PKR: old kinases learn
new tricks. Cell Cycle 7, 1146–1150.
Ray, P. S., Grover, R., and Das, S. (2006).
Two internal ribosome entry sites
mediate the translation of p53 iso-
forms. EMBO Rep. 7, 404–410.

Redondo, N., Sanz, M. A., Wel-
nowska, E., and Carrasco, L. (2011).
Translation without eIF2 promoted
by poliovirus 2A protease. PLoS
ONE 6, e25699. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0025699

Roberts, A. P., Lewis, A. P., and Jopling,
C. L. (2011). miR-122 activates
hepatitis C virus translation by a spe-
cialized mechanism requiring par-
ticular RNA components. Nucleic
Acids Res. 39, 7716–7729.

Rojas-Eisenring, I. A., Cajero-Juarez,
M., and del Angel, R. M. (1995).
Cell proteins bind to a
lin-
ear polypyrimidine-rich sequence
-untranslated region
within the 5
of rhinovirus 14 RNA. J. Virol. 69,
6819–6824.

(cid:2)

Rouha, H., Thurner, C., and Mandl, C.
W. (2010). Functional microRNA
generated
cytoplasmic
RNA virus. Nucleic Acids Res. 38,
8328–8337.

from a

Satoh, S., Hijikata, M., Handa, H., and
Shimotohno, K. (1999). Caspase-
mediated cleavage of eukaryotic
translation initiation factor subunit
2alpha. Biochem. J. 342(Pt 1), 65–70.
Skabkin, M. A., Skabkina, O. V., Dhote,
V., Komar, A. A., Hellen, C. U.,
and Pestova, T. V. (2010). Activi-
ties of ligatin and MCT-1/DENR in
eukaryotic translation initiation and
ribosomal recycling. Genes Dev. 24,
1787–1801.

Sonenberg, N., and Hinnebusch, A.
G. (2009). Regulation of transla-
tion initiation in eukaryotes: mech-
anisms and biological targets. Cell
136, 731–745.

Spriggs, K. A., Bushell, M., Mitchell,
S. A., and Willis, A. E. (2005).
Internal ribosome entry segment-
mediated translation during Apop-
tosis: the role of IRES-trans-acting
factors. Cell Death Differ.
12,
585–591.

Spriggs, K. A., Stoneley, M., Bushell,
M., and Willis, A. E. (2008). Re-
programming of translation follow-
ing cell stress allows IRES-mediated
translation to predominate. Biol. Cell
100, 27–38.

Stoneley, M., and Willis, A. E. (2004).
Cellular internal ribosome entry
segments:
trans-
acting factors and regulation of
gene
23,
3200–3207.

expression. Oncogene

structures,

Sugiyama, R., Naganuma, H., Nishitsuji,
H., and Takaku, H. (2011). Human
immunodeﬁciency virus-1 Nef sup-
presses Hsp70-mediated Tat activa-
tion. FEBS Lett. 585, 3367–3371.

J.

Sukarieh, R., Sonenberg, N.,

and
Pelletier,
(2009). The eIF4E-
binding proteins are modiﬁers of
cytoplasmic
eIF4E relocalization
during the heat shock response.
Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 296,
C1207–C1217.

Sun, J., Conn, C. S., Han, Y., Yeung,
V., and Qian, S. B. (2011). PI3K-
mTORC1 attenuates stress response
by
cap-independent
Hsp70 translation. J. Biol. Chem.
286, 6791–6800.

inhibiting

Suzuki, T., Isobe, T., Kitagawa, M., and
Ueda, K. (2010). Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated
herpesvirus-encoded
LANA positively affects on ubiqui-
tylation of p53. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 403, 194–197.

Suzuki, Y., Minami, M., Suzuki, M.,
Abe, K., Zenno, S., Tsujimoto, M.,
Matsumoto, K., and Minami, Y.

(2009). The Hsp90 inhibitor gel-
danamycin abrogates colocalization
of eIF4E and eIF4E-transporter into
stress granules and association of
eIF4E with eIF4G. J. Biol. Chem. 284,
35597–35604.

Svitkin, Y. V., Herdy, B., Costa-Mattioli,
M., Gingras, A. C., Raught, B.,
and Sonenberg, N. (2005). Eukary-
otic translation initiation factor
4E availability controls the switch
between cap-dependent and inter-
nal ribosomal entry site-mediated
translation. Mol. Cell. Biol. 25,
10556–10565.

Tabas, I., and Ron, D. (2011). Inte-
grating the mechanisms of apoptosis
induced by endoplasmic reticulum
stress. Nat. Cell Biol. 13, 184–190.

Tahiri-Alaoui, A., Smith, L. P., Baigent,
S., Kgosana, L., Petherbridge, L.
J., Lambeth, L. S., James, W., and
Nair, V. (2009). Identiﬁcation of
an intercistronic internal ribosome
entry site in a Marek’s disease virus
immediate-early gene. J. Virol. 83,
5846–5853.

Tee, A. R., and Proud, C. G. (2002).
Caspase cleavage of initiation factor
4E-binding protein 1 yields a dom-
inant
inhibitor of cap-dependent
translation and reveals a novel reg-
ulatory motif. Mol. Cell. Biol. 22,
1674–1683.

Vallejos, M., Deforges, J., Plank, T. D.,
Letelier, A., Ramdohr, P., Abraham,
C. G., Valiente-Echeverria, F., Kieft,
J. S., Sargueil, B., and Lopez-Lastra,
M. (2011). Activity of the human
immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 cell
cycle-dependent internal ribosomal
entry site is modulated by IRES
trans-acting factors. Nucleic Acids
Res. 39, 6186–6200.

Verma, B., Bhattacharyya, S., and Das,
S.
(2010). Polypyrimidine tract-
binding protein interacts with cox-
sackievirus B3 RNA and inﬂuences
its translation. J. Gen. Virol. 91,
1245–1255.

Verma, S., Ali, A., Arora, S., and Baner-
jea, A. C. (2011). Inhibition of beta-
TrcP-dependent ubiquitination of
p53 by HIV-1 Vpu promotes p53-
mediated apoptosis in human T
cells. Blood 117, 6600–6607.

Walters, R. W., Bradrick, S. S., and
Gromeier, M.
(2009). Poly(A)-
binding protein modulates mRNA
susceptibility
cap-dependent
miRNA-mediated repression. RNA
16, 239–250.

to

Wang, K., Xie, S., and Sun, B. (2011a).
Viral proteins function as ion chan-
nels. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1808,
510–515.

Wang, X., Olberding, K. E., White, C.,
and Li, C. (2011b). Bcl-2 proteins

regulate ER membrane permeability
to luminal proteins during ER stress-
induced apoptosis. Cell Death Differ.
18, 38–47.

(2004). Translational

Warnakulasuriyarachchi, D., Cerquozzi,
S., Cheung, H. H., and Holcik,
M.
induc-
the inhibitor of apopto-
tion of
sis protein HIAP2 during endo-
plasmic reticulum stress attenuates
cell death and is mediated via an
inducible internal ribosome entry
site element. J. Biol. Chem. 279,
17148–17157.

Weill, L., James, L., Ulryck, N., Cha-
mond, N., Herbreteau, C. H.,
Ohlmann, T., and Sargueil, B.
(2010). A new type of
IRES
within gag coding region recruits
three initiation complexes on HIV-
2 genomic RNA. Nucleic Acids Res.
38, 1367–1381.

Welnowska, E., Sanz, M. A., Redondo,
N., and Carrasco, L. (2011). Trans-
lation of viral mRNA without
active eIF2:
the case of picor-
naviruses. PLoS ONE 6, e22230.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0022230

White, J. P., Reineke, L. C., and Lloyd,
R. E. (2011). Poliovirus switches to
an eIF2-independent mode of trans-
lation during infection. J. Virol. 85,
8884–8893.

and

Willimott, S., and Wagner, S. D. (2010).
post-
Post-transcriptional
translational
regulation of Bcl2.
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 38, 1571–1575.
Yan, W., Frank, C. L., Korth, M. J.,
Sopher, B. L., Novoa, I., Ron, D.,
and Katze, M. G. (2002). Control
of PERK eIF2alpha kinase activ-
ity by the endoplasmic reticulum
stress-induced molecular chaperone
P58IPK. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
99, 15920–15925.

Yang, D., Wilson, J. E., Anderson, D.
R., Bohunek, L., Cordeiro, C., Kan-
dolf, R., and McManus, B. M.
(1997).
In vitro mutational and
inhibitory analysis of the cis-acting
translational elements within the
(cid:2)
cox-
5
sackievirus B3: potential
targets
for antiviral action of antisense
oligomers. Virology 228, 63–73.

untranslated region of

Yoon, J. H., Choi, E. J., and Parker,
R. (2010). Dcp2 phosphorylation
by Ste20 modulates stress granule
assembly and mRNA decay in Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae. J. Cell Biol.
189, 813–827.

Yoshida, H., Okada, T., Haze, K.,
Yanagi, H., Yura, T., Negishi, M., and
Mori, K. (2001). Endoplasmic retic-
ulum stress-induced formation of
transcription factor complex ERSF
including NF-Y (CBF) and activat-
ing transcription factors 6alpha and

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 15

Hanson et al.

IRES-dependent translational control

6beta that activates the mammalian
unfolded protein response. Mol. Cell.
Biol. 21, 1239–1248.

Jemielity,

Zdanowicz, A., Thermann, R., Kowal-
J.,
J., Duncan,
ska,
Preiss, T., Darzynkiewicz,
K.,
E., and Hentze, M. W.
(2009).
Drosophila miR2 primarily targets
the m7GpppN cap structure for
translational repression. Mol. Cell
35, 881–888.

Zhang, A., Williamson, C. D.,
Wong, D. S., Bullough, M. D.,
J., Hathout, Y., and
Brown, K.
Colberg-Poley, A. M.
(2011a).
Quantitative proteomic analyses of
human
cytomegalovirus-induced

of

endoplasmic
restructuring
reticulum-mitochondrial
contacts
at late times of infection. Mol. Cell
Proteomics 10, M111.009936.

Zhang, H. M., Ye, X., Su, Y., Yuan, J.,
Liu, Z., Stein, D. A., and Yang, D.
(2011b). Coxsackievirus B3 infec-
tion activates the unfolded pro-
tein response and induces apop-
tosis
through downregulation of
p58IPK and activation of CHOP and
SREBP1. J. Virol. 84, 8446–8459.

Zhu, D. M., Shi, J., Liu, S., Liu, Y., and
Zheng, D. (2011). HIV infection
enhances TRAIL-induced cell death
in macrophage by down-regulating
decoy
expression and

receptor

of

generation
reactive
species. PLoS ONE 6,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0018291

oxygen
e18291.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 08 December 2011; accepted:
23 February 2012; published online: 19
March 2012.
Citation: Hanson PJ, Zhang HM,
Hemida MG, Ye X, Qiu Y and Yang

control during

IRES-dependent

reticulum stress

D (2012)
transla-
tional
virus-induced
endoplasmic
and
apoptosis. Front. Microbio. 3:92. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00092
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Virology, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Hanson, Zhang ,
Hemida, Ye, Qiu and Yang . This is an
open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 92 | 16

