General Commentary
published: 14 February 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00052

Commentary on aptamers for virus research

Yasuyuki Miyazaki 1* and Mikako Fujita 2

1  Department of Microbiology, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan
2  Research Institute for Drug Discovery, School of Pharmacy, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan
*Correspondence: ymiyazaki@basic.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

A commentary on

Aptamers in virology: recent advances and 
challenges
by  Binning,  J.  M.,  Leung,  D.  W.,  and 
Amarasinghe, G. K. (2012). Front. Microbiol. 
3:29. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00029

Aptamers are oligonucleotide ligands that 
form unique secondary and tertiary struc-
tures,  such  as  stem  loops,  kinks,  bulges, 
and pseudoknots. Each aptamer exhibits a 
unique interface, through its structure, that 
specifically recognizes the target molecule. 
In fact, the target recognition of aptamers is 
highly specific, and it has been reported that 
an aptamer is able to discriminate between 
closely  related  isoforms  or  different  con-
formational  states  of  the  same  molecule 
(Conrad and Ellington, 1996; Proske et al., 
2002).

    Aptamers  are  often  compared  with 
antibodies  due  to  their  high  specificity 
and affinity to the targets; however, they 
have  some  advantages  over  antibodies. 
For  instance,  antibodies  require  animals 
to  be  generated. Aptamers  are  generated 
by in vitro chemical synthesis, which ena-
bles  chemical  modification  to  control 
their stability or to add fluorescent dye on 
demand.  Moreover,  antibodies  basically 
function in extracellular regions, whereas 
aptamers  are  easily  introduced  into  the 
intra-cellular  compartment  by  transfec-
tion. Loss-of-function technologies such as 
gene knockout, antisense oligonucleotide, 
and RNA interference (RNAi) are actively 
utilized  for  gene  targeting.  These  aim  to 
address  the  function  of  a  target  product 
through gene inactivation at the genomic 
or transcriptional level. Proteins often have 
multiple  functions  and  work  as  part  of 
multiprotein complex. It is often  difficult 

to validate the functional relevance of the 
proteins  by  deletion  at  the  genomic  or 
transcriptional level. Aptamers are appli-
cable to these proteins since aptamers can 
directly bind target proteins. As protein-
based target validation reagents other than 
antibodies,  peptides  derived  from  phage 
display libraries are available. These pep-
tides, however, require in vivo production, 
and in part, exhibit poor specificity to the 
target  molecules,  which  remains  to  be 
overcome  for  general  application.  Thus, 
aptamers have some advantages over other 
technologies  currently  used,  and  have 
potential for a broad range of application, 
such as diagnostic, therapeutic, and basic 
research (Figure 1).

  Binning et al. (2012) summarized the 
recent developments and future prospects 
of  aptamers  in  the  virus  research  field. 
Early and reliable detection of pathogens 
is important for the successful treatment 
and  prevention  of  virus  epidemics. As  a 
diagnostic tool, aptamers have ideal prop-
erties, such as (1) highly specific and tight 
affinity to target molecule, (2) facilitation 
of  modification,  and  (3)  stability.  Due 
to  these  advantages,  aptamers  are  being 
actively investigated as a diagnostic tool. 
In addition, aptamers can be coupled to 
existing  biosensors,  achieving  very  high 
sensitivity (Zhou et al., 2010). Aptamers 
can also be exploited as therapeutic rea-
gents. As mentioned above, aptamers can 
be located in both extra- and intra-cellular 
regions, where they are capable of target-
ing any viral components. In fact, aptam-
ers have been reported to work in various 
viral replication steps, such as entry, tran-
scription, translation, and genome pack-
aging (Binning et al., 2012). Furthermore, 
aptamers exhibit little or no immunogenic-
ity  and  toxicity.  Since   oligonucleotides, 

especially RNAs, are readily broken down 
by nucleases in organisms, aptamers have 
to evade from attack of nucleases for ther-
apeutic use. 2′-Fluoropyrimidine modifi-
cation, 2′-O-methyl nucleotides, or 3′ end 
cap  modification  has  been  developed  to 
achieve resistance to nucleases (Keefe and 
Cload, 2008). Thus, aptamers are potent 
therapeutic reagents. In addition, aptamers 
can be an excellent tool for drug discovery, 
and a competitive  screening method has 
been  developed (Green et al., 2001). A large 
pool of chemical compounds is screened 
against an aptamer/target complex. Only 
a chemical compound capable of binding 
the  target  molecule  with  equivalent  or 
higher  affinity  than  the  aptamer/target 
can displace the aptamer from the target 
molecule. This aptamer approach enables 
high-throughput screening of potent drug 
candidates. Of note, the aptamer approach 
is  applicable  even  if  the  natural  ligand/
substrate is unknown. Aptamers can also 
be a useful tool for basic research by spe-
cifically targeting and disrupting the func-
tions of viral or host protein involved in 
viral  replications.  For  example,  Binning 
et  al.  (2012)  described  an  aptamer  tar-
geting  Tax  of  human  T-cell  leukemia 
virus  and  those  targeting  NC  of  human 
immunodeficiency virus. Thus, aptamers 
can provide invaluable insight into viral 
replication.

  Over two decades have passed since the 
initial description of a screening method of 
aptamers, so called systematic evolution of 
ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX; 
Ellington  and  Szostak,  1990;  Tuerk  and 
Gold, 1990) and applications using aptam-
ers  have  become  more  sophisticated  and 
are increasing. Now is a good time for all 
researchers  in  the  virus  research  field  to 
consider the use of aptamers.

www.frontiersin.org 

February 2012  |  Volume 3  |  Article 52  |  1

Miyazaki and Fujita 

Commentary on aptamers in virology

Figure 1 | Possible applications of aptamers in virus research. (A) Aptamers as 
diagnostic tools. Aptamers exhibit highly specific recognition with very tight affinity 
(Kd < 1 nM) to the target molecules. Aptamer-based detection assays are expected to 
reach lower detection limits than conventional antibody-based detection assays such 
as ELISA. (B) Aptamers as therapeutics. Due to specific and tight affinity to the target 
molecules, and low or no immunogenicity and toxicity, aptamers are expected to be 

effective therapeutic reagents. Moreover, aptamers are capable of existing in 
extra- and intra-cellular regions, indicating that any viral components can be targeted 
by aptamers. (C) Aptamers as a basic research tool. Antibodies or peptides derived 
from phage display libraries are generally used for protein-based target validation. 
Aptamers have some advantages over these methods because of their short 
development time, in vitro synthesis, and high specificity.

RefeRences
Binning, J. K., Leung, D. W., and Amarasinghe, G. K. (2012). 
Aptamers in virology: recent advances and challenges. 
Front. Microbiol. 3:29. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00029
Conrad, R., and Ellington, A. D. (1996). Detecting immo-
bilized protein kinase C isozymes with RNA aptamers. 
Anal. Biochem. 242, 261–265.

Ellington, A. D., and Szostak, J. W. (1990). In vitro selec-
tion of RNA molecules that bind specific ligands. 
Nature 346, 818–822.

Green, L. S., Bell, C., and Janjic, N. (2001). Aptamers as rea-
gents for high-throughput screening. BioTechniques 
30, 1094–1100.

Keefe, A. D., and Cload, S. T. (2008). SELEX with modi-
fied nucleotides. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 12, 448–456.
Proske, D., Höfliger, M., Söll, R. M., Beck-Sickinger, A. 
G., and Famulok, M. (2002). A Y2 receptor mimetic 
aptamer directed against neuropeptide Y. J. Biol. 
Chem. 277, 11416–11422.

Tuerk, C., and Gold, L. (1990). Systematic evolution of 
ligands by exponential enrichment: RNA ligands 
to bacteriophage T4 DNA polymerase. Science 249, 
505–510.

Zhou, J., Battig, M. R., and Wang, Y. (2010). Aptamer-
based molecular recognition for biosensor develop-
ment. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 398, 2471–2480.

Received: 26 January 2012; accepted: 31 January 2012; 
published online: 14 February 2012.
Citation: Miyazaki Y and Fujita M (2012) Commentary 
on aptamers for virus research. Front. Microbio. 3:52. doi: 
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00052
This article was submitted to Frontiers in Virology, a spe-
cialty of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Miyazaki and Fujita. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution Non Commercial License, which 
permits non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduc-
tion in other forums, provided the original authors and 
source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology  |  Virology 

 

February 2012  | Volume 3  |  Article 52  |  2

