REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 03 February 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00023

Toward a systemic understanding of Listeria
monocytogenes metabolism during infection

Thilo M. Fuchs 1,2*, Wolfgang Eisenreich3,Tanja Kern1 and Thomas Dandekar 4

1 Abteilung Mikrobiologie, Zentralinstitut für Ernährungs- und Lebensmittelforschung, Technische Universität München, Freising, Germany
2 Lehrstuhl für Mikrobielle Ökologie, Department Biowissenschaften, Wissenschaftszentrum Weihenstephan, Technische Universität München, Freising, Germany
3 Lehrstuhl für Biochemie, Technische Universität München, Garching, Germany
4 Abteilung Bioinformatik, Theodor-Boveri-Institut (Biozentrum), Universität Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany

Edited by:
Reinhard Guthke, Leibniz-Institute for
Natural Product Research and
Infection Biology – Hans-Knoell-
Institute, Germany
Reviewed by:
Guoku Hu, Creighton University, USA
Conor P. O’Byrne, NUI Galway, Ireland
*Correspondence:
Thilo M. Fuchs, Abteilung
Mikrobiologie, Zentralinstitut für
Ernährungs- und
Lebensmittelforschung, Technische
Universität München,
Weihenstephaner Berg 3, 85350
Freising, Germany.
e-mail: thilo.fuchs@wzw.tum.de

Listeria monocytogenes is a foodborne human pathogen that can cause invasive infection in
susceptible animals and humans. For proliferation within hosts, this facultative intracellular
pathogen uses a reservoir of speciﬁc metabolic pathways, transporter, and enzymatic func-
tions whose expression requires the coordinated activity of a complex regulatory network.
The highly adapted metabolism of L. monocytogenes strongly depends on the nutrient
composition of various milieus encountered during infection.Transcriptomic and proteomic
studies revealed the spatial–temporal dynamic of gene expression of this pathogen during
replication within cultured cells or in vivo. Metabolic clues are the utilization of unusual C2-
and C3-bodies, the metabolism of pyruvate, thiamine availability, the uptake of peptides,
the acquisition or biosynthesis of certain amino acids, and the degradation of glucose-
phosphate via the pentose phosphate pathway. These examples illustrate the interference
of in vivo conditions with energy, carbon, and nitrogen metabolism, thus affecting listerial
growth. The exploitation, analysis, and modeling of the available data sets served as a ﬁrst
attempt to a systemic understanding of listerial metabolism during infection. L. monocyto-
genes might serve as a model organism for systems biology of a Gram-positive, facultative
intracellular bacterium.

Keywords: Listeria monocytogenes, infection, metabolism, systems biology, modeling, intracellular

INTRODUCTION
A successful infection by bacterial pathogens requires multiple
adaptation processes including adhesion to host tissues, mod-
ulation of the immune response, or toxic activity toward the
host defense system. Some pathogens enter epithelial cells or are
internalized by professional phagocytes, and these steps are often
followed by bacterial manipulation of the host cell actin skele-
ton and the manipulation of the endocytic route. Most of these
processes, which often require speciﬁc virulence factors that enable
the microbes to overcome the various physical and biochemical
barriers of the infected host, have been characterized in detail.

In contrast, little attention has been given to the metabolic
requirements and the metabolic ﬂexibility of bacteria during infec-
tion, in parts due to limitation of analytical tools, and because the
bacterial metabolism in vivo and in vitro has erroneously been
assumed to be similar (Muñoz-Elías and McKinney, 2006). There-
fore, our knowledge about the substrates used by pathogens during
infection, and, equally important, the effect of a bacterial infection
on the metabolism of the host cell is still fragmentary (Joseph and
Goebel, 2007; Fuchs et al., 2011; Rohmer et al., 2011). Furthermore,
the structural conservation of metabolic enzymes was considered

Abbreviations: σB, sigma factor; BBCAAs, branched-chain amino acids; GAP,
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate; Hly,
listeriolysin; IPA, isotopolog proﬁling analy-
sis; Pdh, pyruvate dehydrogenase; PlcA/PlcB, phospholipase A/B; PPP, pentose
phosphate pathway; PrfA, positive regulatory factor A.

to prevent the identiﬁcation of microbe-speciﬁc inhibitors. Key
metabolic enzymes, however, that are speciﬁcally required during
growth within host cells could constitute a promising new set of
possible targets for antibacterial compounds urgently needed or be
used for the development of food formulas that suppress growth
of pathogenic bacteria (Boigegrain et al., 2005; Becker et al., 2006;
Liautard et al., 2006). Recent progress has been made in determin-
ing the major carbon sources used by intracellularly replicating
pathogens such as Listeria monocytogenes, Shigella ﬂexneri, and
pathogenic Escherichia coli (Lucchini et al., 2005; Eylert et al., 2008;
Götz and Goebel, 2010; Götz et al., 2010). These data suggest that
pathogens, in order to efﬁciently replicate within a host or its
cells, have to coordinate their metabolism with the availability of
nutrients during their life cycle (for review, see Eisenreich et al.,
2010).

Listeria monocytogenes is a Gram-positive pathogen that mainly
affects immunocompromised individuals, pregnant women, and
newborns. Severe infections are characterized by bacteremia,
meningoencephalitis, abortion, or neonatal sepsis. The most com-
mon vehicles of transmission of this saprophytic bacterium to
humans are dairy products and other foods including eggs,
seafood, and vegetables. Three hundred eighty-six documented
cases of listeriosis were reported for 2010 in Germany (Robert
Koch-Institut, 2011), and about 1600 in the USA (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2011). The high lethality rate
of up to 20–30% despite early antibiotic treatment resulted in

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 23 | 1

Fuchs et al.

Listeria monocytogenes infection

increasing efforts to understand listerial pathogenicity and to ﬁnd
tools against this pathogen (Vázquez-Boland et al., 2001).

Upon uptake by contaminated food, L. monocytogenes enter
non-phagocytic cells such as epithelial cells, hepatocytes, or ﬁbrob-
lasts by the activity of the surface-associated internalins A and B.
In contrast to other facultative intracellular pathogens like Salmo-
nella, a hallmark of L. monocytogenes is that it is capable to escape
from the phagocytic vacuole by disrupting the phagosomal mem-
brane via the expression of listeriolysin (Hly) and phospholipase
A (PlcA). Listerial cells thus access the host cell cytoplasm where
they are not only able to replicate, but also to actively move by actin
polymerization mediated by ActA. Cell-to-cell spreading and sub-
sequent disruption of the vacuolar double-membrane by Hly and
PlcB has also been observed. Having passed the gut epithelium, L.
monocytogenes is capable to resist killing by professional phago-
cytes. It might disseminate via the lymph and the blood to the
liver and the spleen and even cross the blood–brain or the blood–
placenta barrier. All main virulence factors are under control of
the positive regulatory factor A (PrfA; for more details, see reviews
such as Vázquez-Boland et al., 2001; Dussurget et al., 2004; Hamon
et al., 2006; Cossart and Toledo-Arana, 2008; Camejo et al., 2011).
Here, we will summarize recent omic-studies relevant for the
topic of listerial metabolism during infection, and introduce iso-
topolog proﬁling analysis (IPA) as a technique that allows novel
insights in metabolic ﬂuxes during infection. Then, metabolic
adaptations and requirement of L. monocytogenes in cultured cells
and in vivo, as well as the underlying regulatory factors, will be
resumed. Modeling approaches as further tools that pave the way
toward a systems level understanding of listerial metabolism dur-
ing infection will be presented, followed by challenges and future
perspectives in this research ﬁeld.

OMIC-APPROACHES TO DELINEATE METABOLIC TRAITS
RELEVANT FOR INFECTION
So far, mainly two strategies have been followed to improve our sys-
temic understanding of metabolic adaptations by listeriae within
host compartments: ﬁrstly, the differences between the transcrip-
tomes and the proteomes of apathogenic and pathogenic strains,
and secondly the analysis of differential gene expression upon the
transition from one physiologically relevant condition to another.

COMPARATIVE APPROACHES
Comparative genomics is important to identify factors and path-
ways contributing to virulence properties, both on the genus level
with insights into host speciﬁcities and on the species level regard-
ing the biodiversity of certain bacterial lineages (Zhao et al., 2011).
Detection of differences between the genomes of L. monocytogenes
and the apathogenic species L. innocua gave ﬁrst insights into the
reasons that cause a Listeria species to be pathogenic (Buchrieser
et al., 2003). In a triple analysis involving the whole genome
sequences of L. monocytogenes, L. welshimeri, and L. innocua, it was
shown that genome reduction led to the apathogenic L. welshimeri,
the latter being derived from early evolutionary events. This ﬁnd-
ing points to an ancestor more compact than L. monocytogenes
(Hain et al., 2006).

However, the genetic equipment itself does not sufﬁciently
describe differences of more closely related strains with respect

to their virulence properties. Several proteomic approaches have
been performed in the context of listerial adaption to the host
environment, thus contributing to the systemic understanding of
metabolism during infection (Cabanes et al., 2011). A comparative
in vitro proteomic approach investigated the protein expression
proﬁles of L. monocytogenes and L. innocua with a focus on the
secretome of both species (Trost et al., 2005). In vitro comparative
transcriptome analysis of L. monocytogenes strains revealed dif-
ferences of the two major lineages/serovar 1/2a, and serovars 4b
and 1/2b including stress-related sigma factor B (see below) and
virulence factors (Severino et al., 2007). Related studies analyzed
the secreted proteomes of L. monocytogenes strains belonging to
serovars 4b, 1/2b, and 1/2a (Dumas et al., 2008, 2009a,b). Due to
the identiﬁcation of factors possibly involved in substrate degra-
dation, those studies might reveal novel insight into the listerial
metabolism in vivo. Donaldson et al. (2011) focused on proteome
differences between an avirulent and two virulent L. monocytogenes
strains representing the two lineages mentioned above. Their data
revealed that most proteins of the intermediary metabolism are
stronger expressed in pathogenic strains in comparison to apath-
ogenic strains. Comparison between the two virulent serovars
also revealed metabolic differences in their intramacrophagic pro-
teome, possibly reﬂecting unequal proliferation rates (Donaldson
et al., 2009).

TRANSITION STUDIES
Two pilot studies had investigated the transcriptome of L. monocy-
togenes infecting human epithelial (Caco-2) cells and the murine
macrophage cell line P388D1. Both studies revealed that up to 19%
of the listerial genes are differentially expressed in comparison to
their level of transcription in BHI medium (Chatterjee et al., 2006;
Joseph et al., 2006). Differences in the results point to cell-speciﬁc
metabolic adaptations during the intracellular replication of L.
monocytogenes, whereas common ﬁndings support the assump-
tion that several metabolic traits play a central role for listerial
replication in vivo (see below). The analysis of the proteome of L.
monocytogenes strain EGDe replicating in macrophages demon-
strated the upregulation of speciﬁc metabolic pathways (van de
Velde et al., 2009). An in vitro proteomic study revealed global
changes in gene expression when L. monocytogenes enters station-
ary phase, a growth condition also relevant in vivo (Weeks et al.,
2004). These data clearly indicate that speciﬁc metabolic adap-
tations signiﬁcantly contribute to the capability of pathogens to
replicate within macrophages.

The analysis of the bacterial response to changing conditions
in vitro also elucidates the dynamic of metabolism in vivo. Wen
et al. (2011) investigated the reversible transition from the bacilli-
like to the cocci-morphology in the long-term-survival (LTS)
phase of L. monocytogenes serotype 4b strain F2365 at different
growth stages in tryptic soy broth with yeast extract (TSBYE).
Transcriptome analysis identiﬁed 225 differentially expressed
genes (≥4-fold; P < 0.05) with the upregulation of metabolic
genes including those involved in the synthesis of branched-chain
amino acids (BCAAs). Combined treatment with potassium lac-
tate and sodium diacetate led to altered metabolism, including a
shift toward fermentative production of acetoin (Stasiewicz et al.,
2011).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 23 | 2

Fuchs et al.

Listeria monocytogenes infection

POWER OF ISOTOPOLOG PERTURBATION STUDIES FOR
SYSTEMS BIOLOGY OF INFECTION
The study of biosynthetic pathways and ﬂuxes under in vivo con-
ditions is crucial to understand the metabolism and physiology of
microorganisms on a systems level (Winder et al., 2011). While
many important features on metabolism can be deduced on the
basis of genome sequences, RNA transcripts, protein and metabo-
lite proﬁles, and numeric modeling, the direct observation of
metabolic pathways and ﬂuxes during listerial growth in eukary-
otic host cells has long been hampered by the lack of an adequate
technology. One of the recent methods for the quantitative analy-
sis of metabolite ﬂuxes throughout biological systems is based on
growing infected host cells in medium containing stable isotope
labeled nutrients (Eylert et al., 2008). For heterotrophic organisms
including pathogenic bacteria such as L. monocytogenes and their
eukaryotic host cells, simple carbohydrates, amino acids, and glyc-
erol are among the typical carbon sources and, therefore, serve as
suitable tracers in these labeling studies.

Any perturbation of the natural isotope equilibrium by the sup-
ply of such an isotope enriched compound will naturally spread
in the experimental system via a large number of enzyme cat-
alyzed reactions. In other words, a broad spectrum of biosynthetic
pathways (if not all) is covered by this experimental approach.
As a consequence, comprehensive information about the nature
and the dynamics of the metabolic network can be obtained. Ana-
lytical methods to monitor the distribution of the stable isotope
(e.g., 13C) in biosynthetic products are NMR spectroscopy and/or
mass spectrometry typically coupled with gas chromatography
(GC/MS). Both methods have their speciﬁc advantages and disad-
vantages. Mass spectrometry is a well-established tool to determine
isotopolog patterns in amino acids at adequate sensitivity (Zam-
boni et al., 2009). Signals with high signal-to-noise ratio can be
obtained even with small sample amounts, i.e., 108 bacterial cells or
1 mg of dry cell pellet is sufﬁcient for the measurement of protein
bound amino acids (Eisenreich et al., 2010).

After protein hydrolysis, the resulting amino acids are con-
verted into tert -butyldimethylsilyl-derivatives (TBDMS amino
acids). On the basis of the mass patterns, the relative fractions
of isotopomers (i.e., molecular ions or fragments thereof com-
prising a deﬁned number of 13C-atoms) can be determined for
approximately 50 mass fragments of 15 TBDMS amino acids
under realistic conditions. However, from these analytes only 29
fragments of 12 different TBDMS amino acids (glycine, alanine,
serine, aspartate, threonine, glutamate, valine, leucine, isoleucine,
methionine, tyrosine, and phenylalanine) meet the demands for a
reliable isotopomer quantiﬁcation (Antoniewicz et al., 2007). Only
13 fragments comprise all carbon atoms of the original amino
acids (i.e., for glycine, alanine, serine, aspartate, threonine, gluta-
mate, proline, methionine, valine, lysine, histidine, phenylalanine,
and tyrosine), whereas all other fragments are observed after loss
of one or more carbon atoms from the original amino acid. For
most TBDMS amino acids, fragments are detected where C-1 (the
carboxylic atom) has been lost during the ionization. Provided
that the labeling strategy had generated speciﬁc proﬁles in all of
these fragments, the biosynthetic pathways leading to the analyzed
amino acids can be identiﬁed in typical studies. Moreover, the
same data can be used to predict the patterns in the precursors for

the respective amino acids as a basis to elucidate the ﬂuxes in the
central intermediary metabolisms. For accurate data, the overall
13C-enrichment should be at least 0.2%; better results are obtained
with enrichments >1%.

Notably, the measurements can be done in a high throughput
manner by automated systems, albeit data processing, and inter-
pretation still need considerable efforts by expert users even when
supported by the available software to deconvolute isotopolog
enrichments from the original data. Considering the isotope frac-
tions in the molecular masses of the original metabolites and
one or more fragments thereof, some limited information can
be gleaned about the positional distribution of the 13C-label.
However, the positional resolution is still low in comparison with
isotopolog proﬁling by NMR spectroscopy that, in turn, is worse
in sensitivity (Eisenreich and Bacher, 2007). Nevertheless, the iso-
topomer patterns in amino acids detected by GC/MS already reveal
considerable information about the carbon ﬂuxes in the bacterial
cells and their hosts (see below).

When more than 1012 bacterial cells are available (>10 mg of
dry cell pellet), one- and two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy can
be used in addition to GC/MS. Indeed, high-resolution 13C-NMR
spectroscopy is capable to assess 13C-enrichment for each non-
equivalent carbon atom of a metabolite under study. Isotopomers
carrying one 13C-atom at different positions display completely
different 13C-NMR spectra with singlet signals at the chemi-
cal shifts for the respective labeled carbon atoms. Notably, this
is in sharp contrast to mass spectrometry, where each of these
isotopomers gives rise to identical signals due to the identical
molecular masses. The same holds true for multiply 13C-labeled
isotopologs. Whereas the mass spectra only show the sum of all
isotopologs comprising two or more 13C-atoms, respectively, these
isotopologs can be better distinguished by NMR spectroscopy. Due
to scalar 13C13C couplings, the 13C-NMR signals of a multiply
13C-labeled metabolite appear as speciﬁc multiplets in the spectra.
On the basis of the 13C-NMR coupling signatures observed
for every single (non-equivalent) carbon atom in a 13C-labeled
compound, information on the abundance of 12C and 13C at the
respective neighbored carbon atoms is obtained (i.e., in a frame-
work comprising not more than three to four bonds around the
index atom). As a result, a set of isotopolog groups can be identi-
ﬁed for each 13C-NMR signal. On the basis of the signal intensities
(i.e., by deconvolution of the complex coupling patterns providing
integral values for each component in the 13C-NMR multiplets),
these sets are quantiﬁed. For most very small non-symmetrical
molecules (i.e., comprising not more than three carbon atoms),
all isotopomers/isotopologs display speciﬁc NMR signal patterns
and can be clearly assigned and quantiﬁed on this basis (Eisenreich
and Bacher, 2007).

Due to the fact that many of the potential long-range 13C-
couplings cannot be completely resolved in the 13C-NMR spec-
trum of a more complex metabolite (comprising more than three
carbon atoms), the observables are typically not sufﬁcient for
the direct observation of all individual isotopologs. However,
in combination with GC/MS analysis, a sufﬁcient number of
constraints can be determined for amino acids to clearly assign
molecules with single and multiple labels at adjacent carbon
positions. As described below, isotopolog proﬁling studies have

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 23 | 3

Fuchs et al.

Listeria monocytogenes infection

indeed contributed important and novel insights into the listerial
metabolism during infection.

and F2365 could be more metabolically active in J774.1 than in
P388D1 macrophages (Chatterjee et al., 2006).

THE INTRACELLULAR NICHE
A hallmark of L. monocytogenes is its capability to replicate within
host cells. Thus, auxotrophic mutants indicate possible nutri-
ent limitations within a host cell. For example, listerial strains
defective in the biosynthesis of aromatic compounds as precur-
sors for menaquinone show a strong attenuation in cell culture
and mice infection assays, and a more slightly in vivo attenua-
tion was observed for mutants requiring the three aromatic amino
acids, threonine, and adenine (Alexander et al., 1993; Marquis
et al., 1993; Stritzker et al., 2004). These studies indicate that
hosts provide sufﬁcient organic and inorganic compounds to
overcome selected auxotrophies. In addition, proteins involved in
nucleotide synthesis (PyrD, PyrE, PyrF, and PyrAB) are expressed
at a lower level during replication of L. monocytogenes within
human THP-1 monocytes or macrophages, indicating a sufﬁcient
supply of nucleotides from the host cell (Klarsfeld et al., 1994;
van de Velde et al., 2009). The reduced replication rate of a pyrE
mutant in macrophages (Schauer et al., 2010) again might point
to speciﬁcities of host cell lines with respect to their metabolic
status.

The cytosol serves as a compartment that protects pathogens
from killing by the host’s immune system. Its composition with
respect to metabolites is largely unknown, as well as the intra-
cytosolic availability of nutrients. Typically, the cytosol exhibits
low concentrations of magnesium, sodium, iron, and calcium
ions at neutral pH (reviewed in Ray et al., 2009). In total, up
to 100 suitable carbon as well as nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur
sources are present within eukaryotic cells (Brown et al., 2008).
The intracellular milieu is a reducing environment that contains
10 mM reduced glutathione and only 0.5 mM oxidized glutathione
(Hwang et al., 1992), a fact important for growth of L. monocy-
togenes that depends on the availability of reduced nitrogen and
sulfur sources (Joseph and Goebel, 2007).

It was assumed that facultative intracellular bacteria have devel-
oped a balanced strategy to exploit just enough nutrients from the
host cell to maintain survival and proliferation in the intracellular
niche (Joseph and Goebel, 2007). A prerequisite for such a strategy,
however, is that the intracellular compartment is rich in nutrients,
a hypothesis for which the following pros and cons might be stated:
Pros: Strikingly, non-pathogenic bacteria such as Bacillus sub-
tilis or E. coli expressing Hly are able to replicate within the cytosol
following phagocytic uptake and escape from the vacuole (Bielecki
et al., 1990; Monack and Theriot, 2001). The vacuolar passage, for
example by a low pH, might prime the bacterium for intracellular
replication since microinjected non-pathogenic L. innocua, E. coli,
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium, Yersinia enterocolitica,
or B. subtilis failed to proliferate within the cytosol (Goetz et al.,
2001; Slaghuis et al., 2004; Hain et al., 2008). Cons: In case cells are
a habitat providing easy access to substrates, much more pathogens
beside L. monocytogenes, S. ﬂexneri, Burkholderia pseudomallei, and
Francisella tularensis would exploit this niche (Ray et al., 2009).
Furthermore, all intracellular pathogens exhibit a preference for
certain cell types that might depend on differences in the cytosolic
nutrient composition. For example, the pathogenic strains EGDe

LISTERIAL METABOLISM WITHIN CELLS
Occupation of the intracellular niche plays a pivotal role for L.
monocytogenes virulence, allowing the pathogen to temporarily
escape from the immune system of the host and to initiate systemic
infection. The host cell cytosol with cell-speciﬁc and dynamic
nutrient composition is a complex environment that this intra-
cellular pathogen actively adapts to (Eisenreich et al., 2010). Here,
we will resume what is known about the listerial mechanisms of
substrate acquisition, and the speciﬁc metabolic adaptations of L.
monocytogenes that allow its successful transition from the extra-
to the intracellular milieu (Figure 1).

CARBON SOURCES
The intracellular utilization of glucose or glucose-6-phosphate,
but also of non-carbohydrate nutrients such as glycerol and amino
acids has been demonstrated by IPA studies (Eylert et al., 2008).
A multiple mutant unable to take up and catabolize glycerol due
to a lack of GlpF, glycerol kinase (GlpK), glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GlpD), and DhaK is also attenuated in intracel-
lular growth (own unpublished data). This is in line with the
upregulation of these genes within the cytoplasm of host cells
(Chatterjee et al., 2006; Joseph et al., 2006) and within the intes-
tine of mice (Toledo-Arana et al., 2009). In vitro, genes encoding
glycolysis enzymes and genes involved in the metabolism and
the biosynthesis of BCAA are downregulated, and those required
for gluconeogenesis are upregulated in the presence of glycerol.
All PrfA-dependent genes show a higher level of transcription
under these conditions (Joseph et al., 2008). On the other hand,
a strain lacking Hpt, a transporter involved in the exploitation
of hexose phosphate from the host cell, is attenuated in vivo and
within cells, and its gene, uhpT, revealed to be highly upregu-
lated during growth in intracellular strains (Chatterjee et al., 2006;
Joseph et al., 2006). In addition, the decreased transcription of
hpr encoding the phosphocarrier protein of a phosphoenolpyru-
vate (PEP)-dependent phosphotransferase system (PTS) during
intraepithelial replication reﬂects the lower amount of Hpr in the
absence of glucose (Asanuma and Hino, 2003). These data sup-
port the assumption that glucose-6-phosphate rather than glucose
is used for bacterial metabolism within hosts (Chico-Calero et al.,
2002). This was conﬁrmed by the observation of carbon catabolite
derepression during intracellular growth (Joseph et al., 2006), and
the ﬁnding that a mutant unable to uptake glucose does not show
replication attenuation in macrophages or epithelial cells (Stoll
and Goebel, 2010). Instead of glycolysis, the oxidative pentose
phosphate pathway (PPP) is assumed to be the predominant path-
way of sugar metabolism within host cells, since the genes required
for glycolysis are down- and those for PPP are upregulated (Chat-
terjee et al., 2006; Joseph et al., 2006). The non-oxidative branch
of PPP is also upregulated in epithelial cells and results in the
production of xylulose- and ribose-5-phosphate as precursors of
nucleotide biosynthesis (Chatterjee et al., 2006). This was not sup-
ported by proteomic analysis that revealed a decreased abundance
of two enzymes of this pathway, namely the transaldolase lmo2743
and ribose-5-phosphate epimerase during listerial replication in

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 23 | 4

Fuchs et al.

Listeria monocytogenes infection

FIGURE 1 | Simpliﬁed view of listerial metabolic enzymes, transporters,
and pathways relevant during infection. Cofactor thiamine is symbolized by
a blue square. Dashed lines indicate putative interactions of master regulators
with transporters, enzymes, or metabolites, dashed arrows unknown uptake

mechanisms. Blue, shaded genes encode putative interaction partners of
PrkA. De novo biosynthesized amino acids are shown in red, complex
pathways in green. Abbreviations: G, glycolysis; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; P,
phosphate. Functions of genes are mentioned in the text.

human THP-1 monocytes (van de Velde et al., 2009). This contra-
diction might be due to cell-type speciﬁc metabolite compositions.
Another possible explanation was only recently been provided by a
proteomic comparison between two pathogenic strains EGDe and
F2365 of L. monocytogenes with the non-pathogenic strain HCC23.
The pattern of intermediary metabolism proteins suggests that an
initial period of reduced glycolysis during intracellular replication
is followed by a resumption of glycolysis (Donaldson et al., 2011).

NITROGEN METABOLISM
Glutamine, convertible to glutamate, is the optimal nitrogen
source for L. monocytogenes in vitro (Fisher, 1999). Little is known
about the in vivo nitrogen metabolism of L. monocytogenes that
is assumed to use ammonium, arginine, and/or ethanolamine as
nitrogen sources during intracellular replication (Buchrieser et al.,
2003; Joseph et al., 2006; Joseph and Goebel, 2007). NrgAB that
is activated by TnrA at low concentrations of nitrogen sources
is responsible for the uptake of ammonium ions. Gene nrgAB is
strongly downregulated within murine macrophages (Chatterjee
et al., 2006), but upregulated in human epithelial cells (Joseph et al.,
2006). These data again suggest a cell-type dependent availability
of nitrogen sources and/or cell-type speciﬁc metabolic adaptations
of L. monocytogenes.

Ethanolamine lyase EutABC has been demonstrated to be
required for wildtype-like intracellular replication of L. mono-
cytogenes (Joseph et al., 2006). Ethanolamine might be derived
from phoshatidylethanolamine by the activity of listerial phos-
pholipases. Thus, phospholipids ubiquitous in host environments

such as the gut might serve as important nitrogen, carbon, and
energy source during infection. This hypothesis is in line with the
ﬁnding that ethanolamine can be utilized under anaerobic condi-
tions only (Price-Carter et al., 2001; Winter et al., 2010; Srikumar
and Fuchs, 2011). The role of host peptides in nitrogen metabolism
(see below) remains to be investigated in more detail.

AMINO ACID UPTAKE AND DE NOVO BIOSYNTHESIS
At least six listerial transporters possibly involved in the uptake
of amino acids and oligopeptides were recently identiﬁed to con-
tribute to intramacrophagic survival and replication (Joseph et al.,
2006; Schauer et al., 2010). Induced expression of the oligopep-
tide transporter lmo0135–0137 associated with cysteine transport
has been demonstrated to contribute to proliferation in Caco-2
cells and in vivo (Chatterjee et al., 2006; Schauer et al., 2010).
In addition, the oligopeptide permease OppABCDF is not only
a prerequisite for intramacrophagic growth, but also for full vir-
ulence of L. monocytogenes in mice (Borezee et al., 2000; Port
and Freitag, 2007). These ﬁndings support the assumption that
L. monocytogenes uses intracellular peptides as a source of amino
acids (Marquis et al., 1993).

Transcriptomic data showed that genes involved in the biosyn-
thesis of glutamate, glutamine, and arginine belonging to the glu-
tamate family are upregulated during intraepithelial replication of
L. monocytogenes (Joseph et al., 2006). Similar ﬁndings were made
for tryptophan and the BCAAs valine, leucine, and isoleucine.
BCAAs are among the most abundant amino acids in proteins, and
maintaining their pools is a prerequisite for high-level synthesis of

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 23 | 5

Fuchs et al.

Listeria monocytogenes infection

proteins (Sonenshein, 2007). The downregulation of aminoacyl
tRNA synthase genes glyS, serS, cysS, alaS, hisS, valS, thrS, ileS, leuS,
tyrS, and trpS suggests that the respective amino acids are available
for L. monocytogenes within macrophages (Chatterjee et al., 2006).
In a pilot study, this hypothesis was at least partially conﬁrmed
by 13C-isotopolog proﬁling experiments, demonstrating that up
to 50% of the amino acids alanine, aspartate, and glutamate are
recruited from the host cells during intracellular replication of
L. monocytogenes (Eylert et al., 2008). Results of the same study
indicate a restricted anabolism under these conditions since only
7 of 14 amino acids investigated, namely alanine, aspartate, gluta-
mate, serine, threonine, valine, and glycine ordered by decreased
13C-incorporation, were identiﬁed to be de novo biosynthesized
(Eylert et al., 2008).

CENTRAL METABOLISM
A hallmark of the central metabolism of L. monocytogenes is
the incomplete tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle due to a lack of
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase as demonstrated by genome analy-
sis and 13C-labeling studies (Glaser et al., 2001; Eisenreich et al.,
2006). 2-Oxoglutarate as a substrate of glutamate synthase links
carbon and nitrogen metabolism. Vice versa, amino acids such as
arginine, proline, and histidine can be converted to 2-oxoglutarate.
It could be demonstrated that oxaloacetate, the direct or indi-
rect precursor of aspartate and threonine, is generated by an
anaplerotic reaction afforded by pyruvate carboxylation (Eylert
et al., 2008). This reaction is catalyzed by the ATP-dependent
pyruvate carboxylase PycA (Schär et al., 2010). The critical role
for PycA for proliferation of L. monocytogenes in vivo and within
epithelial cells or macrophages makes it an interesting candidate
for antilisterial compound search (Schindler and Zähner, 1972).
It is worth to note that pyruvate is also the precursor for the syn-
thesis of BCAAs that, as demonstrated by several studies cited
here, play a pivotal role during intracellular replication of liste-
riae. Thus, the biosynthesis of BCAAs that is mainly regulated by
catabolite control protein A (CcpA) and CodY in an opposite man-
ner also balances the distribution of pyruvate and 2-oxoglutarate
(Sonenshein, 2007).

Oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate results in acetyl-
coenzyme A used for the synthesis of valine and leucine, whereas
isoleucine is more indirectly derived via pyruvate carboxylation
to oxaloacetate as a precursor for aspartate and threonine synthe-
sis. These data suggest a competition of two metabolic pathways
important for intracellular replication, namely the biosynthesis of
BCAA and the replenishing of the TCA cycle. This metabolic sink
might partially be compensated by the increased and decreased
expression of several enzymes involved in amino acid metabolism,
among them d-alanyl-d-alanine ligase and d-alanine transami-
nase, an enzyme essential for virulence (Johnson et al., 2004; van
de Velde et al., 2009).

COFACTORS
The cofactors riboﬂavin, thiamine, biotin, and lipoate are sup-
plements of deﬁned growth media for L. monocytogenes. The
vitamin thiamine is required by enzymes of the central metab-
olism including Pdh, and the need of its de novo biosynthesis
by L. monocytogenes suggests its intracellular limitation (Schauer

(cid:3)

et al., 2009). Its precursors might be derived from glutamine or
from 2-oxoglutarate by overexpressed glutamate dehydrogenase
(van de Velde et al., 2009). The same authors also argued that
the unexpected induced expression of PurQ and PurM results in
the formation of 1-(5
-phosphoribosyl)-5-amino-imidazole that
might predominantly be used as a thiamine precursor. Indeed,
insertional knockout of purQ attenuated listerial replication inside
macrophages (Schauer et al., 2010). Interestingly, Madeo and
coworkers recently identiﬁed thiamine to play a yet unknown role
in listerial tolerance toward low pH as encountered within host
compartments. This was explained by the fact that the thiamine-
dependent conversion of pyruvate to acetolactate and further to
acetoin comprises two proton-consuming steps (Madeo et al.,
2012). The ﬁrst step is catalyzed by the product of alsS induced
under acidic conditions (Stasiewicz et al., 2011). The use of host-
derived lipoic acid is also relevant for L. monocytogenes infection.
Lipoyl modiﬁcation of Pdh subunit E2 by lipoate protein ligase
LplA1 was demonstrated to contribute to intracellular replication
and virulence of this pathogen (O’Riordan et al., 2003).

METABOLISM OF L. MONOCYTOGENES IN VIVO
Fundamental shifts in the expression pattern of genes are involved
in the adaptation of listerial metabolism to several host compart-
ments. A comprehensive approach was recently performed using
tiling arrays to describe the listerial RNome during transition of
L. monocytogenes from saprophytism to virulence. To this end,
the authors not only studied three physiologically relevant condi-
tions, namely stationary phase, hypoxia, and temperature shifts,
but also investigated sigma B (σB)- and PrfA-negative mutants
(Toledo-Arana et al., 2009). Two PTS required for mannitol and
mannose uptake, and ribose-5-phosphate isomerase as part of the
non-oxidative PPP are also upregulated in intestine and stationary
phase. A remarkable metabolic adaptation to the intestine and the
blood is the increased transcription of the gene cluster involved in
ethanolamine and 1,2-propanediol utilization including the cofac-
tor cobalamine (see above), of PTS systems for galactitol, fructose,
and cellobiose uptake, and of DhaKs involved in glycerol utiliza-
tion. Interestingly, the gene clusters lmo0315–lmo0318 responsible
for thiamine biosynthesis, and lmo1983–1991 involved in the
biosynthesis of BCAAs are also upregulated during listerial replica-
tion in blood (Toledo-Arana et al., 2009). This resembles previous
ﬁndings that these metabolic traits are required for intracellular
replication (Joseph et al., 2006). In the host intestinal lumen, the
authors observed a σB-mediated activation of genes, whereas in
blood, gene transcription was mainly controlled by PrfA.

Listeria monocytogenes also actively replicates within the spleen
of infected mice. Following intravenous application of strain
EGDe, 30% of all genes differentially regulated in mice spleen were
found to be involved in metabolism (Camejo et al., 2009). Upreg-
ulated genes include uhpT and, in contrast to epithelial cells and
macrophages, genes involved in glycolysis (gap, pgi, fbaA, pgm),
whereas those involved in the non-oxidative phase of the PPP
appeared to be downregulated. Genes involved in the expression
of the Pdh complex including its activator, lipoate protein lig-
ase, were induced in vivo. The upregulation of genes encoding
pyruvate–formate lyase indicates an anoxic degradation of pyru-
vate to formate and acetyl-CoA in the spleen. The upregulation of

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 23 | 6

Fuchs et al.

Listeria monocytogenes infection

genes responsible for the biosynthesis of aromatic amino acids
(aroA, pheA), of BCAAs and of amino acids of the aspartate
and glutamate families is in line with the transcription pattern
in epithelial cells and macrophages. An increased expression of
mannose-, maltose-, and cellobiose-speciﬁc PTS and a decreased
expression of PTS responsible for fructose, galactitol, and mannitol
uptake was observed. The induction of glnA encoding glutamine
synthetase might hint to an inactivation of TnrA within the spleen.
Remarkably, listerial genes involved in thiamine synthesis are also
upregulated during proliferation in mice spleen.

The human intestine is a yet underinvestigated compartment
with respect to its impact on bacterial metabolism. Here, L. mono-
cytogenes not only encounters predominantly anaerobic condi-
tions as a prerequisite for ethanolamine utilization, but also a
higher concentration of carbon dioxide known to act as a signal for
bacterial metabolism (Neidhardt et al., 1974; Kröger et al., 2011).
It has been hypothesized that the biosynthesis of threonine via
oxaloacetate and overexpression of threonine synthase is favored
by the high concentration of carbon dioxide (van de Velde et al.,
2009). Carbon dioxide is also required for oxidative carboxylation
of glucose-6-phosphate, the ﬁrst reaction in the PPP.

Some of the data on the listerial metabolism in cell culture
on the one hand and in vivo on the other hand, for example the
role of glycolysis, the non-oxidative PPP or the uptake of sugars,
are inconsistent. These discrepancies not only indicate to a more
active multiplication status in mouse organs compared to cell cul-
ture studies using immortal cells (Camejo et al., 2009), but also
point to compartment-speciﬁc metabolic needs.

REGULATION OF LISTERIAL METABOLISM DURING
INFECTION
During invasive infection, L. monocytogenes not only prolifer-
ates within epithelial cells and macrophages, but encounters a
frequent change of the surrounding milieu. Therefore, in vivo
growth is assumed to require the concerted activity of the following
regulators:

CodY, TnrA, AND CcpA
Three global regulators of L. monocytogenes, CcpA, TnrA, and
CodY sense key metabolites generated in carbon- and nitrogen
metabolism (Fisher, 1999; Sonenshein, 2007). CodY, a global tran-
scriptional regulator, seems to play a critical role in the intracellular
adaptation of L. monocytogenes. CodY is known to lose its repress-
ing activity when intracellular levels of GTP and BCAAs decrease.
As shown by Bennett et al. (2007), the CodY regulon comprises
genes involved in amino acid metabolism, nitrogen assimilation,
and sugar uptake. Derepression of the CodY operon revealed to be
essential for listerial replication in various cell culture models and
in mice. The authors therefore hypothesized that CodY senses the
metabolic state of the host cell cytoplasm and triggers an adap-
tive listerial response, which is characterized by the induction of
genes involved in the de novo biosynthesis of amino acids such
as glutamate, arginine, histidine, tryptophan, and serine, in the
intermediary carbon metabolism, in the uptake of sugars or in pep-
tide, and ammonium transport. The induction and requirement of
argD encoding N -acetylornithine aminotransferase during intra-
cellular replication simultaneously with the induced expression of

the arginine transporter ArpJ might reﬂect a limited availability
of this amino acid under intracellular conditions (Klarsfeld et al.,
1994; Joseph et al., 2006). Listerial TnrA, probably encoded by
lmo1298, is known as the principal global regulator of nitrogen
metabolism in B. subtilis and represses the synthesis of glutamate
synthase (Glt) and glutamine synthetase (GlnA). TnrA expression
revealed to be downregulated within epithelial cells (Chatterjee
et al., 2006), a ﬁnding that links to the inactivation of TnrA in the
presence of glutamine (Wray et al., 2001). Less is known about the
role of the listerial catabolite CcpA. Repression of sugar utilization
pathways by glucose is independent of CcpA (Gopal et al., 2010),
and CcpA is not involved in carbon source regulation of virulence
genes (Behari and Youngman, 1998).

ALTERNATIVE SIGMA FACTOR B (σB)
The transition of L. monocytogenes from the saprophytic to the
pathogenic lifestyle requires an adequate response to environmen-
tal conditions such as low pH, bile stress, carbon starvation, and
the presence of reactive oxygen species on the level of transcription
and expression (Abram et al., 2008a; Hain et al., 2008; O’Byrne
and Karatzas, 2008; Ryan et al., 2008; Soni et al., 2011; Zhang
et al., 2011). The regulon controlled by σB plays a major role in
this adaptation process. Moreover, σB has been demonstrated to
contribute to invasion of epithelial cells and to gastrointestinal
infection (Kim et al., 2004; Garner et al., 2006; McGann et al.,
2007; Ollinger et al., 2009). Interestingly, the two most highly rep-
resented categories of σB-dependent factors were transport and
metabolism proteins, among them pyruvate dehydrogenase Pdh,
a dihydroxyacetone kinase DhaK, the glycerol transporter GlpF,
and a mannose-speciﬁc PTS (Kazmierczak et al., 2003). Accord-
ingly, a L. monocytogenes σB mutant lacking σB less efﬁciently used
glycerol as a carbon and energy source (Abram et al., 2008b). An
intensive transcriptional reorganization was observed in an in vivo
study based on tiling microarrays in which a σB mutant was used
for infection (Toledo-Arana et al., 2009).

POSITIVE REGULATORY FACTOR A
The main virulence regulator of L. monocytogenes, PrfA, belongs
to the family of cAMP receptor protein (Crp)/fumarate nitrate
reductase regulators (de las Heras et al., 2011). PrfA not only acti-
vates nine key virulence factors including Hpt, but also controls
the expression of further 136 factors including those involved in
the metabolic activity of this pathogen during infection (Milo-
hanic et al., 2003). The direct or indirect regulatory PrfA function
requires an interplay with σB that controls the general stress
response of L. monocytogenes (Ollinger et al., 2008, 2009). Interest-
ingly, there is a close link between metabolism and virulence in L.
monocytogenes since the carbon sources utilized by the pathogen
affect the expression of virulence genes. Especially, glucose, fruc-
tose, mannose, or cellobiose transported by PTS downregulated
PrfA-dependent genes (Freitag et al., 2009), a ﬁnding that points
to a low concentration of these sugars within cells. Vice versa,
overproduction of PrfA resulted in growth inhibition in glucose-
containing media and in an increased de novo biosynthesis of
BCAA (Eisenreich et al., 2006; Marr et al., 2006). This sugar-
mediated gene repression of PrfA-dependent genes depends rather
on inhibition of PrfA than on changes of the PrfA concentration

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 23 | 7

Fuchs et al.

Listeria monocytogenes infection

(Renzoni et al., 1997). Taken together, the intracellular availabil-
ity of carbon sources might act as a key signal for virulence gene
expression in L. monocytogenes (de las Heras et al., 2011).

ADDITIONAL REGULATORY MECHANISMS
Another mechanism that regulates the metabolic adaptation of
pathogens to their hosts is the phosphorylation status of pro-
teins. In L. monocytogenes, a eukaryotic-type serine/threonine-
kinase (PrkA, lmo1820) and a serine/threonine-phosphatase (Stp,
lmo1821) have been identiﬁed that play a role during intracellu-
lar replication and in vivo, respectively (Archambaud et al., 2005;
Zemansky et al., 2009). In a proteomic approach, 62 proteins were
identiﬁed as interacting partners of PrkA including 19 involved
in carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism (Lima et al., 2011).
PrkA directly inﬂuences important metabolic enzymes such as
Pdh, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP) dehydrogenase, pyruvate
carboxylase PycA, an aminotransferase involved in BCAA synthe-
sis, and the acetate kinase Acs. The role of universal stress proteins
(Usps), which support the adaptation to energy deﬁciencies, in
listerial stress resistance and in virulence has only recently been
demonstrated (Seifart Gomes et al., 2011). In E. coli, the activation
of uspA is regulated by fructose-6-phosphate (Persson et al., 2007),
but a similar mechanism in Gram-positive pathogens remains to
be elucidated.

MODELING L. MONOCYTOGENES METABOLISM UNDER
INFECTION CONDITIONS
Systems biology approaches of listerial infection use a combina-
tion of genome-based bioinformatics tools including sequence and
domain analysis, function and structure prediction for proteins,
and phylogenetic comparisons. The focus of modeling has been on
(intracellular) metabolism, pathogenicity factors, host–pathogen
interaction, and the immune response of the host (Schauer et al.,
2010; Sauer et al., 2011).

To model listerial metabolism in vitro and within cells, ele-
mentary mode analysis was applied (Eisenreich et al., 2006). This
method allows to enumerate all possible enzyme combinations
or independent pathways within the bacterial cell. Each path-
way balances all internal metabolites involved. Furthermore, the
metabolic ﬂux models allows to ﬁll in gaps of knowledge from
the retrobiosynthetic analysis of the isotopolog compositions, for
instance areas where no labeled metabolites were transported by
the metabolic ﬂux.

In a more recent study, quantitative literature data on intra-
cellular replication of deﬁned mutants was combined with the
replication rates derived from a genome-scale screening for
mutants showing reduced intraepithelial survival of L. mono-
cytogenes (Schauer et al., 2010). The application of extreme
pathway and elementary mode analysis revealed a critical role
of glycerol and purine metabolism, of fucose utilization, and
of the synthesis of glutathione, aspartate semialdehyde, serine,
and BCAAs during intracellular replication of L. monocyto-
genes. Thus, new targets for antibiotic intervention became vis-
ible by this approach. Furthermore, the modeling demonstrated
that degradation of glucose indeed occurs to a large extent via
the PPP. To achieve those insights in metabolic traits relevant
for listerial infection, numerous all-against-all protein sequence

comparisons were performed to establish speciﬁc and general
protein families.

The number of metabolic pathways to consider in such
genome-scale models reaches several thousand and more. Two cri-
teria helped here to zoom in on the key pathways involved: Firstly,
only those mutants of L. monocytogenes were considered that
showed wildtype-like replication in rich medium, but impaired
growth in macrophages.

Secondly, the pathways critical for survival in the macrophage
were analyzed to particularly identify enzymes with a role in at
least two of these pathways. The list of key enzymes reoccurring in
the affected elementary modes by the different affected mutants
could then be calculated and ranked. By this procedure, it was
possible to quickly identify the most important listerial pathways
required for intracellular survival.

Modeling metabolic pathways often results in combinator-
ial explosion, i.e., an intractable high number of potential ﬂux
modes. However, recent advances have the potential to over-
come this disadvantage. For instance, ﬂux distributions were
decomposed into elementary ﬂux modes in genome-scale meta-
bolic networks of E. coli grown in rich medium containing
various carbon sources (Chan and Ji, 2011). Furthermore, soft-
ware such as EMILiO increases the scope of strain design to
include reactions with individually optimized ﬂuxes. Unlike exist-
ing approaches experiencing an explosion in complexity to solve
this problem, this allowed to generate diverse strain designs regard-
ing production of succinate, l-glutamate, and l-serine (Yang
et al., 2011). A third possibility is the application of metabolic
ﬂux patterns. These are sets of reactions representing the basic
routes through a particular subsystem that are compatible with
admissible ﬂuxes in a (possibly) much larger metabolic net-
work (Schuster et al., 2010). The subsystem can be made up
by reactions one is interested in, for example production of a
certain metabolite. Furthermore, growth, growth boundary, and
inactivation models of L. monocytogenes have extensively been
developed in food research. Validated approaches exploited avail-
able experimental data and combined all three aspects using
on different food sources as a medium (Coroller et al., 2012).
Stochastic-based examples are multiplicative heteroscedastic mod-
els taking into account differing growth variance for heteroge-
neous populations (Cao et al., 2010), or the dependence of suc-
cessful growth on inoculum and cell counts (Vermeulen et al.,
2009).

PERSPECTIVES
Each of the approaches reviewed above has obvious limitations.
Interfacing the transcriptome analysis with a mutant library
screening underscored that the up- or downregulation of a gene
or an operon not necessarily coincides with a phenotype under the
same conditions (Joseph et al., 2006), a general drawback of these
approaches. On the other hand, a proteomic analysis does not
reveal the whole proteome under given conditions. Mutant analy-
sis and IPA, on the other hand, focus on the role of single genes
and metabolic traits, thus providing parts of the metabolic puz-
zle only. Contradictory results derived from different approaches
posed the relevance of single metabolic pathways of L. monocyto-
genes for infection in question. Examples are the overexpression

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 23 | 8

Fuchs et al.

Listeria monocytogenes infection

of glutamate dehydrogenase during listerial replication in human
THP-1 monocytes in contrast to its decreased expression in strain
F2365 (van de Velde et al., 2009; Donaldson et al., 2011), or the
induction or repression of the non-oxidative branch of the PPP
(see above). These contradictions not only point to host cell-
speciﬁc or temporary metabolic adaptations of L. monocytogenes,
but also to the need of more standardized experimental conditions
in omic-approaches.

Another prerequisite for systems biology of listerial metabolism
is to quantify and qualify the metabolic state of the bacterial and
the host cells during different stages of infection (Zamboni and
Sauer, 2009). So far, data sets on metabolites have been derived
only from in vitro approaches under non-physiological conditions.
For example, L. monocytogenes 10403S cells grown at 37 and 8˚C
were analyzed (Singh et al., 2011). At low temperature, an increase
of solute concentrations such as amino acids, sugars, organic
acids, urea cycle intermediates, polyamines, and different compat-
ible solutes was observed in the listerial cytoplasm, thus lowering
the freezing point of intracellular water and decreasing ice crys-
tal formation. A statistical analysis (PCA) was instrumental to
reveal this system response. Mathematical modeling can consider
such effects by adjusting metabolite concentrations and by ther-
modynamic considerations. Furthermore, compartment models
are soon expected to improve such studies (Cheng et al., 2008)
including pools and ﬂuxes of the mammalian cell (Lopes et al.,
2010). Future research should also consider microcompartments
and organelles that both are used to optimize metabolic processes.
Compartmentalization is common also in L. monocytogenes
including carboxysomes responsible for cobalamine-dependent
1,2-propanediol degradation, thus contributing to functional
diversity.

To reveal an even more comprehensive picture of listerial
metabolism during infection, cells such as primary macrophages
and ﬁbroblasts should be considered for future cell culture experi-
ments. It is also of interest to determine whether and to what extent
the host metabolism is modulated during infection, for instance
by L. monocytogenes secreting c-di-AMP (Woodward et al., 2010).
In addition to in vivo studies using mice and guinea pigs (Cabanes
et al., 2008), small animals such as Caenorhabditis elegans or Gal-
leria mellonella might be established as new model organisms.
C. elegans is a facile and proven model host for the study of
microbial pathogenesis and metabolism (Sifri et al., 2005; Thom-
sen et al., 2006; Srikumar and Fuchs, 2011). Because both host
and pathogen are easily amenable to genetic manipulations, the
effect of metabolic perturbations upon infection, changing culture

conditions, or gene knockouts can be investigated in this infec-
tion model. Notably, the model also reduces costs and ethical
constraints in comparison to infection experiments with higher
animals. A further advantage of the model is that metabolic ﬂuxes
from cells or tissues of an infected host animal to L. monocyto-
genes and vice versa might be followed, an approach that has long
been hampered by the lack of technology to identify and quantify
metabolism throughout an appropriate biological system (Spanier
et al., 2009). G. mellonella, the greater wax moth, is another rela-
tively simple, non-mammalian host model system that can be used
to assess not only the virulence of listerial strains, but also the con-
tribution of metabolic capacities to larvae killing as exempliﬁed by
the attenuated phenotype of an EGDe ΔuhpT mutant (Mukher-
jee et al., 2010). A major disadvantage in contrast to nematodes,
however, is the need of subcutaneous instead of oral application
of the pathogen.

SUMMARY
Listeria monocytogenes is highly adapted to the cytoplasm of mam-
malian host cells where it is able to multiply with a generation time
comparable to that in rich medium. A comprehensive analysis of
its metabolism is a prerequisite for a systemic understanding of
L. monocytogenes infection. Taking into account all omic-studies
and mutant data, certain metabolic enzymes and pathways of L.
monocytogenes revealed to have a critical role during infection and
might serve as new targets for the development of antilisterial com-
pounds (Figure 1). Metabolic clues for intracellular and in vivo
replication are the degradation of phosphorylated glucose via the
PPP, the utilization of C3-bodies as alternative carbon- and energy
source, pyruvate as a sink for central metabolism including down-
stream reactions such as pyruvate decarboxylation, biosynthesis
of BCAAs, the availability of thiamine, and the acquisition of host
cell derived nitrogen sources including ethanolamine. The regula-
tion of these metabolic capabilities involves the activity of factors
such as PrfA and σB, resulting in a ﬁne-tuned balance of metabolic
ﬂows with the host cell and in vivo. For a deeper understand-
ing especially of host–pathogen interdependencies with respect to
metabolism, new technologies such as isotopolog proﬁling, addi-
tional animal models including invertebrates, and novel systems
biological approaches have to be combined in future research.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Work in the authors’ laboratories is supported by grants of the Ger-
man Research Foundation (DFG), including the priority program
SPP1316 (DA 208/13-1, EI-384/6, and FU-375/5).

REFERENCES
Abram, F., Starr, E., Karatzas, K. A.,
Matlawska-Wasowska, K., Boyd, A.,
Wiedmann, M., Boor, K. J., Con-
nally, D., and O’Byrne, C. P. (2008a).
Identiﬁcation of components of the
sigma B regulon in Listeria monocy-
togenes that contribute to acid and
salt tolerance. Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 74, 6848–6858.

Abram, F., Su, W.-L., Wiedmann, M.,
Boor, K. J., Coote, P., Botting, C.,

Karatzas, K. A. G., and O’Byrne, C. P.
(2008b). Proteomic analyses of a Lis-
teria monocytogenes mutant lacking
sigma B identify new components of
the sigma B regulon and highlight
a role for sigma B in the utilization
of glycerol. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
74, 594–604.

Alexander, J. E., Andrew, P. W., Jones, D.,
and Roberts, I. S. (1993). Character-
ization of an aromatic amino acid-
dependent Listeria monocytogenes

mutant:
attenuation, persistence,
and ability to induce protective
immunity in mice. Infect. Immun.
61, 2245–2248.

Antoniewicz, M. R., Kelleher, J. K., and
Stephanopoulos, G. (2007). Accu-
rate assessment of amino acid mass
isotopomer distributions for meta-
bolic ﬂux analysis. Anal. Chem. 79,
7554–7559.

Archambaud, C., Gouin, E., Pizarro-
Cerda, J., Cossart, P., and Dussurget,

serine-threonine

O. (2005). Translation elongation
factor EF-Tu is a target for Stp,
a
phosphatase
involved in virulence of Listeria
monocytogenes. Mol. Microbiol. 56,
383–396.

Asanuma, N., and Hino, T. (2003). Mol-
ecular characterization of HPr and
related enzymes, and regulation of
HPr phosphorylation in the ruminal
bacterium Streptococcus bovis. Arch.
Microbiol. 179, 205–213.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 23 | 9

Fuchs et al.

Listeria monocytogenes infection

Becker, D., Selbach, M., Rollenhagen,
C., Ballmaier, M., Meyer, T. F.,
Mann, M., and Bumann, D. (2006).
Robust Salmonella metabolism lim-
its possibilities for new antimicro-
bials. Nature 440, 303–307.

Behari, J., and Youngman, P. (1998). A
homolog of CcpA mediates catabo-
lite control in Listeria monocytogenes
but not carbon source regulation
of virulence genes. J. Bacteriol. 180,
6316–6324.

Bennett, H. J., Pearce, D. M., Glenn, S.,
Taylor, C. M., Kuhn, M., Sonenshein,
A. L.,Andrew, P. W., and Roberts, I. S.
(2007). Characterization of relA and
codY mutants of Listeria monocyto-
genes: identiﬁcation of the CodY reg-
ulon and its role in virulence. Mol.
Microbiol. 63, 1453–1467.

Bielecki, J., Youngman, P., Connelly, P.,
and Portnoy, D. A. (1990). Bacillus
subtilis expressing a haemolysin gene
from Listeria monocytogenes can
grow in mammalian cells. Nature
345, 175–176.

Boigegrain, R.-A., Liautard, J.-P., and
Köhler, S. (2005). Targeting of the
virulence factor acetohydroxyacid
synthase by sulfonylureas results
in inhibition of intramacrophagic
multiplication of Brucella
suis.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49,
3922–3925.

Borezee, E., Pellegrini, E., and Berche, P.
(2000). OppA of Listeria monocyto-
genes, an oligopeptide-binding pro-
tein required for bacterial growth
at low temperature and involved in
intracellular survival. Infect. Immun.
68, 7069–7077.

Brown, S. A., Palmer, K. L., and Whiteley,
M. (2008). Revisiting the host as a
growth medium. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
6, 657–666.

Buchrieser, C., Rusniok, C., Kunst,
F., Cossart, P.,
and Glaser, P.
(2003). Comparison of the genome
sequences of Listeria monocyto-
genes and Listeria innocua: clues
for evolution and pathogenicity.
FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 35,
207–213.

Cabanes, D., Lecuit, M., and Cossart,
P. (2008). Animal models of Listeria
infection. Curr. Protoc. Microbiol. 9,
9B.1.1–9B.1.17.

Cabanes, D., Sousa, S., and Cossart,
P. (2011). “Listeria genomics,” in
Genomics of Foodborne Bacterial
Pathogens, eds M. Wiedmann and
W. Zhang (New York: Springer),
141–70.

Camejo, A., Buchrieser, C., Couvé, E.,
Carvalho, F., Reis, O., Ferreira, P.,
Sousa, S., Cossart, P., and Cabanes,
D. (2009). In vivo transcriptional
proﬁling of Listeria monocytogenes

and mutagenesis identify new vir-
ulence factors involved in infec-
tion. PLoS Pathog. 5, e1000449.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000449

Camejo, A., Carvalho, F., Reis, O., Leitao,
E., Sousa, S., and Cabanes, D. (2011).
The arsenal of virulence factors
deployed by Listeria monocytogenes
to promote its cell infection cycle.
Virulence 2, 379–394.

J.

Cao, R., Francisco-Fernández, M.,
and Quinto, E.
(2010). A
random effect multiplicative het-
eroscedastic model
for bacterial
growth. BMC Bioinformatics 11, 77.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-77

Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention. (2011). Statistics of Listerio-
sis. Atlanta. Available at: http://www.
cdc.gov/listeria/statistics.html

Chan, S. H. J., and Ji, P. (2011). Decom-
posing ﬂux distributions into ele-
mentary ﬂux modes in genome-scale
metabolic networks. Bioinformatics
27, 2256–2262.

Chatterjee, S. S., Hossain, H., Otten, S.,
Kuenne, C., Kuchmina, K., Machata,
S., Domann, E., Chakraborty, T.,
and Hain, T. (2006). Intracellular
gene expression proﬁle of Listeria
monocytogenes. Infect. Immun. 74,
1323–1338.

Cheng, S., Liu, Y., Crowley, C. S., Yeates,
T. O., and Bobik, T. A. (2008). Bacter-
ial microcompartments: their prop-
erties and paradoxes. Bioessays 30,
1084–1095.

Chico-Calero, I., Suárez, M., González-
Zorn, B., Scortti, M., Slaghuis, J.,
Goebel, W., and Vázquez-Boland,
J. A.
(2002). Hpt, a bacterial
homolog of the microsomal glucose-
6-phosphate translocase, mediates
rapid intracellular proliferation in
Listeria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
99, 431–436.

Coroller, L., Kan-King-Yu, D., Leguer-
I., Mafart, P., and Mem-
inel,
bré,
J.-M.
(2012). Modelling of
growth, growth/no-growth interface
and nonthermal inactivation areas
of Listeria in foods. Int. J. Food
Microbiol. 152, 139–152.

Cossart, P., and Toledo-Arana, A.
(2008). Listeria monocytogenes, a
unique model in infection biology:
an overview. Microbes Infect. 10,
1041–1050.

de las Heras, A., Cain, R. J., Bielecka,
M. K., and Vazquez-Boland, J. A.
(2011). Regulation of Listeria vir-
ulence: PrfA master and com-
mander. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 14,
118–127.

Donaldson, J. R., Nanduri, B., Burgess,
S. C., and Lawrence, M. L. (2009).
Comparative proteomic analysis of
Listeria monocytogenes strains F2365

and EGD. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
75, 366–373.

Donaldson, J. R., Nanduri, B., Pittman,
J. R., Givaruangsawat, S., Burgess,
S. C., and Lawrence, M. L. (2011).
Proteomic expression proﬁles of vir-
ulent and avirulent strains of Lis-
teria monocytogenes isolated from
macrophages.
74,
1906–1917.

J. Proteomics

Dumas, E., Desvaux, M., Chambon, C.,
and Hébraud, M. (2009a). Insight
into the core and variant exo-
proteomes of Listeria monocyto-
genes species by comparative sub-
proteomic analysis. Proteomics 9,
3136–3155.

Dumas, E., Meunier, B., Berdagué, J.-
L., Chambon, C., Desvaux, M., and
Hébraud, M. (2009b). The origin
of Listeria monocytogenes 4b isolates
is signiﬁed by subproteomic pro-
ﬁling. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1794,
1530–1536.

Dumas, E., Meunier, B., Berdagué, J.-
L., Chambon, C., Desvaux, M., and
Hébraud, M. (2008). Comparative
analysis of extracellular and intra-
cellular proteomes of Listeria mono-
cytogenes strains reveals a correla-
tion between protein expression and
serovar. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74,
7399–7409.

Dussurget, O., Pizarro-Cerda, J., and
Cossart, P. (2004). Molecular deter-
minants of Listeria monocytogenes
virulence. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 58,
587–610.

Eisenreich, W., and Bacher, A. (2007).
Advances of high-resolution NMR
techniques in the structural and
metabolic analysis of plant bio-
chemistry.
68,
2799–2815.

Phytochemistry

Eisenreich, W., Dandekar, T., Heese-
mann, J., and Goebel, W. (2010).
Carbon metabolism of intracellu-
lar bacterial pathogens and possible
links to virulence. Nat. Rev. Micro-
biol. 8, 401–412.

J., Stritzker,

., Bussemer,

Eisenreich, W., Slaghuis, J., Laupitz,
R.
J.,
Schwarz, C., Schwarz, R., Dandekar,
T., Goebel, W., and Bacher, A.
(2006). 13C isotopologue perturba-
tion studies of Listeria monocyto-
genes carbon metabolism and its
modulation by the virulence regula-
tor PrfA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
103, 2040–2045.

Eylert, E., Schär, J., Mertins, S., Stoll, R.,
Bacher, A., Goebel, W., and Eisenre-
ich, W. (2008). Carbon metabolism
of Listeria monocytogenes growing
inside macrophages. Mol. Microbiol.
69, 1008–1017.

Fisher, S. H. (1999). Regulation of nitro-
gen metabolism in Bacillus subtilis:

vive la différence! Mol. Microbiol. 32,
223–232.

Freitag, N. E., Port, G. C., and Miner,
M. D. (2009). Listeria monocyto-
genes – from saprophyte to intracel-
lular pathogen. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
7, 623–628.

Fuchs, T. M., Eisenreich, W., Heese-
mann, J., and Goebel, W. (2011).
Metabolic adaptation of human
non-
pathogenic
pathogenic
extra-
and intracellular habitats. FEMS
Microbiol. Rev. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-
6976.2011.00301.x. [Epub ahead of
print].

and
bacteria

related
to

Garner, M. R., Njaa, B. L., Wiedmann,
M., and Boor, K. J. (2006). Sigma
B contributes to Listeria monocyto-
genes gastrointestinal infection but
not to systemic spread in the guinea
pig infection model. Infect. Immun.
74, 876–886.

Glaser, P., Frangeul, L., Buchrieser, C.,
Rusniok, C., Amend, A., Baquero,
F., Berche, P., Bloecker, H., Brandt,
P., Chakraborty, T., Charbit, A.,
Chetouani, F., Couvé, E., de Daru-
var, A., Dehoux, P., Domann, E.,
Domínguez-Bernal, G., Duchaud,
E., Durant, L., Dussurget, O., Ent-
ian, K. D., Fsihi, H., García-del Por-
tillo, F., Garrido, P., Gautier, L.,
Goebel, W., Gómez-López, N., Hain,
T., Hauf, J., Jackson, D., Jones, L.
M., Kaerst, U., Kreft, J., Kuhn, M.,
Kunst, F., Kurapkat, G., Madueno,
E., Maitournam, A., Vicente, J. M.,
Ng, E., Nedjari, H., Nordsiek, G.,
Novella, S., de Pablos, B., Pérez-Diaz,
J. C., Purcell, R., Remmel, B., Rose,
M., Schlueter, T., Simoes, N., Tierrez,
A., Vázquez-Boland, J. A., Voss, H.,
Wehland, J., and Cossart, P. (2001).
Comparative genomics of Listeria
species. Science 294, 849–852.

Goetz, M., Bubert, A., Wang, G., Chico-
Calero, I., Vazquez-Boland, J. A.,
Beck, M., Slaghuis, J., Szalay, A. A.,
and Goebel, W. (2001). Microinjec-
tion and growth of bacteria in the
cytosol of mammalian host cells.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98,
12221–12226.

Gopal,

J.

S., Berg, D., Hagen, N.,
Schriefer, E.-M., Stoll, R., Goebel,
W., and Kreft,
(2010). Mal-
tose and maltodextrin utilization
by Listeria monocytogenes depend
on an inducible ABC transporter
which is repressed by glucose. PLoS
ONE 5, e10349. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0010349

Götz, A., Eylert, E., Eisenreich, W., and
Goebel, W. (2010). Carbon metab-
olism of
enterobacterial human
epithe-
pathogens
growing
lial
adenocarcinoma

colorectal

in

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 23 | 10

Fuchs et al.

Listeria monocytogenes infection

(Caco-2) cells. PLoS ONE 5, e10586.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0010586

Götz, A., and Goebel, W.

(2010).
Glucose and glucose 6-phosphate
as carbon sources in extra- and
intracellular growth of enteroin-
vasive Escherichia coli and Sal-
monella enterica. Microbiology 156,
1176–1187.

S., Machata,

Hain, T., Hossain, H., Chatterjee,
S.
S., Volk, U.,
Wagner, S., Brors, B., Haas, S.,
Kuenne, C. T., Billion, A., Otten,
S., Pane-Farre, J., Engelmann, S.,
and Chakraborty, T. (2008). Tem-
poral transcriptomic analysis of the
Listeria monocytogenes EGD-e σB
regulon. BMC Microbiol. 8, 20.
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-8-20

Hain, T., Steinweg, C., Kuenne, C. T.,
Billion, A., Ghai, R., Chatterjee, S.
S., Domann, E., Kärst, U., Goes-
mann, A., Bekel, T., Bartels, D.,
Kaiser, O., Meyer, F., Pühler, A., Weis-
shaar, B., Wehland, J., Liang, C.,
Dandekar, T., Lampidis, R., Kreft,
J., Goebel, W., and Chakraborty, T.
(2006). Whole-genome sequence of
Listeria welshimeri reveals common
steps in genome reduction with Lis-
teria innocua as compared to Liste-
ria monocytogenes. J. Bacteriol. 188,
7405–7415.

Hamon, M., Bierne, H., and Cossart,
P. (2006). Listeria monocytogenes: a
multifaceted model. Nat. Rev. Micro-
biol. 4, 423–434.

Hwang, C., Sinskey, A. J., and Lodish,
H. F. (1992). Oxidized redox state
of glutathione in the endoplasmic
reticulum. Science 257, 1496–1502.
Johnson, J., Jinneman, K., Stelma, G.,
Smith, B. G., Lye, D., Messer, J.,
Ulaszek, J., Evsen, L., Gendel, S.,
Bennett, R. W., Swaminathan, B.,
Pruckler, J., Steigerwalt, A., Kathar-
iou, S., Yildirim, S., Volokhov, D.,
Rasooly, A., Chizhikov, V., Wied-
mann, M., Fortes, E., Duvall, R. E.,
and Hitchins, A. D. (2004). Natural
atypical Listeria innocua strains with
Listeria monocytogenes pathogenic-
ity island 1 genes. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 70, 4256–4266.

Joseph, B., and Goebel, W. (2007).
Life of Listeria monocytogenes in the
host cells’ cytosol. Microbes Infect. 9,
1188–1195.

Joseph, B., Mertins, S., Stoll, R., Schar,
J., Umesha, K. R., Luo, Q., Muller-
Altrock, S., and Goebel, W. (2008).
Glycerol metabolism and PrfA activ-
ity in Listeria monocytogenes. J. Bac-
teriol. 190, 5412–5430.

Joseph, B., Przybilla, K., Stühler, C.,
Schauer, K., Slaghuis, J., Fuchs, T. M.,
and Goebel, W. (2006). Identiﬁca-
tion of Listeria monocytogenes genes

contributing to intracellular repli-
cation by expression proﬁling and
mutant screening. J. Bacteriol. 188,
556–568.

Kazmierczak, M. J., Mithoe, S. C., Boor,
K. J., and Wiedmann, M. (2003).
Listeria monocytogenes sigma B reg-
ulates
stress response and viru-
lence functions. J. Bacteriol. 185,
5722–5734.

Kim, H., Boor, K. J., and Marquis,
H. (2004). Listeria monocytogenes
sigma B contributes to invasion
of human intestinal epithelial cells.
Infect. Immun. 72, 7374–7378.

Klarsfeld, A. D., Goossens, P. L., and
Cossart, P.
(1994). Five Listeria
monocytogenes genes preferentially
expressed in infected mammalian
cells: plcA, purH, purD, pyrE and an
arginine ABC transporter gene, arpJ.
Mol. Microbiol. 13, 585–597.

Kröger, C., Srikumar, S., Ellwart, J., and
Fuchs, T. M. (2011). Bistability in
myo-inositol utilization by Salmo-
nella enterica serovar Typhimurium.
J. Bacteriol. 193, 1427–1435.

Liautard, J.-P., Jubier-Maurin, V., Boige-
grain, R.-A., and Köhler, S. (2006).
Antimicrobials: targeting virulence
genes necessary for
intracellular
multiplication. Trends Microbiol. 14,
109–113.

Lima, A., Duran, R., Schujman, G. E.,
Marchissio, M. J., Portela, M. M.,
Obal, G., Pritsch, O., de, M. D.,
and Cervenansky, C. (2011). Ser-
ine/threonine protein kinase PrkA
of
the human pathogen Listeria
monocytogenes: biochemical char-
acterization and identiﬁcation of
interacting partners through pro-
teomic approaches. J. Proteomics 74,
1720–1734.

Lopes, T. J. S., Luganskaja, T., Vujic
Spasic, M., Hentze, M. W., Muck-
enthaler, M. U., Schümann, K.,
and Reich,
(2010). Sys-
tems analysis of iron metabolism:
the network of
iron pools and
ﬂuxes. BMC Syst. Biol. 4, 112.
doi:10.1186/1752-0509-4-112

J. G.

Lucchini, S., Liu, H., Jin, Q., Hinton, J.
C. D., and Yu, J. (2005). Transcrip-
tional adaptation of Shigella ﬂexneri
during infection of macrophages
and epithelial cells:
insights into
the strategies of a cytosolic bac-
terial pathogen. Infect. Immun. 73,
88–102.

Madeo, M., O’Riordan, N., Fuchs, T.
M., Utratna, M., Karatzas, K. A.
G., and O’Byrne, C. P. (2012). Thi-
amine plays a critical role in the acid
tolerance of Listeria monocytogenes.
FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 326, 137–143.
Marquis, H., Bouwer, H. G., Hinrichs,
D. J., and Portnoy, D. A. (1993).

Intracytoplasmic growth and vir-
ulence of Listeria monocytogenes
auxotrophic mutants. Infect. Immun.
61, 3756–3760.

Marr, A. K., Joseph, B., Mertins, S.,
Ecke, R., Müller-Altrock, S., and
Goebel, W. (2006). Overexpression
of PrfA leads to growth inhibition
of Listeria monocytogenes in glucose-
containing culture media by inter-
fering with glucose uptake. J. Bacte-
riol. 188, 3887–3901.

McGann, P., Wiedmann, M., and Boor,
K. J. (2007). The alternative sigma
factor sigma B and the virulence
gene regulator PrfA both regulate
transcription of Listeria monocy-
togenes internalins. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 73, 2919–2930.

Milohanic, E., Glaser, P., Coppée, J.-
Y., Frangeul, L., Vega, Y., Vázquez-
Boland, J. A., Kunst, F., Cossart, P.,
and Buchrieser, C. (2003). Tran-
scriptome analysis of Listeria mono-
cytogenes identiﬁes three groups of
genes differently regulated by PrfA.
Mol. Microbiol. 47, 1613–1625.

Monack, D. M., and Theriot, J. A.
(2001). Actin-based motility is suf-
ﬁcient for bacterial membrane pro-
trusion formation and host cell
uptake. Cell. Microbiol. 3, 633–647.
Mukherjee, K., Altincicek, B., Hain,
T., Domann, E., Vilcinskas, A., and
Chakraborty, T.
(2010). Galleria
mellonella as a model system for
studying Listeria pathogenesis. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 76, 310–317.

Muñoz-Elías, E. J., and McKinney, J. D.
(2006). Carbon metabolism of intra-
cellular bacteria. Cell. Microbiol. 8,
10–22.

Neidhardt, F. C., Bloch, P. L., and
Smith, D. F. (1974). Culture medium
for enterobacteria. J. Bacteriol. 119,
736–747.

O’Byrne, C. P., and Karatzas, K. A. G.
(2008). The role of sigma B (sigma
B) in the stress adaptations of Liste-
ria monocytogenes: overlaps between
stress adaptation and virulence. Adv.
Appl. Microbiol. 65, 115–140.

Ollinger,

J., Bowen, B., Wiedmann,
M., Boor, K. J., and Bergholz, T.
M. (2009). Listeria monocytogenes
sigma B modulates PrfA-mediated
virulence factor expression. Infect.
Immun. 77, 2113–2124.

Ollinger, J., Wiedmann, M., and Boor,
K. J. (2008). Sigma B- and PrfA-
dependent
transcription of genes
previously classiﬁed as putative con-
stituents of
the Listeria monocy-
togenes PrfA regulon. Foodborne
Pathog. Dis. 5, 281–293.

O’Riordan, M., Moors, M. A., and Port-
noy, D. A. (2003). Listeria intracel-
lular growth and virulence require

host-derived lipoic acid. Science 302,
462–464.

Persson, O., Valadi, A., Nyström, T., and
Farewell, A. (2007). Metabolic con-
trol of the Escherichia coli univer-
sal stress protein response through
fructose-6-phosphate. Mol. Micro-
biol. 65, 968–978.

Port, G. C.,

and Freitag, N. E.
(2007). Identiﬁcation of novel Lis-
teria monocytogenes secreted viru-
lence factors following mutational
activation of the central virulence
regulator, PrfA. Infect. Immun. 75,
5886–5897.

Price-Carter, M., Tingey, J., Bobik, T. A.,
and Roth, J. R. (2001). The alterna-
tive electron acceptor tetrathionate
supports B12-dependent anaerobic
growth
enter-
ica
serovar Typhimurium on
ethanolamine or 1,2-propanediol. J.
Bacteriol. 183, 2463–2475.

Salmonella

of

Ray, K., Marteyn, B., Sansonetti, P. J.,
and Tang, C. M. (2009). Life on the
inside: the intracellular lifestyle of
cytosolic bacteria. Nat. Rev. Micro-
biol. 7, 333–340.

Renzoni, A., Klarsfeld, A., Dramsi, S.,
and Cossart, P. (1997). Evidence that
PrfA, the pleiotropic activator of vir-
ulence genes in Listeria monocyto-
genes, can be present but inactive.
Infect. Immun. 65, 1515–1518.

Robert Koch-Institut. (2011). Epidemi-
ologisches Bulletin. Berlin: Robert
Koch-Institut.

Rohmer, L., Hocquet, D., and Miller, S.
I. (2011). Are pathogenic bacteria
just looking for food? Metabolism
and microbial pathogenesis. Trends
Microbiol. 19, 341–348.

Ryan, S., Hill, C., and Gahan, C. G.
M. (2008). Acid stress responses in
Listeria monocytogenes. Adv. Appl.
Microbiol. 65, 67–91.

Sauer, J.-D., Pereyre, S., Archer, K. A.,
Burke, T. P., Hanson, B., Lauer, P.,
and Portnoy, D. A. (2011). Listeria
monocytogenes engineered to acti-
vate the Nlrc4 inﬂammasome are
severely attenuated and are poor
inducers of protective immunity.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108,
12419–12424.

Schär, J., Stoll, R., Schauer, K., Loefﬂer,
D. I. M., Eylert, E., Joseph, B., Eisen-
reich, W., Fuchs, T. M., and Goebel,
W.
(2010). Pyruvate carboxylase
plays a crucial role in carbon metab-
olism of extra- and intracellularly
replicating Listeria monocytogenes. J.
Bacteriol. 192, 1774–1784.

Schauer, K., Geginat, G., Liang, C.,
Goebel, W., Dandekar, T., and Fuchs,
T. M.
(2010). Deciphering the
intracellular metabolism of Listeria
monocytogenes by mutant screening

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 23 | 11

Fuchs et al.

Listeria monocytogenes infection

and modelling. BMC Genomics 11,
573. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-573
Schauer, K., Stolz, J., Scherer, S., and
Fuchs, T. M. (2009). Both thiamine
uptake and biosynthesis of thiamine
precursors are required for intracel-
lular replication of Listeria monocy-
togenes. J. Bacteriol. 191, 2218–2227.
Schindler, P. W., and Zähner, H.
(1972). Stoffwechselprodukte von
Mikroorganismen. Arch. Mikrobiol.
82, 66–75.

Schuster, S., de Figueiredo, L. F., and
Kaleta, C. (2010). Predicting novel
pathways in genome-scale metabolic
networks. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 38,
1202–1205.

Seifart Gomes, C.,

Izar, B., Pazan,
F., Mohamed, W., Mraheil, M.
A., Mukherjee, K., Billion, A.,
Aharonowitz, Y., Chakraborty, T.,
and Hain, T. (2011). Universal stress
proteins are important for oxida-
tive and acid stress resistance and
growth of Listeria monocytogenes
EGD-e in vitro and in vivo. PLoS
ONE 6, e24965. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0024965

Severino, P., Dussurget, O., Vêncio,
R. Z. N., Dumas, E., Garrido, P.,
Padilla, G., Piveteau, P., Lemaître,
J.-P., Kunst, F., Glaser, P., and
(2007). Compar-
Buchrieser, C.
ative
analysis of
strains
Listeria monocytogenes
lineages
of
two major
in virulence,
reveals differences
response.
cell wall,
Appl.
73,
6078–6088.

Environ. Microbiol.

transcriptome

and stress

the

Sifri, C. D., Begun, J., and Ausubel, F.
M. (2005). The worm has turned
- microbial
virulence modeled
in Caenorhabditis elegans. Trends
Microbiol. 13, 119–127.

Singh, A. K., Ulanov, A. V., Li, Z.,
Jayaswal, R. K., and Wilkinson,
B. J. (2011). Metabolomes of the
psychrotolerant bacterium Listeria
monocytogenes 10403S grown at
37˚C and 8˚C. Int. J. Food Microbiol.
148, 107–114.

Slaghuis, J., Goetz, M., Engelbrecht, F.,
and Goebel, W. (2004). Inefﬁcient
replication of Listeria innocua in the
cytosol of mammalian cells. J. Infect.
Dis. 189, 393–401.

Sonenshein, A. L. (2007). Control of
key metabolic intersections in Bacil-
lus subtilis. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 5,
917–927.

Soni, K. A., Nannapaneni, R., and
Tasara, T. (2011). The contribution
transcriptomic and proteomic
of
analysis
stress

elucidating

in

adaptation responses of Listeria
monocytogenes. Foodborne Pathog.
Dis. 8, 843–852.

Spanier, B., Lasch, K., Marsch, S., Ben-
ner, J., Liao, W., Hu, H., Kienberger,
H., Eisenreich, W., and Daniel, H.
(2009). How the intestinal peptide
transporter PEPT-1 contributes to
an obesity phenotype in Caenorhab-
ditis elegans. PLoS ONE 4, e6279.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0006279

S.,

Ethanolamine

and Fuchs, T. M.
Srikumar,
utiliza-
(2011).
to proliferation
tion contributes
of
enterica
serovar
Typhimurium in food and in nema-
todes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77,
281–290.

Salmonella

Stasiewicz, M.

J., Wiedmann, M.,
and Bergholz, T. M. (2011). The
transcriptional response of Liste-
ria monocytogenes during adapta-
tion to growth on lactate and diac-
etate includes synergistic changes
that increase fermentative acetoin
production. Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 77, 5294–5306.

Stoll, R., and Goebel, W. (2010). The
major PEP-phosphotransferase sys-
tems (PTSs) for glucose, mannose
and cellobiose of Listeria monocy-
togenes, and their signiﬁcance for
extra- and intracellular growth.
Microbiology 156, 1069–1083.

Stritzker,

J.,

Janda,

J., Schoen, C.,
Taupp, M., Pilgrim, S., Gentschev, I.,
Schreier, P., Geginat, G., and Goebel,
W. (2004). Growth, virulence, and
immunogenicity of Listeria monocy-
togenes aro mutants. Infect. Immun.
72, 5622–5629.

Thomsen, L. E., Slutz, S. S., Tan, M.-W.,
and Ingmer, H. (2006). Caenorhab-
ditis elegans is a model host for Lis-
teria monocytogenes. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 72, 1700–1701.

Toledo-Arana, A., Dussurget, O., Niki-
tas, G., Sesto, N., Guet-Revillet,
H., Balestrino, D., Loh, E., Gripen-
land,
J., Tiensuu, T., Vaitkevi-
cius, K., Barthelemy, M., Vergas-
sola, M., Nahori, M.-A., Soubigou,
G., Régnault, B., Coppée,
J.-Y.,
Lecuit, M., Johansson, J., and Cos-
sart, P. (2009). The Listeria tran-
scriptional
landscape from sapro-
phytism to virulence. Nature 459,
950–956.

Trost, M., Wehmhöner, D., Kärst, U.,
Dieterich, G., Wehland, J., and Jän-
sch, L. (2005). Comparative pro-
teome analysis of secretory pro-
teins from pathogenic and nonpath-
ogenic Listeria species. Proteomics 5,
1544–1557.

van de Velde, S., Delaive, E., Dieu,
M., Carryn, S., van Bambeke,
F., Devreese, B., Raes, M., and
Tulkens, P. M. (2009). Isolation and
2-D-DIGE proteomic analysis of
intracellular and extracellular forms
of Listeria monocytogenes. Proteomics
9, 5484–5496.
Vázquez-Boland,
P.,

J. A., Kuhn, M.,
Berche,
Chakraborty,
T.,
Domínguez-Bernal, G., Goebel,
W., González-Zorn, B., Wehland, J.,
and Kreft, J. (2001). Listeria patho-
genesis and molecular virulence
determinants. Clin. Microbiol. Rev.
14, 584–640.

Vermeulen, A., Gysemans, K. P. M.,
Bernaerts, K., Geeraerd, A. H., Debe-
vere, J., Devlieghere, F., and van
Impe, J. F. (2009). Modelling the
inﬂuence of the inoculation level on
the growth/no growth interface of
Listeria monocytogenes as a function
of pH, aw and acetic acid. Int. J. Food
Microbiol. 135, 83–89.

Weeks, M. E., James, D. C., Robinson, G.
K., and Smales, C. M. (2004). Global
changes in gene expression observed
at the transition from growth to
stationary phase in Listeria mono-
cytogenes ScottA batch culture. Pro-
teomics 4, 123–135.

Wen, J., Deng, X., Li, Z., Dudley, E. G.,
Anantheswaran, R. C., Knabel, S. J.,
and Zhang, W. (2011). Transcrip-
tomic response of Listeria mono-
cytogenes during the transition to
the long-term-survival phase. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 77, 5966–5972.

Winder, C. L., Dunn, W. B., and
Goodacre, R.
(2011). TARDIS-
based microbial metabolomics: time
and relative differences in systems.
Trends Microbiol. 19, 315–322.

Winter, S. E., Thiennimitr, P., Win-
ter, M. G., Butler, B. P., Huseby, D.
L., Crawford, R. W., Russell, J. M.,
Bevins, C. L., Adams, L. G., Tso-
lis, R. M., Roth, J. R., and Bäum-
ler, A. J. (2010). Gut
inﬂamma-
tion provides a respiratory electron
acceptor for Salmonella. Nature 467,
426–429.

Woodward, J. J., Iavarone, A. T., and
Portnoy, D. A. (2010). c-di-AMP
secreted by intracellular Listeria
monocytogenes activates a host type
I interferon response. Science 328,
1703–1705.

Wray, L. V., Zalieckas, J. M., and Fisher, S.
H. (2001). Bacillus subtilis glutamine
synthetase controls gene expression
through a protein-protein interac-
tion with transcription factor TnrA.
Cell 107, 427–435.

Yang, L., Cluett, W. R., and Mahade-
van, R. (2011). EMILiO: a fast
algorithm for genome-scale strain
design. Metab. Eng. 13, 272–281.

Zamboni, N., Fendt, S.-M., Rühl, M.,
and Sauer, U. (2009). (13)C-based
metabolic ﬂux analysis. Nat. Protoc.
4, 878–892.

Zamboni, N., and Sauer, U. (2009).
Novel biological
insights through
metabolomics and 13C-ﬂux analy-
sis. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 12,
553–558.

Zemansky, J., Kline, B. C., Woodward,
J. J., Leber, J. H., Marquis, H., and
Portnoy, D. A. (2009). Development
of a mariner-based transposon and
identiﬁcation of Listeria monocyto-
genes determinants,
including the
peptidyl-prolyl
isomerase PrsA2,
that contribute to its hemolytic
phenotype.
191,
3950–3964.

Bacteriol.

J.

Zhang, Q., Feng, Y., Deng, L., Feng, F.,
Wang, L., Zhou, Q., and Luo, Q.
(2011). SigB plays a major role in
Listeria monocytogenes tolerance to
bile stress. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 145,
238–243.

Zhao, H., Chen, J., Fang, C., Xia, Y.,
Cheng, C.,
Jiang, L., and Fang,
W. (2011). Deciphering the bio-
diversity of Listeria monocytogenes
lineage
strains by polypha-
sic approaches.
J. Microbiol. 49,
759–767.

III

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 12 December 2011; paper
pending published: 30 December 2011;
accepted: 13 January 2012; published
online: 03 February 2012.
Citation: Fuchs TM, Eisenreich W, Kern
T and Dandekar T (2012) Toward
a systemic understanding of Liste-
ria monocytogenes metabolism during
infection. Front. Microbio. 3:23. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00023
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Microbial Immunology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Fuchs, Eisenreich, Kern
and Dandekar. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 23 | 12

