MINI REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 09 December 2011
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00242

Morphogenesis of the infectious HIV-1 virion

Jun-ichi Sakuragi *

Department of Viral Infections, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan

Edited by:
Akio Adachi, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Japan
Reviewed by:
Masako Nomaguchi, The University of
Tokushima Graduate School, Japan
Mikako Fujita, Kumamoto University,
Japan
*Correspondence:
Jun-ichi Sakuragi, Department of Viral
Infections, Research Institute for
Microbial Diseases, Osaka University,
3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka
565-0871, Japan.
e-mail: sakuragi@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp

The virion of HIV-1 is spherical and viral glycoprotein spikes (gp120, gp41) protrude from its
envelope. The characteristic cone-shaped core exists within the virion, caging the ribonu-
cleoprotein (RNP) complex, which is comprised of viral RNA, nucleocapsid (NC), and viral
enzymes. The HIV-1 virion is budded and released from the infected cell as an imma-
ture donut-shaped particle. During or immediately after release, viral protease (PR) is
activated and subsequently processes the viral structural protein Gag. Through this matu-
ration process, virions acquire infectivity, but its mechanism and transition of morphology
largely remain unclear. Recent technological advances in experimental devices and tech-
niques have made it possible to closely dissect the viral production site on the cell, the
exterior – or even the interior – of an individual virion, and many new aspects on virion mor-
phology and maturation. In this manuscript, I review the morphogenesis of HIV-1 virions.
I focus on several studies, including some of our recent ﬁndings, which examined virion
formation and/or maturation processes.The story of novel compound, which inhibits virion
maturation, and the importance of maturation research are also discussed.

Keywords: HIV-1, virion, maturation, Gag, RNA, morphology

INTRODUCTION
The infectious particle of virus (virion) is a very sophisticated
device since it needs to be durable enough to protect the packaged
viral genome from extracellular nucleases and other obstructions;
where it has to be subsequently dissociated appropriately in the
target cell to initiate infection.

The virion of the retrovirus, including Human Immunod-
eﬁciency Virus type 1 (HIV-1), is spherical with a diameter
of about 120 nm and viral glycoprotein spikes protrude from
its envelope. HIV-1 dynamically converts the interior mor-
phology of
its particle during particle release, termed mat-
uration. Maturation changes the virion morphology from an
immature particle, called the donut-shaped particle, to the
mature virion; a particle that is (1) lined with viral matrix
proteins (MA), (2) containing a condensed cone-shaped core
composed of a viral capsid (CA) which ﬁnally encapsidates
the (3) RNP complex, comprised of viral RNA, NC, and
viral enzymes such as reverse transcriptase (RT) and integrase
(IN) (Frankel and Young, 1998). After the maturation, the
virus acquires ability to infect adjacent host cells and, thus,
the maturation is inevitably essential for particle infectivity.
Although much about how the process of virion maturation
contributes to achieving infectivity remain unclear, it is a well-
accepted concept that viral infectivity is fully acquired only after
complete virion maturation (Bukrinskaya, 2004). Here, I review
the morphogenesis of HIV-1 virions, focusing on studies, includ-
ing our own studies, which have examined the virion formation
and/or maturation processes. The mutual relationship between
protein processing and virion structure are discussed for a further
understanding of how virion morphology plays a key role in the
HIV-1 life cycle.

HIV-1 VIRION MATURATION PROCESS
The construction of the spherical virion of HIV-1 solely dri-
ven by the viral gag proteins. The precursor proteins of gag
(Pr55) and gag–pol (Pr160) are expressed from an unspliced full-
length viral RNA, which is targeted to the plasma membrane
by their N-terminal myristoylation and the adequate accumu-
lation of precursor proteins drive virion assembly beneath the
host cell membrane (Ganser-Pornillos et al., 2008). Many fea-
tures of the virion assembly, budding, and release processes are
largely unknown, but many host cell factors are suggested to
support and/or actively contribute to these processes (Martin-
Serrano and Neil, 2011). Several thousands of gag precursors
are required to construct the normal virion (Briggs et al., 2004),
but budded particle is not fully infectious at its current state.
To acquire infectivity, the virion must undergo a maturation
process, which is mediated by the precursor protein process-
ing by virally encoded PR (Briggs and Krausslich, 2011). Virion
maturation is believed to initiate and complete during or imme-
diately after particle release (Kaplan et al., 1994; Bukrinskaya,
2004), although it still remains unclear what triggers viral PR
activation.

The Pr55 polypeptide is composed of four protein domains –
MA, CA, NC, and p6 – and two spacer peptides, p2 and p1. The
N-to-C terminal order of the six proteins and peptides are MA–
CA–p2–NC–p1–p6, thus containing ﬁve proteolytic cleavage sites
to be processed by PR. It was previously demonstrated that the
processing rates of the ﬁve cleavage sites were not equal (Pettit
et al., 1994), where the processing rate of the cleavage site between
p2 and NC (p2/NC) is the fastest, while p1/p6 and MA/CA are
the second and the third, respectively. The processing rates of the
two remaining sites (CA/p2 and NC/p1) are much slower than

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 242 | 1

Sakuragi

Morphogenesis of the infectious HIV-1 virion

those of the three aforementioned sites. As virion maturation is
suggested to occur during particle production, it is very difﬁcult
to observe the exact maturation process over a time series. There-
fore, we recently constructed four sequential HIV-1 Gag mutants
in an attempt to generate a sequential series of Gag maturation
intermediates and effectively snapshoot the process of virion mat-
uration (Ohishi et al., 2011). We examined the physical states
of the RNA viral genome, including dimerization and stability,
the ability of endogenous reverse transcription and overall infec-
tivity of particles generated with these mutants. The results are
summarized in Figure 1. During the virion maturation process,
stabilization of the RNA dimer primes during the primary cleav-
age (p2–NC) of Pr55 Gag. However, the primary cleavage alone
is insufﬁcient and the ensuing cleavages are required for complete
the uniform dimerization of viral RNA. Although endogenous
virion RT activity was fully acquired at the initial step of mat-
uration, the following processes were necessary for viral DNA
production in the infected cell, suggesting that viral RNA/protein
maturation plays a critical role for viral infectivity outside the RT
process.

MORPHOLOGICAL STUDIES OF VIRION
It is well-accepted that HIV-1 virion morphology dramatically
changes during Pr55 processing. To investigate whether the mor-
phological changes of the virion are correlated with maturation,
we examined virion morphological features generated from the
four sequential step mutants via electron microscopy (Ohishi
et al., 2011). We classiﬁed the virion morphologies into four
main groups (A, B, C, and D) based on structure of viral core
and membrane features (Figure 1). The morphology of all ΔPR
virions were typical immature particles (Group A) as demon-
strated by many previous reports (e.g., Peng et al., 1989). As
expected, virions from the Step0 mutant were very similar to
those of ΔPR, containing a thick electron-dense ring devoid of
a conical-shaped core, termed a donut-shaped morphology. The
morphologies of the WT were classiﬁed into two major groups.
One was the typical mature particle (Group D), with a conical
core surrounded by an envelope. The second was an enveloped
particle containing some amorphous structures rather than an
obvious core (Group C). Most of the virions from Step1 to
1.1 were immature (Group B), but did not have an apparent

FIGURE 1 | Schematic of morphological and biological transition of the HIV-1 virion during maturation. Stepwise features of Gag cleavage, RNA status,
and virion morphology are shown.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 242 | 2

Sakuragi

Morphogenesis of the infectious HIV-1 virion

electron-dense ring observed in Group A particles, along with
envelopes that were thicker than those of Group C. The virions
from Step2 contained both Group B and C particles. Figure 1
represents the schematic of morphological transition of the HIV-
1 virion during maturation. As the change from Group A to B
was characterized by the disappearance of an electron-dense ring
inside the viral membrane, the observed ring is likely composed
by the p15 (NC–p1–p6) region within Pr55. After the cleavage
at p2–NC position, the ordered array of the p15 region would
be lost and p15 would be released from inner viral membrane.
This transition was synchronous with initial dimeric RNA sta-
bilization, suggesting the release of genome RNA from a per-
imembrane localization to a space inside the virion where p15
could trigger dimer maturation. The thin-membraned virions
(Group C) became abundant after the third proteolytic pro-
cessing at the MA/CA region, represented by the Step2 mutant.
Viral membranes of Group B may appear to be thick because of
the fusion between the Pr55 CA and MA, which lines the inner
membrane.

Recent advances in analytical technology, particularly elec-
tron microscopy, enabled researchers to study the structure of
intact virions and even within the virion itself (Liu et al., 2010),
and several morphological studies about HIV-1 virion were
reported (Carlson et al., 2010; de Marco et al., 2010; Zhang
et al., 2011). Of particular note, a cryoelectron tomography
study examined the maturation process of the HIV-1 virion
(de Marco et al., 2010). Several stepwise mutants of Gag cleav-
age were constructed and the changes in virion structure that
occurred during maturation were observed. They visualized the
arrangement of Gag in three-dimensions (3D) using cryoelectron
tomography and sub-tomogram averaging. The condensation of
the RNP complex with RNA genome and viral proteins were
detected at the initial cleavage event. This inner RNA/protein
structure appears to maintain a link with the remaining Gag
lattice. Processing on both sides of CA–p2 – the main struc-
tural module of Gag – is required for disassembly of the imma-
ture Gag lattice. The results provided structural correlates of the
ordered processing events during HIV-1 maturation and were
also consistent in principle with our observations (Ohishi et al.,
2011).

Another report studied the budding process of HIV-1 (Carlson
et al., 2010). They established experimental systems to study HIV-
1 budding sites by cryoelectron tomography and observed variable
3D structures within HIV-1 virions and budding sites. By analyz-
ing these images they showed that the organization of released
immature virions is not altered to a large degree from the state of
its intracellular assembly. They also identiﬁed a novel Gag lattice
structure present at viral budding sites. It seemed to be caused by
the premature processing of Gag precursors and resulted in the
production of dead-end particles. The structures were abundant
at viral budding sites in some HIV-1 infected T-cells, suggesting
that a crucial control step during virus maturation was lost. They
suggested this loss of control might be caused by the host cell envi-
ronment and a host factor, but the signiﬁcance of this phenomena
was unclear. The actin ﬁlaments were often observed around and
at the budding sites, and sometimes they appeared stuck to the
budding virions.

Although it is not clear whether actin actively contributes to the
HIV-1 budding process or not, a recent report denied the effect
of HIV-1 replication on the coherency of the actin cytoskeleton
(Weichsel et al., 2010). On the other hand, clathrin, a major player
in the formation of coated vesicles (Pearse, 1976), was reported to
facilitate the morphogenesis of retrovirus particles (Zhang et al.,
2011). Clathrin was previously thought to be only passively incor-
porated into retroviral virions (Hammarstedt and Garoff, 2004).
However in this report, abundant amounts of clathrin was shown
to be actively and speciﬁcally incorporated into retrovirus parti-
cles. In several cases, retroviral proteins contain peptide motifs for
clathrin recruitment. HIV, SIV, and other murine and simian retro-
viruses actively packaged clathrin and the prevention of clathrin
incorporation caused a variety of defects in the generation of infec-
tious virions, evidenced by viral protein destabilization, inhibition
of particle assembly/release, and reduction in virion infectivity.
The virion morphology of an SIV mutant lacking the PTAP
motif showed grossly abnormal clathrin incorporation. Virus-
producing-cells exhibited hemispherical protrusions from their
surfaces, but complete spherical particles were hardly observed via
scanning electron microscopy. In case of MLV, the virion’s ability
to saturate the TRIM5alpha (T5a) restriction factor was exam-
ined. For efﬁcient elimination of T5a activity, the presence of an
unmodiﬁed capsid lattice was reported to be required (Pertel et al.,
2011). As expected, mutant particles lacking clathrin were approx-
imately 10-fold less active in the T5a saturation assay to that of
the WT. The ﬁnding suggested that their cores were not properly
formed, or unstable, therefore suggesting that clathrin is important
for correct MLV particle morphogenesis. These studies suggested
that clathrin might be frequently recruited by retroviruses to assist
the correct assembly of infectious virions.

ANTI-VIRAL DRUGS TARGETING FOR VIRION MATURATION
As the virion maturation process is essential for acquiring viral
infectivity, it is a reasonable target for developing anti-viral drugs
(Adamson and Freed, 2011). The principal anti-viral target of
HIV-1 maturation for many effective drugs was viral PR, (Perno,
2011) however, the emergence of drug-resistant strains in patients
undergoing drug treatments appear inevitable. In addition, mul-
tiple drug targeting a single protein such as PR often induces
the emergence of cross-resistant strains, which have very seri-
ous implications for infection dissemination and control (Lefeb-
vre and Schiffer, 2008). Thus, the development of drugs using
alternative strategies and targets may be required. An alternative
target for a maturation inhibitor is Pr55, which is the substrate
(cid:2)
of PR (Adamson et al., 2009). The small molecule 3-O-(3
, 3
-
dimethylsuccinyl)-betulinic acid (DSB), also known as bevirimat
(BVM), PA-457, or MPC-4326, is the ﬁrst maturation inhibitor,
which potently inhibits HIV-1 replication by blocking a late step of
the Gag cleavage pathway, preventing scission at the CA–p2 junc-
tion (Li et al., 2003). Although the structural study is still ongoing,
it has been demonstrated that BVM is incorporated into assem-
bling virus particles in a Gag-dependent manner (Zhou et al.,
2005) and is able to prevent cleavage of CA from p2 in the context
of premature Gag used in virion assembly assembled into virions,
but not in free Gag in solution (Li et al., 2003; Sakalian et al.,
2006). These data have led to a model where the BVM binding site

(cid:2)

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 242 | 3

Sakuragi

Morphogenesis of the infectious HIV-1 virion

FIGURE 2 | Mechanism of action of bevirimat. It binds to CA/p2 cleavage site of HIV-1 Pr55 to prevent processing by PR (left) and also to stabilize viral core
formation in immature status (right).

is present during Gag assembly, at or nearby the CA–p2 cleavage
site, and binding of BVM blocks PR from accessing the cleavage
site (Figure 2). When virions isolated from BVM-treated cells were
observed, the drug disrupted virion production as particles con-
tained an incomplete shell of protein density – with a structure
similar to the Gag lattice of an immature HIV-1 particle. Simi-
lar to the CA–p2 fusion mutant, BVM binding was suggested to
stabilize the immature lattice and prevent capsid maturation, effec-
tively suppressing particle infectivity (Keller et al., 2011). Although
BVM was in Phase II clinical trial to determine its use as a treat-
ment against HIV-1, several reports suggested that there was a very
low genetic barrier for resistance against BVM (Seclen et al., 2010;
Verheyen et al., 2010), eliciting concern for the continuation of its
clinical development and subsequently the pharmaceutical com-
pany has recently halted BVM development (Wainberg and Albert,
2010). Nonetheless, other pharmaceutical companies still express
strong interests in developing a second generation of maturation
inhibitor drugs, indicating a compelling demand and promising
future for these novel drugs.

CONCLUSION
The HIV-1 virion structure, as well as the processes involved in
their generation, are not fully elucidated. The virion maturation
process is one of the most challenging events to be completely
understood. It completely changes the morphology and conditions
within the virion and primes viral infectivity by properly arranging

the core, which contains the viral RNA and enzymes. Recent
advancements of tools and methodologies for experimentation
enables scientists to unveil many features of virion morphol-
ogy and its architecture. Many observations pertaining to virion
formation are waiting to be discovered and further structural
studies alongside technological improvements would be valuable
to resolve these issues. The morphological studies of the virion
will not only elucidate the lifecycle of virus replication, but will
further the understanding of drug efﬁcacy mechanisms. In fact,
cryoelectron tomography studies provided structural correlates
of the ordered processing events during HIV-1 maturation and
shed light on the mechanism of action of BVM (de Marco et al.,
2010). Although current maturation inhibitors seem to be con-
centrated on the CA–p2 cleavage site (Salzwedel et al., 2007), there
remain four additional cleavage sites which may serve as potential
drug targets, thus underscoring the importance of studies involv-
ing virion morphology and these study cannot be overlooked in
the future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I appreciate Prof. Tatsuo Shioda and Dr. Seiga Ohmine for critically
reading the manuscript. This work was supported by a Grant-in-
Aid for Scientiﬁc Research on Priority Areas from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology (MEXT) of
Japan and a grant for HIV/AIDS research from the Ministry of
Health, Labor, and Welfare of Japan.

REFERENCES
Adamson, C. S., and Freed, E. O.
(2011). Novel approaches to inhibit-
ing HIV-1 replication. Antiviral Res.
85, 119–141.

Adamson, C. S., Salzwedel, K., and
Freed, E. O. (2009). Virus matura-
tion as a new HIV-1 therapeutic tar-
get. Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 13,
895–908.

Briggs, J. A., and Krausslich, H. G.
(2011). The molecular architecture
of HIV. J. Mol. Biol. 410, 491–500.

Briggs, J. A., Simon, M. N., Gross, I.,
Krausslich, H. G., Fuller, S. D., Vogt,
V. M., and Johnson, M. C. (2004).

The stoichiometry of Gag protein
in HIV-1. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 11,
672–675.

Bukrinskaya, A. G.

(2004). HIV-1
assembly and maturation. Arch.
Virol. 149, 1067–1082.

Carlson, L. A., de Marco, A., Oberwin-
kler, H., Habermann, A., Briggs, J. A.,
Krausslich, H. G., and Grunewald,
K. (2010). Cryo electron tomog-
raphy of native HIV-1 budding
sites. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1001173.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1001173

de Marco, A., Muller, B., Glass,
J. D., Krausslich, H.
(2010).

B., Riches,
G.,

and Briggs,

J. A.

Structural analysis of HIV-1 matu-
ration using cryo-electron tomog-
raphy. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1001215.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1001215

Frankel, A. D., and Young, J. A. (1998).
HIV-1: ﬁfteen proteins and an RNA.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67, 1–25.

Ganser-Pornillos, B. K., Yeager, M., and
Sundquist, W. I. (2008). The struc-
tural biology of HIV assembly. Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol. 18, 203–217.

Hammarstedt, M., and Garoff, H.
(2004). Passive and active inclu-
sion of host proteins in human
immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 gag
particles during budding at
the

plasma membrane.
5686–5697.

J. Virol. 78,

Kaplan, A. H., Manchester, M., and
Swanstrom, R. (1994). The activity
of the protease of human immun-
odeﬁciency virus type 1 is initiated
at the membrane of infected cells
before the release of viral proteins
and is required for release to occur
with maximum efﬁciency. J. Virol.
68, 6782–6786.

Keller, P. W., Adamson, C. S., Heymann,
J. B., Freed, E. O., and Steven, A. C.
(2011). HIV-1 maturation inhibitor
bevirimat stabilizes the immature
Gag lattice. J. Virol. 85, 1420–1428.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 242 | 4

Sakuragi

Morphogenesis of the infectious HIV-1 virion

Lefebvre, E., and Schiffer, C. A. (2008).
Resilience to resistance of HIV-
1 protease inhibitors: proﬁle of
darunavir. AIDS Rev. 10, 131–142.

Li, F., Goila-Gaur, R., Salzwedel, K., Kil-
gore, N. R., Reddick, M., Matallana,
C., Castillo,A., Zoumplis, D., Martin,
D. E., Orenstein, J. M., Allaway, G. P.,
Freed, E. O., and Wild, C. T. (2003).
PA-457: a potent HIV inhibitor that
disrupts core condensation by tar-
geting a late step in Gag process-
ing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100,
13555–13560.

Liu, J., Wright, E. R., and Winkler,
H. (2010). 3D visualization of HIV
virions by cryoelectron tomography.
Meth. Enzymol. 483, 267–290.

Martin-Serrano, J., and Neil, S. J. (2011).
Host
factors involved in retrovi-
ral budding and release. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 9, 519–531.

Ohishi, M., Nakano, T., Sakuragi, S.,
Shioda, T., Sano, K., and Sakuragi, J.
I. (2011). The relationship between
HIV-1 genome RNA dimerization,
virion maturation and infectivity.
Nucleic Acids Res. 39, 3404–3017.

Pearse, B. M. (1976). Clathrin: a unique
protein associated with intracellu-
lar transfer of membrane by coated
vesicles. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
73, 1255–1259.

Peng, C., Ho, B. K., Chang, T. W.,
and Chang, N. T. (1989). Role
of human immunodeﬁciency virus

type 1-speciﬁc protease in core pro-
tein maturation and viral infectivity.
J. Virol. 63, 2550–2556.

Perno, C. F.

(2011). The discov-
and development of HIV
new challenges.
47,

Sanita

Super.

the

Ist.

ery
therapy:
Ann.
41–43.

Pertel, T., Hausmann, S., Morger, D.,
Zuger, S., Guerra, J., Lascano, J.,
Reinhard, C., Santoni, F. A., Uchil,
P. D., Chatel, L., Bisiaux, A., Albert,
M. L., Strambio-De-Castillia, C.,
Mothes, W., Pizzato, M., Grutter, M.
G., and Luban, J. (2011). TRIM5 is
an innate immune sensor for the
retrovirus capsid lattice. Nature 472,
361–365.

Pettit, S. C., Moody, M. D., Wehbie,
R. S., Kaplan, A. H., Nantermet, P.
V., Klein, C. A., and Swanstrom, R.
(1994). The p2 domain of human
immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 Gag
regulates sequential proteolytic pro-
cessing and is required to produce
fully infectious virions. J. Virol. 68,
8017–8027.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

,3

Sakalian, M., McMurtrey, C. P.,
J., Maloy, C. W., Li,
Deeg, F.
F., Wild, C. T., and Salzwedel, K.
-dimethysuccinyl)
(2006). 3-O-(3
betulinic acid inhibits maturation
of
immunodeﬁ-
ciency virus type 1 Gag precursor
assembled in vitro.
J. Virol. 80,
5716–5722.

human

the

Salzwedel, K., Martin, D. E., and
Sakalian, M. (2007). Maturation
inhibitors: a new therapeutic class
targets the virus structure. AIDS Rev.
9, 162–172.

Seclen, E., Gonzalez Mdel, M., Corral,
A., de Mendoza, C., Soriano, V., and
Poveda, E. (2010). High prevalence
of natural polymorphisms in Gag
(CA-SP1) associated with reduced
response to Bevirimat, an HIV-
1 maturation inhibitor. AIDS 24,
467–469.

Verheyen, J., Verhofstede, C., Knops,
E., Vandekerckhove, L., Fun, A.,
Brunen, D., Dauwe, K., Wens-
ing, A. M., Pﬁster, H., Kaiser,
R., and Nijhuis, M. (2010). High
prevalence of bevirimat resistance
mutations
in protease inhibitor-
resistant HIV isolates. AIDS 24,
669–673.

Wainberg, M. A., and Albert, J. (2010).
Can the further clinical development
of bevirimat be justiﬁed? AIDS 24,
773–774.

Weichsel, J., Herold, N., Lehmann, M.
J., Krausslich, H. G., and Schwarz, U.
S. (2010). A quantitative measure for
alterations in the actin cytoskeleton
investigated with automated high-
throughput microscopy. Cytometry
A 77, 52–63.

Zhang, F., Zang, T., Wilson, S.

J.,
Johnson, M. C., and Bieniasz, P.
D. (2011). Clathrin facilitates the

morphogenesis of retrovirus par-
ticles. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002119.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002119

Zhou, J., Huang, L., Hachey, D. L., Chen,
C. H., and Aiken, C. (2005). Inhibi-
tion of HIV-1 maturation via drug
association with the viral Gag pro-
tein in immature HIV-1 particles. J.
Biol. Chem. 280, 42149–42155.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 15 November 2011; paper
pending published: 20 November 2011;
accepted: 21 November 2011; published
online: 09 December 2011.
J-i
(2011) Mor-
Citation: Sakuragi
phogenesis of
infectious HIV-1
the
virion. Front. Microbio. 2:242. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2011.00242
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Virology, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2011 Sakuragi. This is an
open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 242 | 5

