MINI REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 19 March 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00100

Enhancing effects on vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity
of amphotericin B

Akira Ogita1,2, Ken-Ichi Fujita2 and Toshio Tanaka2*

1 Research Center for Urban Health and Sports, Osaka City University, Osaka, Japan
2 Department of Biology and Geosciences, Graduate School of Science, Osaka City University, Osaka, Japan

Edited by:
Bruce C. Campbell, Western Regional
Research Centre, USA
Reviewed by:
Long Nam Nguyen, Singapore
Immunological Network, Singapore
Nikhat Manzoor, Jamia Millia Islamia,
India
*Correspondence:
Toshio Tanaka, Department of Biology
and Geosciences, Graduate School of
Science, Osaka City University,
3-3-138 Sugimoto, Sumiyoshi-ku,
Osaka, Osaka, Japan.
e-mail: tanakato@sci.osaka-cu.ac.jp

Invasive fungal infections are major threats for immunocompromised patients as well as
for those undergoing cancer chemotherapy. Amphotericin B (AmB), a classical antifungal
drug with a polyene macrolide structure, is widely used for the control of serious fungal
infections. However, the clinical use of this antifungal drug is limited by its side effects
and the emergence of drug-resistant strains. AmB lethality has been generally attributed
to alterations in plasma membrane ion permeability due to its speciﬁc binding to plasma
membrane ergosterol. Recent studies with Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Candida albi-
cans reveal the vacuole disruptive action as another cause of AmB lethality on the basis
of marked ampliﬁcation of its activity in combination with allicin, an allyl-sulfur compound
from garlic. The enhancing effect of allicin is dependent on the inhibition of ergosterol-
trafﬁcking from the plasma membrane to the vacuole membrane, which is considered to
be a cellular response to protect against disintegration of the vacuole membrane.The polyol
macrolide niphimycin (NM) also possesses vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity, which is
greater than that of AmB and nystatin. The alkyl side chain attached to the macrolide ring
of NM is considered to possess an allicin-like inhibitory effect on the intracellular trafﬁck-
ing of ergosterol. The vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity was additionally detected with a
bactericidal cyclic peptide polymyxin B (PMB), and was markedly enhanced when adminis-
tered together with allicin, monensin, or salinomycin.The synergistic fungicidal activities of
AmB and allicin may have signiﬁcant implications for the development of vacuole-targeting
chemotherapy against fungal infections.

Keywords: vacuole, fungicidal activity, amphotericin B, allicin

INTRODUCTION
The polyene macrolide antibiotic amphotericin B (AmB;
Figure 1A) was introduced in the mid-1950s as the ﬁrst effective
antifungal drug for treating systemic mycoses (Johnson and Ein-
stein, 2007). AmB has been used for controlling life-threatening
systemic fungal infections primarily caused by Candida albicans
and Aspergillus fumigatus (Lemke et al., 2005). The susceptibil-
ity of fungal cells to AmB absolutely requires the presence of
ergosterol in the fungal plasma membrane. Molecular model-
ing studies indicate that AmB creates aqueous pores consisting
of an annulus of eight molecules linked hydrophobically to ergos-
terol embedded in phospholipid bilayers (Baginski et al., 2006).
This type of ion channel structure results in altered plasma
membrane permeability and leakage of vital cytoplasmic compo-
+
nents, such as K
, ultimately inducing cell death (Kerridge, 1980,
1985). However, AmB-induced lethal effects cannot be simply
explained by the disturbance in plasma membrane ion trans-
port function, because the leakage of K
has various secondary
effects. Alonso et al. (1979) reported that AmB is a powerful
inhibitor of both protein and ribonucleic acid synthesis in yeast
cells at concentrations that do not affect the transport of amino
acids or nucleosides. The induction of oxidative stress is also
considered as an AmB-induced toxic event in C. albicans cells
(Sokol-Anderson et al., 1986). The involvement of additional

+

+

cytotoxic effects in AmB lethality is supported by the fact that
the leakage of K
is not necessarily accompanied by the loss of
cell viability (Chen et al., 1978). Clearly, the exact mechanism
of AmB lethality is very complex and has not been completely
deciphered.

Recently, AmB-induced cytoplasmic events have been visual-
ized as vacuole membrane fragmentation into numerous dotted
particles in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and C. albicans, and such
drastic structural damage has been considered as the major cause
of AmB lethality (Ogita et al., 2006; Borjihan et al., 2009). Vac-
uole membrane fragmentation is observed concurrently with
AmB-induced cell death when this antibiotic is used at a non-
lethal concentration in combination with allicin (Figure 1B), an
allyl-sulfur compound derived from garlic (Ogita et al., 2006).
This Mini Review describes a possible mechanism underlying the
vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity of AmB and its enhancement
by allicin. This review also deals with chemosensitization of the
vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity detected with a compound
other than AmB.

ALLICIN AS AN ENHANCER OF THE FUNGICIDAL ACTIVITY OF
AmB
Garlic (Allium sativum L.) has attracted much attention through-
out human history as a medicinal panacea (Hobbs, 1992). A

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 100 | 1

Ogita et al.

Vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity of amphotericin B

Fungal vacuole function is in osmoregulation, ion homeosta-
sis, and cell volume regulation (Thumm, 2000; Wickner, 2000).
Various hydrolytic enzymes, including proteases and nucleases,
are thought to accumulate in vacuoles; hence, the damage to these
organelles is considered a critical step in inducing cell death (Obara
et al., 2001). In S. cerevisiae, vacuoles normally exhibit a swollen
spherical architecture in untreated cells and are similarly observed
in cells treated with either 120 μM allicin or a non-lethal con-
centration of AmB (0.5 μM; Ogita et al., 2006, 2007b, 2010b).
Surprisingly, the organelles are visible as small discrete dots in
the cytoplasm when cells are treated with a lethal concentration
of AmB (5 μM), suggesting that vacuole membrane damage is
the primary mechanism of AmB’s lethality (Ogita et al., 2006,
2007b, 2010b). Consistent with these ﬁndings is the detection
of signiﬁcant levels of AmB molecules in the cytoplasmic and
plasma membrane fractions (Ogita et al., 2010b). Similar observa-
tions have been reported in studies on C. albicans (Borjihan et al.,
2009).

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AmB-INDUCED PLASMA AND
VACUOLE MEMBRANE DAMAGE
Although some controversy surrounds the lethal action of AmB, we
believe that most researchers will agree that this antibiotic exerts
its initial action at the fungal plasma membrane. According to the
widely accepted hypothesis regarding the role of plasma mem-
brane ergosterol, this neutral lipid is indispensable for the initial
action of AmB (Ghannoum and Rice, 1999; Lemke et al., 2005).
This view is also supported by ﬁndings that AmB resistance results
from lack of ergosterol biosynthesis (Ellis, 2002). Chemothera-
peutic application of AmB is indeed based on its higher afﬁnity
and activity toward fungal plasma membranes containing ergos-
terol rather than cholesterol (Baginski et al., 2005). Brajtburg
+
et al. (1980) discovered that the simultaneous addition of K
and Mg2+
fully protects against the fungicidal activity of AmB.
This fact supports the idea that AmB lethality is primarily depen-
dent on the leakage of intracellular cations through the plasma
membrane.

and Mg2+

In contrast, Chen et al. (1978) reported that the aqueous
channels or pores formed by AmB are not essential for its
lethality for C. albicans, suggesting that the drug induces cell
death by another mechanism. We have reported that the extra-
+
cellular addition of K
could restrict cytotoxicity
as well as vacuole membrane fragmentation in S. cerevisiae
treated with a lethal concentration of AmB alone (Ogita et al.,
2010b). This may also suggest that AmB-induced leakage of these
intracellular ions weakens the vacuole membrane or interferes
with a mechanism of maintaining its normal rounded archi-
tecture. However, the simultaneous addition of allicin could
still enhance AmB-induced cell death and the associated vac-
uole disruption. Our results reveal that, under certain condi-
tions, AmB can cause vacuole disruption and cell death even
when cells are protected against intracellular ionic imbalance.
Therefore, we conclude that allicin likely inhibits a mechanism
required for maintaining vacuole membrane stability that can-
not be protected by simply increasing the intracellular cation
concentration.

FIGURE 1 | Structures of amphotericin B (AmB) (A) and allicin (B).

number of historical records attest to the protective effects of
garlic preparations against a wide variety of microorganisms
including bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and even viruses (Ankri and
Mirelman, 1999). Garlic extract exerts additional pharmacological
effects such as reducing serum neutral lipids and suppressing the
development of mammary cancers in animals and the growth of
human breast cancer cells in vitro (Jain et al., 1993; Tsubura et al.,
2011).

Allicin (diallyl thiosulﬁnate) is the main active component
in freshly crushed garlic extract that is responsible for pro-
tection against the proliferation of pathogenic microbes and
malignant tumor cells (Ankri and Mirelman, 1999; Oommen
et al., 2004). Its inhibitory activities on microbial and tumor
cell growth may be partly elucidated by the inhibitory effect on
certain thiol-containing enzymes via strong SH-modifying prop-
erties, as reﬂected by the production of S-allylmercaptocysteine
from l-cysteine (Ankri and Mirelman, 1999; Miron et al., 2000;
Rabinkov et al., 2000). Allicin is produced by the action of
alliinase on the non-protein amino acid alliin that is abun-
dant in garlic cloves (Stoll and Seebeck, 1951). Our own stud-
ies suggest the possibility of applying alliinase from the bac-
terium Ensifer adhaerens for in situ generation of fungicidal
activity using alliin as a stable precursor (Yutani et al., 2011a).
In addition to its own antimicrobial activity, allicin synergis-
tically inhibits the growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis when
used in combination with either streptomycin or chloram-
phenicol (Gupta and Viswanathan, 1955; Ankri and Mirelman,
1999).

+

Allicin when added alone, inhibits the growth of S. cere-
visiae cells (Ogita et al., 2005); however, it greatly potentiates
the fungicidal activity of AmB (Ogita et al., 2006). AmB pro-
motes K
efﬂux during the process of cell death, but this ion
efﬂux was not increased signiﬁcantly in the presence of allicin
+
(Ogita et al., 2010b). This means that AmB-induced K
efﬂux
could contribute to the lethality of AmB at least in part, but
such an intracellular ionic imbalance is not a major cause in
allicin-mediated enhancement of lethal cytotoxicity.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 100 | 2

Ogita et al.

Vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity of amphotericin B

INTRACELLULAR ERGOSTEROL-TRAFFICKING AS A
POSSIBLE TARGET OF ALLICIN
Yeast vacuoles normally undergo ﬁssion as well as fusion, and
defects in vacuole fusion cause vacuole membrane fragmentation
(Seeley et al., 2002). Ergosterol is required for proper ﬂuidity
as well as the relating function of plasma membrane (Zinser
et al., 1991), and thus plays an important role in both endocy-
tosis (Munn et al., 1999) and homotypic vacuole fusion (Kato and
Wickner, 2001). This suggests the possibility that fungal cells can
increase their vacuole membrane ergosterol content by provoking
ergosterol-trafﬁcking from the plasma membrane in response to
the preliminary vacuole membrane damage such as that caused
by the action of AmB at a non-lethal concentration (Ogita et al.,
2009a). In support of such an urgent response, ergosterol-enriched
S. cerevisiae cells are protected against the vacuole membrane
damage induced by AmB alone at a lethal concentration as well
as that caused by the combination of allicin and AmB at non-
lethal concentrations (Ogita et al., 2009a). C. albicans responded
identically to the lethal actions of AmB when the cells had been
pretreated with exogenously added ergosterol (Borjihan et al.,
2009).

Isolated vacuoles represent a much simpler system than intact
cells for the study of vacuole membrane ﬁssion and fusion. They
lack not only consecutive transport systems, but also the prin-
cipal energy-producing systems, and most of the metabolic and
biosynthetic systems of the cell (Boller et al., 1975). Although
allicin alone had no effect on the morphology of the isolated
vacuoles, AmB could disrupt their swollen spherical architectures
regardless of whether allicin was added to the vacuole suspension

(Borjihan et al., 2009; Ogita et al., 2009a). The vacuoles isolated
from ergosterol-enriched cells are apparently resistant to the dis-
ruptive action of AmB when compared to those from untreated
cells. The effect of allicin on the cellular localization of ergos-
terol could be visualized by ﬁlipin III. Ergosterol was, indeed,
detected in the intracellular compartment corresponding to the
vacuole membrane in addition to the plasma membrane when
cells were treated with AmB alone at a non-lethal concentra-
tion (Ogita et al., 2009a). Unlikely, ergosterol remained in the
plasma membrane without mobilization into the cytoplasm when
allicin was added to the medium (Ogita et al., 2009a). These
results suggest that the intracellular transport of ergosterol rep-
resents a protective reaction against the vacuole disruptive activity
of AmB.

A model

for the role of allicin in the vacuole-targeting
fungicidal activity of AmB has been proposed based on these
results (Figure 2). In response to the action of AmB, fun-
gal cells increase the vacuole membrane ergosterol content by
ergosterol-trafﬁcking from the plasma membrane. As a result,
at non-lethal concentrations of AmB, cells can maintain the
large, spherical architecture of the organelle (Figure 2A). In
the presence of allicin, however, AmB can cause vacuole mem-
brane damage even at a non-lethal concentration, because the
vacuole membrane cannot be suitably provided with ergosterol
due to failure of its trafﬁcking from the plasma membrane
(Figure 2B). In contrast, in ergosterol-enriched cells, the vacuole
membrane is protected against AmB-induced disruptive damage
even if the intracellular ergosterol transport is inhibited by allicin
(Figure 2C).

FIGURE 2 | A proposed model for the role of allicin and ergosterol (◦) in
the vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity of amphotericin B (AmB) (•).

Untreated cells were incubated in the presence of AmB alone at a non-lethal

concentration (A) and AmB at a non-lethal concentration and allicin (B).
Ergosterol-enriched cells were incubated in the presence of AmB at a
non-lethal concentration and allicin (C).

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 100 | 3

Ogita et al.

Vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity of amphotericin B

FUNGICIDAL ACTIVITIES OF OTHER COMPOUNDS THAT
TARGET VACUOLES
Vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity has been markedly detected
with the polyol macrolide antibiotic niphimycin (NM; Figure 3A)
even in a nutrient medium (YPD) in which yeast cells are rather
resistant to AmB, possibly because of their high ergosterol content
derived from “yeast extract,” a component of YPD medium (Sub-
biah and Abplanalp, 2003; Ogita et al., 2010b). The molecu-
lar structure of NM is characterized by a polyol lactone ring
and alkylguanidium chain attached to the ring, suggesting the
contribution of the alkyl side chain to the predominant lethal-
ity of NM even in ergosterol-rich medium (Nakayama et al.,
2002).

N -Methyl-N

-dodecylguanidine (MC12; Figure 3B) was syn-
thesized and substituted for the alkyl side chain of NM,
and was shown to strongly enhance the vacuole-targeting

(cid:2)(cid:2)

FIGURE 3 | Structures of niphimycin (NM) (A), N-methyl-N (cid:3)(cid:3)-
dodecylguanidine (MC12) (B), and polymyxin B (PMB) (C).

fungicidal activity of AmB against both S. cerevisiae and
C. albicans (Usuki et al., 2000; Ogita et al., 2007a; Yutani
et al., 2011b). The enhancing effect of MC12 on C. albicans
pretreated with ergosterol was not observed, suggesting that it
exerts an allicin-like inhibitory effect on intracellular ergosterol-
trafﬁcking.

The structure of the macrocyclic lactone ring of polyene
macrolide compounds, in addition to the alkyl side chain, can
also affect vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity. For example, nys-
tatin possesses a polyene macrolide ring analogous to that of AmB,
and its fungicidal activity results in disruption of vacuoles as is the
case for AmB. The fungicidal activity of nystatin is also enhanced
in the presence of allicin in parallel to an enhancement of vacuole
disruption (Ogita et al., 2010a). In contrast, allicin is ineffec-
tive in enhancing the fungicidal activity of ﬁlipin III, a pentaene
macrolide that exhibits toxic effects such as inducing oxidative
stress but does not disrupt vacuoles (Bonneau et al., 2010; Ogita
et al., 2010a).

Polymyxin B (PMB; Figure 3C) is a bactericidal cyclic pep-
tide effective against Gram-negative bacteria. PMB passes through
the outer membrane, interacting with plasma membrane phos-
pholipids, and thus, its bactericidal action is proposed to depend
on a marked increase in plasma membrane permeability. This
antibiotic can also interact with the plasma membranes of S. cere-
visiae and C. albicans, but its fungicidal activity is much lower
than that detected against bacterial cells. In our chemical screen-
ing experiment, PMB exhibited fungicidal activity that is enhanced
by allicin (Ogita et al., 2007b). As expected, the vacuole membrane
damage was clearly observed in PMB-treated S. cerevisiae and
could be enhanced along with cytotoxicity even in ergosterol-rich
medium.

The vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity of PMB against
C. albicans, A. niger, and Mucor mucedo is enhanced in the pres-
ence of ionophores like monensin and salinomycin (Ogita et al.,
2009b). An organosulfur compound, zwiebelane A, isolated from
onion bulbs, also enhances the vacuole-targeting fungicidal activ-
ity of PMB (Borjihan et al., 2010). Interestingly, the enhancing
effects of ionophores and zwiebelane A were observed when S.
cerevisiae cells were treated with PMB, but not with AmB, suggest-
ing a difference in the mechanism of vacuole disruption between
AmB and PMB.

In spite of its proven track record, the well-known side effects
of AmB might prevent its clinical use. Clinical use of AmB has
been therefore improved with the aid of liposomal drug delivery
systems that reduce its nephrotoxicity (Deray, 2002). A clinically
effective dose of AmB may be also reduced when the antibiotic
is used in combination with an agent like allicin. AmB resis-
tance can be generated due to a genetic lack of plasma mem-
brane ergosterol that plays an important role in the uptake of
AmB into the fungal cytoplasm in addition to its participa-
tion in the formation of the plasma membrane’s ion-permeable
channel (Ogita et al., 2010b). Therefore, it seems possible to
improve AmB-dependent chemotherapy by developing a method
of enhancing its uptake into the cytoplasm of AmB-resistant fungal
strains.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 100 | 4

Ogita et al.

Vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity of amphotericin B

REFERENCES
Alonso, M. A., Vázquez, D., and Car-
rasco, L. (1979). Compounds affect-
ing membranes that inhibit protein
synthesis in yeast. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 16, 750–756.

Ankri, S., and Mirelman, D. (1999).
Antimicrobial properties of allicin
from garlic. Microbes
Infect. 1,
125–129.

Baginski, M., Czub, J., and Sternal,
K. (2006). Interaction of ampho-
tericin B and its selected derivatives
with membranes: molecular model-
ing studies. Chem. Rec. 6, 320–332.

Baginski, M., Sternal, K., Czub,

J.,
and Borowski, E. (2005). Molecular
modelling of membrane activity of
amphotericin B, a polyene macrolide
antifungal antibiotic. Acta Biochim.
Pol. 52, 655–658.

Boller, T., Dürr, M., and Wiemken, A.
(1975). Characterization of a speciﬁc
transport system for arginine in iso-
lated yeast vacuoles. Eur. J. Biochem.
54, 81–91.

Bonneau,

L., Gerbeau-Pissot,

P.,
Thomas, D., Der, C., Lherminier, J.,
Bourque, S., Roche, Y., and Simon-
Plas, F. (2010). Plasma membrane
sterol complexation, generated by
ﬁlipin, triggers signaling responses
in tobacco cells. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1798, 2150–2159.

Borjihan, B., Ogita, A., Fujita, K., Doe,
M., and Tanaka, T. (2010). The cyclic
organosulfur compound zwiebelane
A from onion (Allium cepa) func-
tions as an enhancer of polymyxin B
in fungal vacuole disruption. Planta
Med. 76, 1864–1866.

Borjihan, H., Ogita, A., Fujita, K., Hira-
sawa, E., and Tanaka, T. (2009). The
vacuole-targeting fungicidal activ-
ity of amphotericin B against the
pathogenic fungus Candida albicans
and its enhancement by allicin. J.
Antibiot. 62, 691–697.

+

or Mg2+

Brajtburg, J., Medoff, G., Kobayashi, G.
S., and Elberg, S. (1980). Inﬂuence
on the
of extracellular K
stages of the antifungal effects of
amphotericin B and ﬁlipin. Antimi-
crob. Agents Chemother. 18, 593–597.
Chen, W. C., Chou, D. L., and Fein-
gold, D. S. (1978). Dissociation
between ion permeability and the
lethal action of polyene antibiotics
on Candida albicans. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 13, 914–917.

Deray, G.

(2002). Amphotericin B
Antimicrob.

J.

nephrotoxicity.
Chemother. 49, 37–41.

Ellis, D. (2002). Amphotericin B: spec-
trum and resistance. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 49, 7–10.

Ghannoum, M. A., and Rice, L. B.
(1999). Antifungal agents: mode of

action, mechanisms of resistance,
and correlation of
these mecha-
nisms with bacterial resistance. Clin.
Microbiol. Rev. 12, 501–517.

Gupta, K. C., and Viswanathan, R.
(1955). Combined action of strep-
tomycin and chloramphenicol with
plant antibiotics against
tubercle
bacilli. I. Streptomycin and chlo-
ramphenicol with cepharanthine. II.
Streptomycin and allicin. Antibiot.
Chemother. 5, 24–27.

Hobbs, C. (1992). Garlic–the pungent
panacea. Pharm. Hist. 34, 152–157.
Jain, A. K., Vargas, R., Gotzkowsky, S.,
and McMahon, F. G. (1993). Can
garlic reduce levels of serum lipids? A
controlled clinical study. Am. J. Med.
94, 632–635.

Johnson, R. H., and Einstein, H. E.
(2007). Amphotericin B and coccid-
ioidomycosis. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.
1111, 434–441.

is

Kato, M., and Wickner, W. (2001).
Ergosterol
the
Sec18/ATP-dependent priming step
of homotypic vacuole fusion. EMBO
J. 20, 4035–4040.

required for

Kerridge, D. (1980). “The plasma mem-
brane of Candida albicans and its
role in the action of antifungal
drugs,” in The Eukaryotic Microbial
Cell, eds G. W. Gooday, D. Lloyd,
and A. P. J. Trinci (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press), 103.

Kerridge, D. (1985). “The protoplast
membrane and antifungal drugs,”
in Fungal Protoplasts: Applications in
Biochemistry and Genetics, eds J. F.
Pebedy and L. Ferenczy (New York,
NY: Marcel Dekker Inc.), 135.

Lemke, A., Kiderlen, A. F., and Kayser,
O. (2005). Amphotericin B. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 68, 151–162.

Miron, T., Rabinkov, A., Mirelman, D.,
Wilchek, M., and Weiner, L. (2000).
The mode of action of allicin: its
ready permeability through phos-
pholipid membranes may
con-
tribute to its biological activity.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1463, 20–30.
Munn, A. L., Heese-Peck, A., Steven-
son, B. J., Pichler, H., and Riezman,
H. (1999). Speciﬁc sterols required
for the internalization step of endo-
cytosis in yeast. Mol. Biol. Cell 10,
3943–3957.

Nakayama, K., Yamaguchi, T., Doi,
T., Usuki, Y., Taniguchi, M., and
Tanaka, T. (2002). Synergistic com-
bination of direct plasma membrane
damage and oxidative stress as a
cause of antifungal activity of polyol
macrolide antibiotic niphimycin. J.
Biosci. Bioeng. 94, 207–211.

Obara, K., Kuriyama, H., and Fukuda,
H.
evidence of
active and rapid nuclear degradation

(2001). Direct

triggered by vacuole rupture during
programmed cell death in Zinnia.
Plant Physiol. 125, 615–626.

Ogita, A., Fujita, K., and Tanaka, T.
(2009a). Enhancement of the fungi-
cidal activity of amphotericin B by
allicin: effects on intracellular ergos-
terol trafﬁcking. Planta Med. 75,
222–226.

Ogita, A., Konishi, Y., Borjihan, B.,
Fujita, K., and Tanaka, T. (2009b).
Synergistic fungicidal activities of
polymyxin B and ionophores, and
their dependence on direct disrup-
tive action of polymyxin B on fungal
vacuole. J. Antibiot. 62, 81–87.

Ogita, A., Fujita, K., Taniguchi, M., and
Tanaka, T. (2006). Enhancement of
the fungicidal activity of ampho-
tericin B by allicin, an allyl-sulfur
compound from garlic, against the
yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae as
a model system. Planta Med. 72,
1247–1250.

Ogita, A., Fujita, K., Usuki, Y., and
Tanaka, T. (2010a). Targeted yeast
vacuole disruption by polyene
antibiotics with a macrocyclic lac-
tone ring. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents
35, 89–92.

Ogita, A., Yutani, M., Fujita, K., and
Tanaka, T. (2010b). Dependence of
vacuole disruption and indepen-
dence of potassium ion efﬂux in
fungicidal activity induced by com-
bination of amphotericin B and
allicin against Saccharomyces cere-
visiae. J. Antibiot. 63, 689–692.

Ogita, A., Hirooka, K., Yamamoto, Y.,
Tsutsui, N., Fujita, K., Taniguchi,
M., and Tanaka, T. (2005). Syner-
gistic fungicidal activity of Cu2+
and allicin, an allyl sulfur compound
from garlic, and its relation to the
role of alkyl hydroperoxide reduc-
tase 1 as a cell surface defense in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Toxicology
215, 205–213.

Ogita, A., Matsumoto, K., Fujita, K.,
Usuki, Y., Hatanaka, Y., and Tanaka,
T. (2007a). Synergistic fungicidal
activities of amphotericin B and
-dodecylguanidine: a
N -methyl-N
constituent of polyol macrolide
antibiotic niphimycin. J. Antibiot.
60, 27–35.

(cid:2)(cid:2)

Ogita, A., Nagao, Y., Fujita, K., and
Tanaka, T. (2007b). Ampliﬁcation of
vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity
of antibacterial antibiotic polymyxin
B by allicin, an allyl sulfur com-
pound from garlic. J. Antibiot. 60,
511–518.

Oommen, S., Anto, R. J., Srinivas, G.,
and Karunagaran, D. (2004). Allicin
(from garlic)
caspase-
mediated apoptosis in cancer cells.
Eur. J. Pharmacol. 485, 97–103.

induces

Rabinkov, A., Miron, T., Mirelman, D.,
Wilchek, M., Glozman, S., Yavin,
E., and Weiner, L.
(2000). S-
Allylmercaptoglutathione: the reac-
tion product of allicin with glu-
tathione possesses SH-modifying
and antioxidant properties. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1499, 144–153.

Seeley, E. S., Kato, M., Margolis, N.,
Wickner, W., and Eitzen, G. (2002).
Genomic analysis of homotypic vac-
uole fusion. Mol. Biol. Cell 13,
782–794.

Sokol-Anderson, M. L., Brajtburg, J.,
and Medoff, G. (1986). Ampho-
tericin B-induced oxidative damage
and killing of Candida albicans. J.
Infect. Dis. 154, 76–83.

Stoll, A., and Seebeck, E. (1951). Chem-
ical investigations on alliin, the spe-
ciﬁc principle of garlic. Adv. Enzy-
mol. 11, 377–400.

Subbiah, M. T., and Abplanalp, W.
(2003). Ergosterol (major sterol of
baker’s and brewer’s yeast extracts)
inhibits the growth of human breast
cancer cells in vitro and the poten-
tial
its oxidation prod-
ucts. Int. J. Vitam. Nutr. Res. 73,
19–23.

role of

Thumm, M. (2000). Structure and func-
tion of the yeast vacuole and its role
in autophagy. Microsc. Res. Tech. 51,
563–572.

Tsubura, A., Lai, Y. C., Kuwata, M.,
Uehara, N., and Yoshizawa, K.
(2011). Anticancer effects of gar-
lic and garlic-derived compounds
for breast cancer control. Anticancer
Agents Med. Chem. 11, 249–253.

Usuki, Y., Matsumoto, K., Inoue, T.,
Yoshioka, K., Iio, H., and Tanaka,
T. (2000). Structure-activity rela-
tionship studies on niphimycin, a
guanidylpolyol macrolide antibiotic.
(cid:2)(cid:2)
-
Part 1: the role of the N -methyl-N
alkylguanidinium moiety. Bioorg.
Med. Chem. Lett. 16, 1553–1556.

Wickner, W. (2000). Yeast vacuoles and
membrane fusion pathways. EMBO
J. 21, 1241–1247.

Yutani, M., Taniguchi, H., Borjihan,
H., Ogita, A., Fujita, K.,
and
Tanaka, T. (2011a). Alliinase from
Ensifer adhaerens and its use for gen-
eration of fungicidal activity. AMB
Express 1, 2.

(cid:2)(cid:2)

-dodecylguanidine

Yutani, M., Ogita, A., Usuki, Y.,
Fujita, K., and Tanaka, T. (2011b).
Enhancement effect of N -methyl-
the
N
vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity
of amphotericin B against the path-
ogenic fungus Candida albicans. J.
Antibiot. 64, 469–474.

on

Zinser, E., Sperka-Gottlieb, C. D., Fasch,
E. V., Kohlwein, S. D., Paltauf, F.,
and Daum, G. (1991).Phospholipid

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 100 | 5

Ogita et al.

Vacuole-targeting fungicidal activity of amphotericin B

lipid

synthesis
and
composi-
tion of
subcellular membranes
in
the
unicellular
eukaryote
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Bacteriol.
173, 2026–2034.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was

conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 30 November 2011; accepted:
28 February 2012; published online: 19
March 2012.

Citation: Ogita A, Fujita K-I and Tanaka
T (2012) Enhancing effects on vacuole-
targeting fungicidal activity of ampho-
tericin B. Front. Microbio. 3:100. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00100
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Fungi and Their Interactions, a specialty
of Frontiers in Microbiology.

Copyright  2012 Ogita, Fujita and
Tanaka. This is an open-access article dis-
tributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Non Commercial
License, which permits non-commercial
use, distribution, and reproduction in
other
forums, provided the original
authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 100 | 6

