Editorial
published: 02 December 2011
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00241

The microbial sulfur cycle

Martin G. Klotz1*, Donald A. Bryant 2 and  Thomas E. Hanson3

1  Department of Biology, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, USA
2  Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Eberly College of Science, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA
3  College of Earth, Ocean, and Environment, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA
*Correspondence: martin.klotz@frontiersin.org

Sulfur is one example of an element whose transformation and fate 
in the environment are critically dependent upon microbial activi-
ties. Sulfur is the 10th most abundant element in the universe and 
the sixth most abundant element in microbial biomass. By virtue 
of  its  chemical  properties,  particularly  the  wide  range  of  stable 
redox states, sulfur plays important roles in central biochemistry as 
a structural element, redox center, and carbon carrier. In addition, 
redox reactions involving reduced and oxidized inorganic sulfur 
compounds  can  be  utilized  by  microbes  for  the  generation  and 
conservation of biochemical energy. Microbial transformation of 
both inorganic and organic sulfur compounds has had a profound 
effect on the properties of the biosphere and continues to affect 
geochemistry today.

While sulfur microbiology has a rich history, the last decade 
has changed our views on many aspects of microbially driven bio-
geochemical cycles, including the global sulfur cycle, in that tre-
mendous advances in methods, techniques, and approaches have 
enabled the discovery of novel processes and characterization of 
the organisms and molecular mechanisms that facilitate them. This 
progress is documented in a collection of 20 articles at the leading 
edge of sulfur microbiology, focusing on microbes, reactions, and 
compounds of geochemical significance. Whether students or peer 
researchers in the field, it is the intent of this Research Topic issue 
to reach a wide audience whose interests and expertise spans from 
the molecular biochemistry of single enzymes and their reactions 
through pure culture physiology and genetic analysis to community 
level  metagenomics  and  metatranscriptomics.  This  collection  is 
especially  timely  given  the  recent  publication  describing  one  of 
the oldest microfossils to date that likely lived a sulfur-dependent 
chemolithoautotrophic  lifestyle  (Wacey  et  al.,  2011).  Microbial 
sulfur cycling may have had a hand in starting it all.

This collection of papers can be viewed as falling roughly into 
four  clusters  that  deal  with  enzymes/activities,  organisms/path-
ways/comparative approaches, symbiosis, and environments:

•	 At	the	level	of	enzymes	and	activities,	new	data	are	reported	on	a	
variety of systems. Structural analyses are reported for a dispro-
portionating sulfur oxygenase/reductase and a dissimilatory sul-
fite  reductase.  Two  independent  papers  focus  on  tetrathionate 
hydrolase,  one  of  bacterial  and  one  of  archeal  origin.  Electron 
flow for the Sor pathway of thiosulfate oxidation has been further 
defined in Sinorhizobium meliloti. Finally, another article provi-
des the first functional evidence in a phototrophic bacterium for 
the function of a quinone-interacting membrane-bound oxido-
reductase that participates in the oxidation of sulfite.

•	 At	the	level	of	pathways	and	organisms,	detailed	reviews	have	
been  produced.  For  the  sulfate  reducing  bacteria,  the  foci 
are  metabolic  flexibility,  energy  metabolism,  and  electron 

flow. In the phototrophic bacteria, putative sulfur oxidation 
pathways  in  sequenced  Chlorobi  are  examined.  Finally,  the 
latest developments in microbial pathways for the degrada-
tion  of  DMSP,  an  extremely  important  component  of  the 
marine  sulfur  cycle  are  summarized.  Three  research  arti-
cles focus on the regulation of sulfur oxidation genes in the 
purple  sulfur  bacterium  Allochromatium  vinosum,  growth 
on  tetrathionate  vs.  S(0)  in  Acidithiobacillus  caldus  and 
new  Mycobacteria  isolates  from  sandstone  monuments  that 
appear to grow as sulfur oxidizers.

•	 Multi-organism	 interactions	 and	 symbiosis	 encompass	 the	
third  category.  Papers  on  exclusively  prokaryotic  symbioses 
and  those  that  cross  domain  boundaries  involving  micro-
bial eukaryotes and the symbionts of marine fauna provide a 
broad  perspective  in  this  arena  grounded  in  the  application 
of traditional (label tracing experiments to examine substrate 
exchange) and cutting edge (transcriptomic analysis of uncul-
tured microbial symbionts) techniques.

•	 Finally,	 this	 issue	 presents	 three	 papers	 on	 sulfur	 cycling	 at	
the  level  of  ecosystems  and  communities.  Two  extreme  envi-
ronments are examined. Sorokin et al. (2011) summarize their 
long track record of work in soda lakes that combine high sali-
nity with high pH. Both the reductive and oxidative arms of the 
sulfur cycle are discussed, and new insights into sulfidogenesis 
are presented for these fascinating systems. Yang et al. (2011) 
compare  microbial  communities  and  chemolithoautotrophic 
activity  in  relatively  understudied  freshwater  hydrothermal 
vents in Yellowstone Lake. Finally, Luther et al. (2011) present 
a  detailed  analysis  of  the  chemical  parameters  that  influence 
abiotic  oxidation  of  sulfide  in  natural  environments.  Sulfide 
oxidizing microbes must compete with this abiotic process and 
this report analyzes both literature and fresh experimental data 
to show that biotic sulfide oxidation will almost always occur 
at significantly faster rates due to kinetic restrictions on abiotic 
oxidation. Biology rules after all, as should be evident not just 
from this paper, but from the entire collection presented here.

Together,  these  papers  represent  the  forefront  of  research  of 
this field. We hope you enjoy them as much as we enjoyed working 
with this talented group of researchers to put this volume together.

REFERENCES
Luther, G. W., III, Findlay, A. J., MacDonald, D. J., Owings, S. M., Hanson, T. E., Beinart, 
R. A., and Girguis, P. R. (2011). Thermodynamics and kinetics of sulfide oxidation 
by oxygen: a look at inorganically controlled reactions and biologically mediated 
processes in the environment. Front. Microbio. 2:62. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00062
Sorokin, D. Y., Kuenen, J. G., and Muyzer, G. (2011). The microbial sulfur cycle at 
extremely haloalkaline conditions of soda lakes. Front. Microbio. 2:44. doi: 10.3389/
fmicb.2011.00044

www.frontiersin.org 

December 2011  |  Volume 2  |  Article 241  |  1

Klotz et al. 

The microbial sulfur cycle

Wacey, D., Kilburn, M. R., Saunders, M., Cliff, J., and Brasier, M. D. (2011). Microfossils 
of sulphur-metabolizing cells in 3.4-billion-year-old rocks of Western Australia. 
Nature Geosci. 4, 698–702.

Yang, T., Lyons, S., Aguilar, C., Cuhel, R., and Teske, A. (2011). Microbial communities 
and chemosynthesis in Yellowstone Lake sublacustrine hydrothermal vent waters. 
Front. Microbio. 2:130. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00130

Received: 15 November 2011; accepted: 16 November 2011; published online: 02 December 
2011.

Citation: Klotz  MG, Bryant DA and Hanson TE (2011) The microbial sulfur cycle. Front. 
Microbio. 2:241. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00241
This article was submitted to Frontiers in Microbial Physiology and Metabolism, a specialty 
of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2011 Klotz, Bryant and Hanson. This is an open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial License, which 
permits non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in other forums, provided the 
original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology  |  Microbial Physiology and Metabolism 

 

December 2011  | Volume 2  |  Article 241  |  2

