KSHV Rta promoter speciﬁcation and viral reactivation

Jonathan Guito1,2 and David M. Lukac 1,2*

1 Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, New Jersey Medical School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA
2 Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, New Jersey Medical School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA

REVIEW ARTICLE
14 February 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00030

published:

Edited by:
Keiji Ueda, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Japan
Reviewed by:
Hiroki Isomura, Aichi Cancer Center
Research Institute, Japan
Ke Lan, Institut Pasteur of
Shanghai – Chinese Academy of
Sciences, China
*Correspondence:
David M. Lukac, Department of
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics,
New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry
of New Jersey, 225 Warren Street,
ICPH E350C, P.O. Box 1709, Newark,
NJ 07101, USA.
e-mail: Lukacdm@umdnj.edu

Viruses are obligate intracellular pathogens whose biological success depends upon replica-
tion and packaging of viral genomes, and transmission of progeny viruses to new hosts.The
biological success of herpesviruses is enhanced by their ability to reproduce their genomes
without producing progeny viruses or killing the host cells, a process called latency. Latency
permits a herpesvirus to remain undetected in its animal host for decades while maintain-
ing the potential to reactivate, or switch, to a productive life cycle when host conditions
are conducive to generating viral progeny. Direct interactions between many host and viral
molecules are implicated in controlling herpesviral reactivation, suggesting complex bio-
logical networks that control the decision. One viral protein that is necessary and sufﬁcient
to switch latent Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) into the lytic infection
cycle is called K-Rta. K-Rta is a transcriptional activator that speciﬁes promoters by binding
DNA directly and interacting with cellular proteins. Among these cellular proteins, binding
of K-Rta to RBP-Jk is essential for viral reactivation. In contrast to the canonical model
for Notch signaling, RBP-Jk is not uniformly and constitutively bound to the latent KSHV
genome, but rather is recruited to DNA by interactions with K-Rta. Stimulation of RBP-Jk
DNA binding requires high afﬁnity binding of Rta to repetitive and palindromic “CANT DNA
repeats” in promoters, and formation of ternary complexes with RBP-Jk. However, while
K-Rta expression is necessary for initiating KSHV reactivation, K-Rta’s role as the switch is
inefﬁcient. Many factors modulate K-Rta’s function, suggesting that KSHV reactivation can
be signiﬁcantly regulated post-Rta expression and challenging the notion that herpesviral
reactivation is bistable. This review analyzes rapidly evolving research on KSHV K-Rta to
consider the role of K-Rta promoter speciﬁcation in regulating the progression of KSHV
reactivation.

Keywords: KSHV, herpesvirus, reactivation, DNA/protein interactions, DNA binding, RBP-Jk, Rta

INTRODUCTION
Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is one of ﬁve
DNA tumor viruses implicated in the etiology of human cancers.
The study of small DNA tumor viruses has established a paradigm
for viral cancers, which result from non-productive, dead-end
infections. For example, in human papillomavirus (HPV) infec-
tion, extrachromosomal genomes replicate to produce mature
progeny viruses (a productive infection), leading to the forma-
tion of benign warts. However, if HPV integrates into the host
genome, it chronically expresses its oncogenic early proteins,
fails to replicate (a non-productive infection), and elicits cervi-
cal cancer (Moody and Laimins, 2010). This binary relationship
between alternative outcomes of infection and cell transformation
in human infections has received further support as a fundamen-
tal oncogenesis mechanism from studies of the recently discovered
Merkel cell polyomavirus (Chang and Moore, 2011).

A basic difference between the small and large DNA tumor
viruses is the relationship between productive and non-productive
infections. While the small DNA tumor viruses transform
human cells due to non-productive, inescapably dead-end infec-
tions, large DNA tumor viruses establish non-productive infec-
tions that are reversible. These large DNA tumor viruses,

KSHV and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), belong to the family
Herpesviridae, and both replicate with latent/reactivating (i.e.,
non-productive/productive) patterns of
infection. In natural
infections of humans, both KSHV and EBV establish latency in
B cells and are associated with B lymphoid hyperproliferations
and cancers (Ganem, 2007; Rickinson and Kieff, 2007). Reactiva-
tion of KSHV from latency leads to increased risk of developing
Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS) and primary effusion lymphoma (PEL). KS
tumors develop following KSHV reactivation; in the KS tumors,
the virus is found in endothelial cells.

Dramatic advances in understanding the relationship between
EBV infection and mechanisms of pathogenesis have been facili-
tated by the ease with which EBV infects primary B cells de novo.
In that model, genetic studies established a strict interdependence
between EBV latency and B cell transformation, and led to deﬁn-
ition of the minimal EBV genome sufﬁcient for that effect (Kieff
and Rickinson, 2007). Similar progress in understanding KSHV
biology has been hampered by the difﬁculty in establishing robust
models of de novo infection that support long-lived viral persis-
tence and transformation. Nonetheless, the models that have been
most revealing suggest a remarkable contribution of productive
cycle genes to cellular survival and growth control. Most of these

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 1

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

viral genes are homologous to human genes (Russo et al., 1996).
Mechanisms that control expression of the productive cycle genes
and progression of the viral reactivation program are thus keys to
understanding cellular growth control during KSHV infection.

PEL CELL MODEL OF KSHV LATENCY AND REACTIVATION
Although long-term latency in tissue culture is not established
following de novo KSHV infection (Renne et al., 1998; Grund-
hoff and Ganem, 2004), latently infected B cells can be explanted
and cultured from human afﬂicted with PEL (Cesarman et al.,
1995; Moore et al., 1996; Renne et al., 1996; Boshoff et al., 1998;
Drexler et al., 1998). These PEL cell lines maintain KSHV latency
for multiple passages, supporting very limited viral gene expres-
sion and little virus production (Renne et al., 1996). Treatment of
these cells with the protein kinase C-activator 12-O-tetradecanoyl
phorbol-13-acetate (TPA) induces a dramatic increase in the num-
ber of viral genes transcribed, and release of viral progeny (Renne
et al., 1996). Since most of the TPA-induced transcripts encode
homologs of productive cycle genes from other herpesviruses
(Sarid et al., 1998), these data established PEL cells as authentic
models for KSHV latency and reactivation.

Samples derived from KS tissue show transcription patterns
similar to un-treated PEL cells (Zhong et al., 1996; Sun et al., 1999)
most infected endothelial cells express latent stage transcripts, but
1–10% of cells express productive cycle transcripts (Staskus et al.,
1997, 1999; Sun et al., 1999). Most of the viral homologs of cellular
genes are expressed with a productive cycle transcription pattern
(reviewed in Mesri et al., 2010).

The development of KSHV microarrays permitted initial
kinetic classiﬁcation of the viral transcriptome. Less than 10 KSHV
genes are expressed during latency in PEL cells, but most viral
genes are induced following reactivation. With a few exceptions,
the viral mRNAs that encode homologs of cellular proteins are
expressed with kinetics similar to that of the viral transcripts for
DNA replication proteins (Jenner et al., 2001; Paulose-Murphy
et al., 2001). Most of the viral transcripts that encode structural
proteins are expressed following the transcripts for the replication
proteins (Jenner et al., 2001; Paulose-Murphy et al., 2001).

Formal deﬁnition of stage-speciﬁc transcription was estab-
lished using microarrays and approaches validated for other her-
pesviruses. Four of the latent transcripts are expressed constitu-
tively in both latency and reactivation, while all other transcripts
are induced during reactivation (Fakhari and Dittmer, 2002).
Eighteen miRNAs are also expressed during KSHV latency, and
further induced during reactivation (Cai et al., 2005; Samols et al.,
2005). Nine transcripts were deﬁned as immediate early (IE) based
on their expression in the absence of de novo protein synthesis (Zhu
et al., 1999; Rimessi et al., 2001). Twenty-seven transcripts were
deﬁned as late (L) based on their sensitivity to treatment with a
viral replication inhibitor (Lu et al., 2004). By default classiﬁcation,
42 transcripts were expressed with delayed early (DE) kinetics, ﬁll-
ing the temporal class that follows IE expression but precedes viral
DNA replication. As in the other herpesviruses, the existence of
distinct classes of transcription in KSHV implies the existence of
mechanisms that regulate gene-speciﬁc transactivation.

Recent studies used tiling microarrays and limiting dilution
quantitative-reverse-transcription (qRT)-PCR to further deﬁne

stage-speciﬁc transcription. These studies showed that a few
transcripts commonly classiﬁed as lytic are latently expressed in
selected cells or conditions (Chandriani and Ganem, 2010). Fol-
lowing reactivation, nearly the entire KSHV genome, including
both DNA strands, is transcribed to high levels (Chandriani et al.,
2010; Xu and Ganem, 2010). These analyses identiﬁed a com-
plex set of previously un-appreciated and abundant productive
cycle transcripts. Many of these transcripts are very large, and are
expressed in the anti-sense orientation to coding transcripts and
miRNAs.

Rta IS THE KSHV LYTIC SWITCH PROTEIN
Rta IS SUFFICIENT TO REACTIVATE KSHV FROM LATENCY
A series of studies established that a single KSHV gene called Rta
encoded the only viral protein both necessary and sufﬁcient to
reactivate the virus from latency.

Publication of the complete KSHV genome sequence and the
demonstration of its extensive homology and collinearity with
EBV (Russo et al., 1996) permitted identiﬁcation of candidate
KSHV lytic switch proteins. KSHV encodes two homologs of the
EBV transactivating switches Rta (“E-Rta”) and Zta in open read-
ing frames (ORFs) 50 and K8, respectively (Sun et al., 1998). In
KSHV, these proteins are called K-Rta and K-bZIP. Transient trans-
fection of vectors that expressed K-Rta in BC-1 PEL cells induced
the lytic cycle transcripts PAN (also known as nut-1), K-bZIP, small
viral capsid antigen (sVCA), viral interleukin (vIL)-6, and viral
macrophage inﬂammatory protein (vMIP)-II (Sun et al., 1998).
Conversely, transfection of a K-bZIP expression vector failed to
induce PAN and vIL-6, demonstrating that K-bZIP is not a func-
tional equivalent of EBV Zta (Sun et al., 1998). The amount of PAN
expressed was dependent on the input dose of the K-Rta expression
vector. vIL-6 and PAN were induced by K-Rta with DE kinetics,
similar to induction by reactivating chemicals (Sun et al., 1998).
As sVCA expression required viral genome replication (i.e., sVCA
is a true late gene), its induction by Rta suggested that Rta could
drive the lytic gene expression cascade to completion. Interest-
ingly, sVCA was induced in only 20% of the Rta vector-transfected
cells.

Transcription of K-Rta was induced by reactivating chemicals
prior to detection of the vIL-6 and K-bZIP transcripts, proving
that K-Rta was upstream of those genes in the reactivation cascade
(Sun et al., 1998). Truncation at amino acid (aa) 134 eliminated
K-Rta’s ability to induce lytic cycle gene expression.

Candidate lytic switch proteins were also selected based on early
expression during KSHV reactivation in BCBL-1 PEL cells and
by homology to EBV transactivators (Lukac et al., 1998). KSHV
ORFs 50 (K-Rta), 57, K1, K3, and K5 were transcribed within
6 h following TPA treatment of BCBL-1 cells, prior to expression
of suspected DE genes. Moreover, ORF 57 encoded a homolog
of the EBV transactivator Mta. Transfection of a vector express-
ing K-Rta, but not vectors expressing ORF 57, K1, K3, or K5,
induced expression of the ORF 59 and K8.1 proteins from the
latent viral genome in BCBL-1 cells (Lukac et al., 1998). Induction
of these productive cycle proteins by ectopic K-Rta was quanti-
tatively similar to reactivation stimulated by TPA. Induction of
the late protein K8.1 by K-Rta was sensitive to a viral replication
inhibitor, agreeing with the conclusion that Rta expression was

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 2

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

sufﬁcient to reactivate the complete lytic cycle of KSHV. Remark-
ably, K8.1 expression occurred in only 6.9% of Rta expressing cells
(Lukac et al., 1998).

Despite the identiﬁcation of K-Rta as the KSHV lytic switch
protein, two characteristics of PEL cell lines have hampered mol-
ecular studies of KSHV reactivation: PEL cells are poorly trans-
fectable, and undergo low-level spontaneous reactivation under
normal culture conditions. Isolation of the HH-B2 PEL cell
line overcame these obstacles by permitting demonstration that
ectopic expression of K-Rta induced release of encapsidated viral
DNA to the culture supernatant (Gradoville et al., 2000). These
data formally proved that K-Rta could activate the entire KSHV
productive reactivation cycle (Gradoville et al., 2000). More recent
studies showed that K-Rta is also sufﬁcient to reactivate the com-
plete productive cycle of KSHV in infected endothelial, CV-1,
human ﬁbroblastic, and 293 cells (Bechtel et al., 2003; An et al.,
2006).

Rta IS A PHOSPHORYLATED, TRANSCRIPTIONAL TRANSACTIVATOR
Analyses of ORF 50’s RNA and protein products enhanced under-
standing of K-Rta’s role in viral reactivation. K-Rta’s aa sequence
suggested that it was a transcription factor, since it contains an
N-terminal basic domain and a C-terminal acidic domain con-
served with E-Rta (Figure 1; Lukac et al., 1998). In E-Rta, the
domains mediate DNA binding and dimerization, and transac-
tivation, respectively. K-Rta also contained two putative nuclear
localization sequences (NLSs; Figure 1), and a K-Rta-speciﬁc
polyclonal antiserum conﬁrmed that K-Rta was localized to the
nuclei of TPA-treated BCBL-1 cells and transfected CV-1 cells
(Lukac et al., 1998). Co-transfection of uninfected CV-1 cells with
the K-Rta expression vector and reporter plasmids demonstrated
that Rta transactivated the promoters for PAN, thymidine kinase
(TK), kaposin, single stranded DNA binding protein (DBP), and
DNA polymerase, but not the assembly protein (AP; Lukac et al.,
1998). K-Rta transactivated the PAN, TK, and DBP promoters in

FIGURE 1 | K-Rta structure/function map. A linear representation of the
amino acid content and predicted structural motifs of the ORF 50/Rta
protein. Numbers refer to amino acid (AA) positions. Positions of each
functional domain are shown by the colored bars, with amino acid
boundaries indicated by numbers, corresponding to the function shown in
the column on the right. Color codes for bars are: black, core functional

domain; red, inhibitor of K-Rta; green, stimulator of K-Rta. Citations are
listed in parentheses, and described in the text. +++, basic amino acid
rich; LR, leucine heptapeptide repeat; ST, serine/threonine-rich;
hyd/DE/hyd, repeats of hydrophobic and acidic amino acids, comprising
K-Rta’s transcriptional activation domain; NLS, nuclear localization
sequence; Dom. Neg., dominant negative.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 3

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

both B cells and endothelial cells (Lukac et al., 1999). These data
established that Rta was a direct transactivator of speciﬁc viral
promoters in the absence of any other viral genes (Lukac et al.,
1999).

Northern blotting more clearly distinguished the relative kinet-
ics of K-Rta transcription and that of other early proteins. Abun-
dant Rta expression was detectable within 1 h post-TPA addition
to PEL cells, and preceded detection of transcripts for Mta, K-bZIP,
K3, K5, and DBP (Lukac et al., 1999). The ORF 50 locus expresses
multiple, divergent transcripts, but only a single, 3,402 nt tran-
script encodes the sense K-Rta sequence (Lukac et al., 1999). This
major transcript initiates upstream of ORF 49, is spliced to an
acceptor site upstream of ORF 50, and then continues un-spliced
through ORF 50. Downstream of ORF 50, the transcript is spliced
three additional times, and encodes K-bZIP and K8.1. The major
protein expressed from ORF 50 during reactivation is approxi-
mately 110 kDa, about 36 kDa greater than the predicted molecular
mass of 73.7 kDa (Lukac et al., 1999). The 110-kDa protein is also
detected in Cos cells transfected with an ORF 50 expression vec-
tor. A second, minor protein of 90 kDa is also detected by the
K-Rta antiserum in TPA-induced PEL cell extracts, and migrates
identically to the protein produced by programming rabbit retic-
ulocyte lysates (RRL) with the ORF 50 cDNA (Lukac et al., 1999).
Phosphatase treatment of the 110-kDa K-Rta protein decreased
its abundance and increased accumulation of the 90-kDa species,
suggesting that 20 kDa of K-Rta’s apparent MW is attributable to
phosphorylation (Lukac et al., 1999). Thus, K-Rta has the potential
to be regulated by post-translational modiﬁcation.

Rta IS NECESSARY FOR KSHV REACTIVATION
Ectopic expression of K-Rta in PEL cells had established that K-Rta
was sufﬁcient to induce the full lytic cycle of KSHV gene expres-
sion. Structure-function studies of K-Rta led to experiments that
proved that K-Rta was also necessary for KSHV reactivation. K-
Rta’s transcriptional activation domain was identiﬁed by fusing
full-length and truncated mutants of K-Rta to the DNA binding
domain of the yeast protein Gal4. Among these truncations, only
K-Rta aa 486–691 were sufﬁcient to activate transcription of a
reporter gene containing binding sites speciﬁc for Gal4, in B and
endothelial cells (Lukac et al., 1999). These data indicated that
K-Rta’s activation domain is contained within its C-terminal 206
aa (Figure 1; Lukac et al., 1998; Seaman et al., 1999; Wang et al.,
2001a). This sequence is homologous to the activation domains
of many cellular and viral transcription factors (Lukac et al.,
1999). Deletion of the C-terminal 162 aa from wild type, cog-
nate K-Rta generated a mutant called RtaΔSTAD (also known as
ORF50ΔSTAD; Figure 1), that was unable to transactivate KSHV
promoters or reactivate the virus from latency in PEL cells (Lukac
et al., 1999). These data proved that transcriptional activation
by K-Rta was required for KSHV reactivation. Furthermore, this
RtaΔSTAD bound to WT K-Rta and speciﬁcally inhibited K-Rta-
mediated transactivation. Proving that K-Rta was necessary for
KSHV reactivation, RtaΔSTAD blocked viral reactivation that was
either spontaneous or induced by TPA or sodium butyrate in PEL
cells (Lukac et al., 1999).

Formal genetic proof that K-Rta is required for KSHV reac-
tivation came from studies of a bacmid clone of KSHV in which

ORF 50 was deleted (called BAC36Δ50). Viral infection was estab-
lished by transfecting 293 cells with BAC36Δ50 DNA and selecting
with hygromycin. TPA failed to reactivate BAC36Δ50, as measured
by DNA replication, production of infectious virus in cell super-
natants, or expression of K-bZIP, ORF 40/41, K8.1, ORF 57, or ORF
59 (Xu et al., 2005). Expression of K-Rta in trans rescued reactiva-
tion of BAC36Δ50, implying the deletion of ORF 50 was the only
mutation that contributed to the reactivation defect. In addition,
a bacmid clone constitutively expressing Rta (called “KSHV-lyt”)
entered the productive replication cycle by default upon infecting
epithelial, endothelial, and Vero cells (Budt et al., 2011).

Rta FUNCTIONS AS A TETRAMER
The ability of the Rta mutant RtaΔSTAD to inhibit KSHV reac-
tivation suggested that Rta must form multimers to reactivate
KSHV from latency. Blue Native Polyacrylamide electrophore-
sis (BN-PAGE) and size exclusion chromatography showed that
full-length Rta formed tetramers and decamers in solution (Bu
et al., 2007). Deletion of Rta’s N-terminal leucine heptapeptide
repeat (RtaΔLR; aa 244–275; Figure 1) inhibited it’s transacti-
vation of the K-bZIP and PAN promoters without affecting its
nuclear localization. The ΔLR mutation also did not inhibit DNA
binding of K-Rta, but altered the pattern of K-Rta/DNA complexes
observed in EMSA. In the context of the dominant negative mutant
RtaΔSTAD, deletion of the LR (RtaΔSTADΔLR) inhibited its abil-
ity to interact with full-length K-Rta and to block K-Rta-mediated
transactivation and reactivation. However, the LR alone was not
sufﬁcient for K-Rta self-interaction, but required the entire central
portion of K-Rta (aa 245–414; Figure 1; Bu et al., 2007).

Despite encoding four leucines spaced at 7 aa intervals, K-Rta’s
LR is not predicted to form leucine-zipper coiled-coils because it
also contains ﬁve proline residues (Bu et al., 2007). In fact, the
proline content, but not the leucine content, of the LR is criti-
cal for determining the oligomeric state of Rta. Mutation of three
leucines to prolines in the center of the LR generated a K-Rta
mutant (Rta-L3P) that exclusively formed tetramers and retained
the ability to transactivate and reactivate the virus (Bu et al., 2007).
Mutants of Rta that were unable to form tetramers but retained the
ability to form higher-order multimers were reduced in function
or were non-functional (Bu et al., 2007). Monomers were never
detected with WT or mutant K-Rta. In the context of RtaΔSTAD,
the L3P mutant (RtaΔSTAD-L3P) retained the ability to bind and
dominant-negatively inhibit WT K-Rta (Bu et al., 2007). As differ-
ences in Rta multimerization had dramatic effects on its function,
the data suggested that Rta’s multimerization state is a prime can-
didate for regulating KSHV reactivation. The data also suggest
that many phenotypes attributed to K-Rta LR mutations could
affect both interactions with heterologous proteins and K-Rta
homo-oligomerization.

Rta SPECIFIES PROMOTERS FOR TRANSACTIVATION BY
BINDING DNA DIRECTLY AND INTERACTING WITH
CELLULAR DNA BINDING PROTEINS
The molecular interactions between host and virus that determine
transactivation speciﬁcity are critical for understanding DNA virus
persistence and replication. Identiﬁcation of K-Rta as KSHV’s lytic
switch (Lukac et al., 1998; Sun et al., 1998), and demonstration of

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 4

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

K-Rta’s promoter selectivity (Lukac et al., 1998), led immediately
to the question of how Rta speciﬁed promoters for transactiva-
tion. Intense investigations of Rta speciﬁcity have focused on the
PAN and Mta promoters as models. Experimental approaches have
followed the classic strategy of comparing K-Rta DNA binding
speciﬁcity with K-Rta transactivation speciﬁcity. Studies of PAN
have revealed a largely concordant relationship between K-Rta
DNA binding and transactivation. Studies of Mta have revealed
a more complex relationship between K-Rta DNA binding and
interactions with cellular DBPs. Taken together, the PAN and Mta
models support the existence of two apparently distinct mecha-
nisms for K-Rta promoter speciﬁcation. These mechanisms are
distinguished by K-Rta’s relative dependence on the cellular pro-
tein RBP-Jk, and the relative lengths of K-Rta’s binding sites. K-Rta
promoter speciﬁcation is further inﬂuenced by cell type. Contro-
versies regarding K-Rta promoter speciﬁcation might be attribut-
able to variations in experimental systems, and are discussed in
the Section “Conclusion and Perspectives.”

RBP-Jk INDEPENDENT PROMOTERS
PAN is a non-coding, poly-adenylated nuclear RNA that is the
most abundant transcript expressed by reactivating KSHV (Sun
et al., 1996; Zhong et al., 1996); recent data shows PAN RNA is
essential for viral late gene expression (Borah et al., 2011). The PAN
locus from −2974 to +1136 was cloned into a pBluescript vector
and transfected into COS-1 and 293T cells (Song et al., 2001). The
PAN RNA was undetectable by Northern blotting unless a K-Rta
expression vector was co-transfected (Song et al., 2001). Deletion
of the promoter to −69 had little effect on K-Rta transactivation,
while further deletion to −38 eliminated transactivation (Song
et al., 2001). Deletion of the element in the cognate PAN promoter
eliminated K-Rta transactivation (Kirshner et al., 2000; Song et al.,
2001), and the sequence from −69 to −38 conferred orienta-
tion independent Rta responsiveness on a heterologous promoter
(Song et al., 2001).
Recombinant, FLAG-tagged, full-length K-Rta, expressed and
puriﬁed from E. coli, bound to PAN promoter DNA −70/−42 in
EMSA, providing a direct correspondence between DNA binding
and transactivation (Song et al., 2001). Truncated K-Rta (aa 1–320;
Figure 1), expressed and puriﬁed from bacteria, bound to the PAN

−78/−37 element with high afﬁnity [a dissociation constant (K D)
of 7.9–8.6 nM; Song et al., 2002]. The minimal DNA sequence for
detectable K-Rta binding was −74/−45, and methylation between
positions −67/−52 interfered with DNA binding (Figure 2; Song
et al., 2002). The extra 14 bp ﬂanking the methylation sensitive
sequences were A/T-rich. K-Rta made in RRL, requires aa 11–112
and 151–167 to bind the PAN promoter (Figure 1; Wang et al.,
2003a).
Analyses of an extensive set of mutations across positions
−75/−38 of the PAN promoter showed a general correspondence
between K-Rta binding and transactivation, with some discrepan-
cies (i.e., incomplete concordance between a mutation’s effect on
binding with its effect on transactivation; Song et al., 2002). Due
to Rta’s high binding afﬁnity to the relatively short segment of the
PAN promoter, it was concluded that Rta binding to the promoter
is necessary and sufﬁcient to activate transcription of PAN (Song
et al., 2002).

FIGURE 2 | Comparison of RBP-Jk independent and dependent K-Rta
responsive elements. Vertical lines indicate homologous bases. Numbers
indicate positions relative to transcriptional start sites. The green box
indicates position of RBP-Jk binding site.

Comparison of the K-Rta responsive element from PAN to
other KSHV promoters revealed a 26-bp element from the
kaposin (K12) promoter that contained 20 bp homologous to PAN
(Figure 2; Song et al., 2002; Chang et al., 2005c). Recombinant
K-Rta, cloned as a fusion of aa 1–490 to the VP16 activation
domain and expressed in cultured cells, bound to the PAN and
kaposin promoters (Chang et al., 2002). The same fusion pro-
tein was competent to activate transcription of PAN and kaposin
from the latent viral genome in PEL cells (Chang et al., 2002).
Mutations in the kaposin element also demonstrated a strict
correlation between DNA binding by the K-Rta1-490/VP16 and
transactivation (Chang et al., 2002). Further C-terminal trun-
cation of K-Rta to aa 390 was sufﬁcient to bind and trans-
activate the PAN and kaposin promoters (Chang and Miller,
2004).

The K-Rta binding site from kaposin is also homologous to
K-Rta binding sites in the lytic origins of replication (ori-Lyt;
Figure 2). K-Rta activates transcription from those sites to par-
ticipate in lytic replication (AuCoin et al., 2004; Wang et al.,
2004b).

RBP-Jk-DEPENDENT PROMOTERS
In transient transfections of CV-1 cells with a series of KSHV pro-
moters, K-Rta most robustly transactivated those from the ORF
57 and K-bZIP genes (Lukac et al., 1998). Deletion analysis of the
ORF 57 promoter revealed that the element critical for Rta trans-
activation was located between bps−106 and−54 relative to Mta’s
transcriptional start site (Lukac et al., 2001). While not required for
K-Rta transactivation, the promoter sequence between −218 and
−106 also contributed positively to transactivation (Lukac et al.,
2001). Fusion of the −106/−54 element to a heterologous TATA
box conferred K-Rta responsiveness in an orientation independent
manner (Lukac et al., 2001).

Initial studies of K-Rta’s interaction with the Mta promoter uti-
lized recombinant K-Rta protein that was partially puriﬁed from
Sf9 cells that were infected with a K-Rta expressing baculovirus.
This protein preparation formed three K-Rta-containing com-
plexes with short, overlapping DNAs that spanned the −106/−54
element (Lukac et al., 2001). The DNAs were cloned as dimers
in a heterologous reporter vector, and tested for transactivation
by K-Rta in CV-1 cells. K-Rta transactivation corresponded with
formation of two of the three K-Rta-containing protein/DNA
complexes (Lukac et al., 2001). A 26-bp sequence, called Mta
5D (−100/−76; Figure 2), was optimal for K-Rta complex DNA

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 5

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

binding and transactivation (Lukac et al., 2001). Mta 5D con-
tains a 12-bp, partially palindromic sequence that is conserved
with the TATA proximal promoter of the K-bZIP gene. Muta-
tions that inhibited DNA binding of the two K-Rta-containing
complexes also eliminated K-Rta transactivation of the Mta and
K-bZIP promoters (Lukac et al., 2001).

Site-directed mutagenesis of the Mta 5D element revealed
nucleotide-speciﬁc variability in K-Rta transactivation and DNA
binding (Lukac et al., 2001). Mutations in the upstream side
of the 5D palindrome reduced K-Rta transactivation 50–80%
and reduced, but did not eliminate, DNA binding of the K-Rta-
containing complexes. Mutations in the downstream side of the
palindrome eliminated K-Rta transactivation and DNA binding.
Later studies suggested that the downstream side of the 5D element
was a binding site for K-Rta complexed with the cellular pro-
tein Recombination Signal Binding Protein (RBP)-Jk (Figure 2),
which co-puriﬁed from Sf9 cells (see next paragraph). Truncations
of K-Rta, expressed and fully puriﬁed from E. coli, demonstrated
that K-Rta bound directly to the 5D element, and that K-Rta’s
DNA binding domain is encoded within aa 1–272 (Lukac et al.,
2001).

A two-hybrid screen identiﬁed RBP-Jk as a binding partner
for K-Rta, and provided a crucial insight into how K-Rta’s spec-
iﬁes a sub-set of promoters for transactivation (Liang et al.,
2002). RBP-Jk is a nuclear, DBP that speciﬁes Notch-responsive
promoters in the canonical model for the Notch signal trans-
duction pathway (Tanigaki and Honjo, 2010). RBP-Jk is essen-
tial for KSHV reactivation (Liang and Ganem, 2003). K-Rta
and RBP-Jk co-immunoprecipitated from reactivating PEL cells
and from cells co-transfected with expression vectors for both
proteins (Liang et al., 2002). K-Rta and RBP-Jk also interacted
in GST pull-down assays, which identiﬁed two independent
K-Rta-interacting domains in RBP-Jk, aa 1–180 and 179–360
(Liang et al., 2002). Similar experiments identiﬁed the smallest
fragment of K-Rta that interacted with RBP-Jk as aa 170–400
(Figure 1).

The signiﬁcance of RBP-Jk in K-Rta promoter speciﬁcation
was shown by transient transfection-reporter assays. K-Rta trans-
activated artiﬁcial promoters containing multimerized WT, but
not mutant, RBP-Jk binding sites, in an orientation independent
manner (Liang et al., 2002). K-Rta failed to transactivate these
promoters in transfected mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts (MEFs)
that were genetically RBP-Jk null (OT-11 cells), unless RBP-Jk was
ectopically co-expressed (Liang et al., 2002).

Similar to the right side of the Mta promoter 5D element
(Figure 2), the KSHV DBP promoter also contains a consensus
RBP-Jk site (Liang et al., 2002). However, the PAN promoter does
not contain an obvious RBP-Jk site. Rta transactivation of the
Mta and DBP promoters, but not the PAN promoter, was elim-
inated in OT-11 cells, but rescued by ectopic RBP-Jk expression.
Mutation of the RBP-Jk sites eliminated K-Rta transactivation of
the Mta and DBP promoters in cells genetically intact for RBP-Jk
(Liang et al., 2002). K-Rta and RBP-Jk formed a complex with
an RBP-Jk site in EMSA assays. Together with studies of the PAN
promoter, these data suggested that K-Rta responsive promoters
fall into two classes, differentiated by their dependence on RBP-Jk
for speciﬁcation (Liang et al., 2002).

Rta STIMULATES DNA BINDING OF RBP-Jk
While it was ﬁrmly established that K-Rta transactivation of the
Mta promoter is RBP-Jk-dependent, mutations upstream of the
RBP-Jk site in the Mta 5D promoter also reduced K-Rta trans-
activation, suggesting additional complexity in the K-Rta/RBP-
Jk/DNA model for promoter speciﬁcation (Lukac et al., 2001).
Two complementary approaches revealed that the unexplained
mutations affected Rta DNA binding (Carroll et al., 2006): (1)
analyses of constitutive activators of the Notch pathway, and (2)
comparison of DNA binding speciﬁcity of fully pure K-Rta and
RBP-Jk.

The canonical model for Notch signal transduction holds that
RBP-Jk is constitutively bound to DNA as a transcriptional repres-
sor, but provides a nucleation site for activated Notch1 (NICD1)
to activate transcription (Tanigaki and Honjo, 2010). The RBP-Jk
site in the Mta promoter (Figure 2) is a perfect match to the con-
sensus sequence (Liang et al., 2002). Therefore, it was surprising
that both NICD1 and transcriptionally active RBP-Jk (WT RBP-Jk
fused to the HSV VP16 transcriptional activation domain, called
“RBP-Jk/VP16”) failed to transactivate the native Mta promoter,
nor the dimerized Mta 5D element (Carroll et al., 2006). As a posi-
tive control, both proteins activated the dimerized RBP-Jk element
from the EBV Latency C promoter (Cp). These data suggested that
RBP-Jk did not constitutively bind to the Mta promoter in vivo, an
exception to the canonical model for Notch regulation.

Remarkably, co-expression of the K-Rta transcriptional mutant
RtaΔSTAD, which contained K-Rta’s domains for DNA binding,
RBP-Jk interaction, and oligomerization (Figure 1), dramatically
rescued the ability of RBP-Jk/VP16 to activate transcription of the
native Mta promoter and the dimerized Mta 5D element (Carroll
et al., 2006). These data suggested that RtaΔSTAD stimulated DNA
binding of RBP-Jk/VP16 in vivo. Proving that RtaΔSTAD could
similarly stimulate DNA binding of endogenous, WT RBP-Jk to
DNA, RtaΔSTAD also rescued the ability of NICD1 to activate the
native Mta promoter (Carroll et al., 2006; Palmeri et al., 2011). This
effect of RtaΔSTAD was promoter speciﬁc: although the viral TK
promoter also contains a consensus RBP-Jk site, and RBP-Jk/VP16
also failed to transactivate TK, RtaΔSTAD did not rescue RBP-
Jk/VP16 transactivation of TK (Carroll et al., 2006). RtaΔSTAD
also failed to stimulate transactivation of a Gal4 reporter by
Gal4/VP16, proving that the effect of RtaΔSTAD on RBP-Jk/VP16
requires the RBP-Jk portion of the VP16 fusion molecule (Palmeri
et al., 2011).

Clariﬁcation of the relationship between DNA binding speci-
ﬁcity of RBP-Jk and K-Rta to the Mta 5D element came from stud-
ies of truncated K-Rta (aa 1–272; Figure 1) and RBP-Jk expressed
and puriﬁed from E. coli (Carroll et al., 2006). As expected, RBP-
Jk bound speciﬁcally to its consensus element, while Rta bound
speciﬁcally to the A/T-rich sequences upstream of the RBP-Jk
site in the 5D element. Mutational analyses of 5D showed (1) a
strict correlation between RBP-Jk DNA binding and K-Rta trans-
activation, and (2) reduced, transactivation of 5D mutants that
bound to RBP-Jk but not Rta. These data conﬁrmed that RBP-Jk
DNA binding was essential for K-Rta activation of the 5D ele-
ment, and that DNA binding of Rta independently of RBP-Jk was
not sufﬁcient to activate the dimerized 5D element (Carroll et al.,
2006).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 6

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

Combinatorial DNA binding of K-Rta and RBP-Jk revealed
that ternary Rta/RBP-Jk/DNA complexes formed only on WT
and mutant 5D elements to which both proteins bound indepen-
dently (Carroll et al., 2006). Furthermore, RtaΔSTAD stimulation
of RBP-Jk/VP16 binding also required intact binding sites for
both proteins, and corresponded to maximal transactivation of
these dimerized elements by WT K-Rta. C-terminal truncation of
RtaΔSTAD to aa 414 generated a mutant of Rta that retained the
ability to bind to the 5D element, but failed to form a ternary
complex with RBP-Jk and DNA. This Rta mutant also failed to
stimulate transactivation of 5D dimers by RBP-Jk/VP16 (Figure 2;
Carroll et al., 2006). These data established that RtaΔSTAD stim-
ulation of RBP-Jk/VP16 DNA binding required DNA/protein and
protein/protein interactions of both proteins.

Proving that cognate, full-length K-Rta could also stimu-
late DNA binding of RBP-Jk, chromatin immunoprecipitations
(ChIPs) showed that RBP-Jk is virtually undetectable on the Mta,
K-bZIP, and K14 promoters during KSHV latency, but is enriched
on these promoters during reactivation in a K-Rta-dependent fash-
ion (Carroll et al., 2006). Rta also selectively stimulated RBP-Jk
binding to the cellular IL-6 and HES-1, but not CD23, promot-
ers (Carroll et al., 2006). The inability of the RBP-Jk-dependent
transactivators NICD1 and Esptein–Barr virus (EBV) nuclear anti-
gen (EBNA)-2 to reactivate KSHV from latency when expressed
ectopically in PEL cells (Liang and Ganem, 2003; Chang et al.,
2005a; Carroll et al., 2006) conﬁrmed that RBP-Jk is not bound to
essential KSHV genes during latency in the absence of K-Rta.

COMPARISON OF RBP-Jk-DEPENDENT AND INDEPENDENT
PROMOTERS
K-Rta promoter binding and transactivation were compared for
the PAN, kaposin, ORF 57, and vIL-6 genes. Nuclear run-on
assays from KS-1 PEL cells that were treated with sodium butyrate
demonstrated a hierarchy of transcription initiation rates for the
genes, in the order PAN > kaposin > ORF57 > vIL-6 (Song et al.,
2003). The hierarchy was similar to the magnitude of transactiva-
tion of the promoters of these genes in transient reporter assays
in 293T, BJAB, and PEL cells. The hierarchy was also similar in
comparative DNA binding afﬁnities of K-Rta to short promoter
elements from these genes. In particular, K-Rta’s DNA binding
afﬁnity for PAN was at least 10-fold greater than for a 30-bp Mta
element (similar to Mta 5D; Figure 2; Song et al., 2003). Notably,
the differences in DNA binding afﬁnities were greater than the
differences in transactivation.

The Mta 5D element contained signiﬁcant homology to
the promoter of the KSHV macrophage inﬂammatory protein
(vMIP)-I gene (Chang et al., 2005c). The homologous portion
of the vMIP-I promoter conferred K-Rta responsiveness on a het-
erologous promoter. Rta aa 1–490/VP16, expressed in cultured
mammalian cells, did not bind to 39 bp K-Rta responsive ele-
ments from the Mta and vMIP-I promoters, although it bound
to the PAN and kaposin elements (Chang et al., 2005c). A series
of proteins from cellular extracts, including RBP-Jk, bound to the
vMIP-I and Mta elements (Chang et al., 2005c). The K-Rta point
mutation R160A abolished DNA binding of K-Rta aa 1–490/VP16,
reduced transactivation of the short Mta and vMIP-I reporters, and
eliminated transactivation of the short PAN and kaposin reporters

(Chang et al., 2005c). A series of additional mutations in K-Rta’s
DNA binding domain had inconsistent effects on DNA binding
of Rta aa 1–490/VP16 and transactivation of the short Mta and
vMIP-I reporters. Two of the Rta DNA binding mutants, R160A
and R161A, showed reduced and delayed transactivation of the
viral transcripts from the viral genome in PEL cells (Chang et al.,
2005c). The transcription was probably dependent on WT Rta
induced from the endogenous virus (see Conclusion and Perspec-
tives). The authors concluded that DNA binding was essential for
K-Rta to transactivate the PAN and kaposin elements, but not the
Mta and vMIP-I elements (Chang et al., 2005c).

K-Rta BINDS WITH HIGH AFFINITY TO CANT REPEATS IN THE Mta
PROMOTER TO STIMULATE DNA BINDING OF RBP-Jk
A puzzling observation was that K-Rta-stimulated RBP-Jk DNA
binding to the Mta promoter (Carroll et al., 2006) yet bound with
relatively low afﬁnity to the Mta 5D DNA element (Song et al.,
2003). Studies of the K-bZIP promoter provided a hint to resolve
this conundrum. In the K-bZIP promoter, an extended repeat of
phased A/T trinucleotides were bound by K-Rta with high afﬁn-
ity, but a single unit of that repeat bound to K-Rta with only low
afﬁnity (Figure 3; Liao et al., 2003a). The Mta promoter contains
a similar A/T repeat (Liao et al., 2003a), and the 5D element con-
tains only a single A/T unit (Figure 4A, bold sequence; Palmeri
et al., 2011).

To determine the qualitative interactions of K-Rta with the
Mta promoter, the DNAse I footprint of recombinant RtaΔSTAD
was determined (Palmeri et al., 2011). WT RtaΔSTAD, but not
a DNA binding mutant, footprinted four distinct stretches of
the promoter (Figure 4A, underlined sequence). The foot print
extended over 64 bp ﬂanking the RBP-Jk binding site, within
the −136/−62 portion of the promoter. The longest contiguous
portion of the footprint protected the previously identiﬁed 5D ele-
ment (Figure 4A). Alignment of the foot printed regions revealed
a 14-nt consensus sequence, ANTGTAACANTA/T
A/TT, in which
N = any base (Figure 3; Palmeri et al., 2011). The consensus was
repeated seven times in the foot printed region, and two pairs of
two of the repeats formed palindromes (Figure 4A; Palmeri et al.,
2011). Each unit contained the core sequence “CANT,” so was
termed the “CANT repeat.” (Palmeri et al., 2011). Using saturating
K-Rta concentrations, the footprint extended farther downstream
to −21 to cover additional CANT repeats (Palmeri et al., 2011);
this downstream region has been identiﬁed as an additional Rta
responsive element (Wen et al., 2009).

FIGURE 3 | Comparison of consensus K-Rta binding sites. The indicated
K-Rta consensus sequences were derived from the listed studies. “N”
means any nucleotide.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 7

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

FIGURE 4 | Comparison of Mta and K-ZIP promoters. (A). Schematic
of the −136/−62 Mta promoter. Sequences of the top and bottom
strands of the indicated portion of the Mta promoter. Numbers indicate
positions relative to Mta transcriptional start site. Bold letters indicate
four units of the A/T3 trinucleotide repeat. Underlines indicate Rta’s
footprint from the bottom strand. Blue boxes indicate regions of highest
conservation, nt 4–14, for each unit of the CANT repeat. The green box

indicates the RBP-Jk binding site. The peach box indicates the AP-1
binding site. The yellow box indicates the K-RBP binding site. The red box
indicates the IRF-7 binding site. The position of the short, Mta 5D
element is indicated by the brackets. (B) Alignment of the top and
bottom strands of the Mta and K-bZIP promoters. Numbering and box
designations are as listed in the legend for Figure 3, above. The purple
box indicates the Oct-1 binding site.

RtaΔSTAD’s afﬁnity for Mta −136/−62 was 5.7 nM (Palmeri
et al., 2011), similar to K-Rta’s afﬁnity measured for its shorter PAN
promoter binding site (Song et al., 2003). RtaΔSTAD’s afﬁnity for
–136/–62 was approximately 35-fold greater than for the 5D ele-
ment alone (Palmeri et al., 2011), similar to the afﬁnity measured
for a short Mta element in (Song et al., 2003). RBP-Jk enhanced Rta
binding afﬁnity ﬁvefold to Mta −136/−62, and ternary Rta/RBP-
Jk/DNA complex formation on −136/−62 was more robust than
on the short 5D DNA (Palmeri et al., 2011). Therefore, classiﬁca-
tion of the Mta promoter as a high or low afﬁnity K-Rta binding
site depended on the length of DNA used as probe (Palmeri et al.,
2011).

To test the functional signiﬁcance of these data, a series of pro-
moters were generated by artiﬁcially combining CANT repeats
and RBP-Jk sites, or mutating the cognate Mta promoter to alter
the number and architecture of CANT repeats (Palmeri et al.,
2011). Each was tested for transactivation by the combination of
RtaΔSTAD and RBP-Jk/VP16. The data conﬁrmed that K-Rta’s
stimulation of RBP-Jk DNA binding required an intact RBP-
Jk binding site. However, K-Rta’s stimulation of RBP-Jk DNA
binding was proportional to the number and position of CANT
elements for K-Rta, but not RBP-Jk sites. Furthermore, the num-
ber of CANT repeats, their presence in palindromes, and their
positions relative to the RBP-Jk binding site determined the opti-
mal target for Rta stimulation of RBP-Jk DNA binding. Both CA
dinucleotides and A/T-richness of the promoter were critical for
the Rta/RBP-Jk/DNA interaction (Palmeri et al., 2011).

The minimum promoter

robust
Rta/RBP-Jk transactivation contained a single RBP-Jk site

structure required for

straddled by two pairs of palindromic CANT repeats (Palmeri
et al., 2011). DNA binding and tetramerization mutants of K-
Rta failed to stimulate RBP-Jk DNA binding (Palmeri et al.,
2011). Based on these genetic studies of K-Rta, RBP-Jk, and the
Mta promoter, a model was proposed in which K-Rta tetramers
make high afﬁnity interactions with repetitive DNA elements in
KSHV promoters (Figure 5; Palmeri et al., 2011). Tetrameriza-
tion of Rta allows it to straddle RBP-Jk and contact palindromic
pairs of CANT repeats ﬂanking RBP-Jk in the Mta promoter.
Two regions of RBP-Jk independently bind to K-Rta in solution
(Liang et al., 2002; Carroll et al., 2006) permitting Rta bound
to DNA on both sides of RBP-Jk to contact RBP-Jk simulta-
neously. A second K-Rta tetramer might bind to the upstream
CANT repeats, with or without an unidentiﬁed cellular protein, to
further stabilize K-Rta DNA binding and recruitment of RBP-Jk
to DNA (Figure 5). Since the upstream CANT repeats partially
overlap a functional binding site for the cellular protein AP-1,
and AP-1 enhances K-Rta transactivation (Wang et al., 2004a),
AP-1 might contribute to formation of the Rta/RBP-Jk/DNA
complex.

Chromatin immunoprecipitations showed that RBP-Jk DNA
binding was broadly, but selectively, stimulated across the entire
KSHV genome during reactivation (Palmeri et al., 2011). Bioin-
formatics showed that CANT and A/T repeats were located in
proximity to many RBP-Jk sites throughout the KSHV genome.
This study thus integrated high afﬁnity Rta DNA binding with
the requirement for RBP-Jk in Rta transactivation, to deﬁne
the promoter requirements for formation of transcriptionally
productive Rta/RBP-Jk/DNA complexes (Palmeri et al., 2011).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 8

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

FIGURE 5 | Model for stimulation of DNA binding of RBP-Jk by Rta.
The sequence and description of the Mta promoter are as described in the
legend for Figure 4A. Tetramerization of Rta allows it to straddle RBP-Jk
and contact the palindromic CANT repeat units on both sides of RBP-Jk. A

second K-Rta tetramer may bind to an unidentiﬁed protein (“X”) and
contact the CANT repeats in the upstream side of the promoter. The two
Rta tetramers might contact each other to stabilize the holo-protein/DNA
complex.

The PAN and Mta promoter models for Rta DNA binding
therefore suggest dramatic differences in mechanisms for forming
productive Rta/DNA transcription complexes. The PAN promoter
contains a short, high afﬁnity K-Rta binding site from which
Rta activates transcription independently of RBP-Jk (Liang et al.,
2002; Song et al., 2003). The Mta promoter contains multiple Rta
CANT binding sites, each of which is an independent, low afﬁnity
binding site, but which act in concert as a high avidity, extended
element that bind K-Rta multimers simultaneously, and together
with RBP-Jk (Figure 5; Palmeri et al., 2011).

RBP-Jk AND OCTAMER-1 PARTICIPATE IN K-Rta SPECIFICATION OF THE
K-bZIP PROMOTER
Although CANT repeats are found throughout the KSHV genome
(Palmeri et al., 2011), their signiﬁcance for Rta transactivation has
only been formally investigated for the Mta and K-bZIP promot-
ers (see Mta, above). The core sequences of two of the Mta CANT
repeats are homologous to the TATA proximal K-bZIP promoter
(Figure 4B; Lukac et al., 2001). These K-bZIP repeats also bound to
recombinant K-Rta puriﬁed from E. coli. Mutation of the repeats in
the full-length K-bZIP promoter reduced K-Rta-mediated trans-
activation by greater than 80% (Lukac et al., 2001; Carroll et al.,
2007).

In the K-bZIP promoter, the CANT repeats overlap an RBP-Jk
binding site and a sequence that is well conserved with binding
sites for the cellular Octamer (Oct) transcription factors that are
found in the immediate early promoters of herpes simplex virus

type 1 (HSV-1; Figure 4B; Carroll et al., 2007). At least seven pro-
tein complexes from infected PEL cells bound to a 26-bp DNA
from the K-bZIP CANT repeats (Carroll et al., 2007). Mutation of
the K-bZIP sequence eliminated binding of one cellular complex.
That complex was super shifted by an Oct-1 speciﬁc antibody and
was increased following TPA addition to PEL cells. Together, these
data suggested that Oct-1 binds to the K-bZIP promoter in a man-
ner that corresponds to viral reactivation and Rta transactivation
(Carroll et al., 2007).

Recombinant K-Rta and Oct-1 bound to the WT but not
mutant promoter, and Oct-1 and Rta were speciﬁcally ChIP’d on
the K-bZIP promoter in reactivating cells (Carroll et al., 2007).
Their binding sites overlap (Figure 4B). Recombinant Oct-1
enhanced Rta DNA binding to the promoter, and co-expression
of Oct-1 enhanced Rta-mediated transactivation of the wild type
but not the mutant K-bZIP promoter.

Octamer-1 and WT Rta proteins bound to each other directly
in vitro (Carroll et al., 2007). aa 134–150 of Rta, within its DNA
binding domain, contains a sub-domain homologous to the Oct-
interacting domains (OIDs) of the Yeast protein MATα2 and
the HSV-1 virion protein 16 (Figure 1). A series of single point
mutations of Rta’s OID had individual, negative effects on either
DNA or Oct-1 binding, but none completely eliminated trans-
activation of K-bZIP and viral reactivation (Carroll et al., 2007).
However, combining 3 of these point mutations, or insertion of
a 4 aa peptide, ablated Rta DNA and Oct-1 binding, transactiva-
tion of the K-bZIP promoter and viral reactivation. None of the

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 9

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

mutations inhibited Rta’s interaction with RBP-Jk (Carroll et al.,
2007).

A second Oct-1 binding site was identiﬁed upstream of the
CANT repeats (Carroll et al., 2007). In transfections of B cells,
mutation of both Oct sites ablated Rta-mediated transactivation
(Carroll et al., 2007). However, in transfections of WT and mutant
MEFs, Oct-1 deletion only reduced Rta transactivation of K-
bZIP by 50%, while RBP-Jk deletion eliminated transactivation.
These data suggested that the Rta/Oct-1 interaction is essential for
optimal KSHV reactivation, and the requirement for Oct-1 in Rta-
mediated transactivation was stricter in B cells than MEFs (Carroll
et al., 2007). Oct-1 is also involved in K-Rta transactivation of the
K-Rta and K9 promoters (Sakakibara et al., 2001; Ueda et al., 2002;
Harrison and Whitehouse, 2008).

K-Rta DNA BINDING SCREENS
Two genome-wide screens were performed using distinct strate-
gies to identify K-Rta DNA binding sequences. In one strategy,
FLAG-tagged K-Rta aa 1–390 was stably expressed in PEL cells,
and chromatin was ChIP’d with anti-FLAG antibody 6 h after
adding TPA to the cells (Chen et al., 2009). ChIP’d sequences
were detected by a KSHV genomic tiling array. Nineteen viral loci
scored above background, and were compared to previously pub-
lished Rta binding sites to derive a consensus. The consensus con-
tained two imperfect inverted tandem repeats with the sequence
TTCCAGGAT(N)0–16TTCCTGGGA (Figure 3). The study iden-
tiﬁed a new Rta responsive element within the ﬁrst intron of the
K15 P gene.

In the other strategy, RtaΔSTAD generated in E. coli was incu-
bated with sheared KSHV genomic DNA, and bound DNA was
enriched by serial repetition of PCR ampliﬁcation and incubation
with RtaΔSTAD (Ziegelbauer et al., 2006). Bound sequences were
detected using a KSHV genomic microarray. Eighteen viral loci
scored above background. The highest scoring sequence was in the
gB promoter, which the authors conﬁrmed was strongly activated
by K-Rta. The authors aligned gB with other known transcrip-
tional targets of Rta and identiﬁed a consensus with the sequence
C/TTTT (Figure 3). Notably, the core of this consensus
CC/TCA/C
is a CANT element (Figure 3).

OTHER MECHANISMS FOR K-Rta PROMOTER SPECIFICATION
WT K-Rta, but not a DNA binding mutant, induces the expression
of IFN-stimulated genes (Zhang et al., 2005). K-Rta’s binding sites
are similar to interferon stimulated response elements (ISREs),
and K-Rta activates the K14-ORF 74 promoter through an ISRE-
like element. K-Rta’s DNA binding domain is partly homologous
to that of cellular interferon regulatory factor (IRF) proteins, and
mutations in conserved aas inhibit K-Rta DNA binding (Zhang
et al., 2005). K-Rta also binds to DNAs containing sites matching
the A/T trinucleotide consensus (Liao et al., 2003a; Figure 3) to
activate transcription of the KSHV K1 promoter (Bowser et al.,
2006).

K-Rta interacts with the cellular protein C/EBPα to regulate
transactivation of various KSHV promoters (Wang et al., 2003a,b).
In transient transfections, C/EBPα and Rta cooperate to activate
transcription of the K-bZIP, Mta, Rta, and PAN promoters. All of
these promoters contain at least one C/EBPα binding site required

for contributing to Rta-mediated transactivation. However, since
the consensus binding site for C/EBPα (the CAAT box Osada
et al., 1996) matches the core of the K-Rta binding CANT repeats
(Palmeri et al., 2011; Figure 3), CAAT box mutations also have
the potential to disrupt binding of K-Rta. K-Rta binds directly to
C/EBPα in vitro and in vivo, and deletion of aa 151–167 of K-Rta
inhibits (1) the interaction of K-Rta with C/EBPα or PAN DNA
(Figures 1), (2) transactivation of the PAN promoter by Rta alone,
and (3) cooperative transactivation of the K-bZIP or PAN promot-
ers by Rta with C/EBPα (Wang et al., 2003a,b) ChIPs demonstrated
that C/EBPα and Rta bound to the Rta, PAN, and Mta promoters
in increasing amounts at 8 and 24 h after TPA addition to PEL
cells, but not in un-treated cells (Wang et al., 2003b). Immunode-
pletion of C/EBPα prior to Rta ChIP suggested that it participated
in binding of Rta to the K-bZIP promoter. K-Rta may also bind to
the ori-Lyts through C/EBPα sites (Wang et al., 2006; Kato-Noah
et al., 2007).

K-Rta also cooperates with AP-1 constituents cJun and cFos to
activate transcription (Wang et al., 2004a). Rta binds to cJun and
cFos in vivo and in vitro, and the three proteins cooperatively trans-
activate the K-bZIP, Mta, and Rta promoters in uninfected cells.
cJun ChIPs those promoters in TPA-treated, but not un-treated,
BCBL-1 cells.

K-Rta also transactivates STAT-driven reporter genes by stimu-
lating STAT3 dimerization and nuclear localization (Gwack et al.,
2002; Figure 1).

K-Rta HAS THE POTENTIAL TO ACTIVATE KSHV GENE
EXPRESSION BROADLY DURING INFECTION
Transcriptomic analyses indicated that expressing Rta ectopically
in PEL cells induced a coordinated cascade of KSHV gene expres-
sion (Nakamura et al., 2003; Damania et al., 2004). Transient
expression of Rta induced all ORFs except the latency genes
(Damania et al., 2004), while uniform expression of K-Rta under
the control of doxycycline (dox) induced every viral ORF within
48 h after dox addition (Nakamura et al., 2003). In the latter study,
the productive transcriptional cascade induced by dox was more
rapid and robust than that induced by TPA treatment, suggesting
TPA is a relatively inefﬁcient reactivation signal. Most of the viral
homologs of cell growth regulatory genes were expressed as DE
transcripts, and infectious viral progeny were produced.

K-Rta activates many KSHV promoters

in an RBP-Jk-
dependent manner (Liang et al., 2002; Liang and Ganem, 2004;
Chang et al., 2005b, 2010; Lan et al., 2005a; Carroll et al., 2006,
2007; Wang and Yuan, 2006; Ziegelbauer et al., 2006; Liu et al., 2008;
Persson and Wilson, 2010; Wang et al., 2010). At least 260 putative
binding sites for K-Rta’s cellular binding partner RBP-Jk were iden-
tiﬁed in silico in the KSHV genome (Persson and Wilson, 2010 and
Gonzalez-Lopez and Lukac, unpublished). Three genomic regions
with clustered sites were identiﬁed as new RBP-Jk-dependent
transactivation targets of K-Rta (Persson and Wilson, 2010).
Among the putative RBP-Jk sites, the RBP-Jk protein demonstrated
a binding preference, and K-Rta demonstrated a transactivation
preference. A signature was derived for 17 conﬁrmed RBP-Jk bind-
ing sites, which added a cytosine residue at position upstream
of the canonical GTGGGAA core sequence (Persson and Wilson,
2010). Further work is needed to determine which of the putative

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 10

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

RBP-Jk sites are co-regulated by K-Rta DNA binding. The obser-
vation that the RBP-Jk sites are scattered widely across the unique
portion of the genome suggests that K-Rta has the potential to
activate transcription of every KSHV ORF during reactivation.

A comprehensive strategy to identify all of K-Rta’s transcrip-
tional targets compared 83 putative KSHV promoters for K-Rta
transactivation in uninfected 293 cells, with ChIP of dox-inducible
Rta from infected PEL cells (Ellison et al., 2009). Rta transactivated
34 of the promoters greater than 10-fold, including many previ-
ously identiﬁed targets of K-Rta. At 12 h following dox induction,
K-Rta was signiﬁcantly ChIP’d on 22 promoters (Ellison et al.,
2009). Fourteen of the promoters corresponded to those identi-
ﬁed as targets in 293 cells. Although there was little correspon-
dence between magnitude of transactivation and magnitude of
ChIP enrichment, there were cell-speciﬁc differences in speciﬁcity
and magnitude of transactivation (Ellison et al., 2009). A sub-
set of promoters were tested at later time points following K-Rta
induction, which indicated that K-Rta associated with increasingly
greater numbers of promoters as the infection progressed (Ellison
et al., 2009). These data suggest that K-Rta has the potential to acti-
vate at least half of putative KSHV promoters during reactivation.

DIRECT K-Rta TRANSACTIVATION IS LIMITED IN INFECTED
CELLS
It is well established that K-Rta is the only viral protein necessary
and sufﬁcient to initiate the complete KSHV productive cycle. The
foundation of this process is the ordered expression of viral genes,
with transcriptional initiation of speciﬁc genes one of the earliest
regulated steps. It was clear that the gene-speciﬁc transcriptional
cascade could be classiﬁed kinetically from the earliest detection of
Rta to the replication-dependent expression of the true late genes.
It was also clear that Rta had the potential to activate transcription
of many, if not most, of the viral genes. However, it was not clear
which viral genes Rta directly transactivated during reactivation
in infected cells, and which depended on prior expression of Rta’s
targets.

To answer this question, a modiﬁed allele of Rta was engineered
that was fully functional, but could be conditionally activated in
the presence of protein synthesis inhibitors to eliminate any other
protein expression (Bu et al., 2008). The strategy relied upon
manipulation of Rta’s nuclear/cytoplasmic localization by fusion
to the hormone-binding domain of the murine estrogen receptor
gene (ER), an approach used successfully for many other transcrip-
tion factors. In this approach, nuclear transcription factors are
constitutively localized to the cytoplasm by fusion to the ER, but
re-localize to the nucleus in the presence of 4-hydroxytamoxifen
(OHT).

However, fusion of the WT K-Rta protein to ER failed to local-
ize the protein to the cytoplasm, suggesting that Rta’s cognate NLS
was dominant (Bu et al., 2008). Sequence analysis identiﬁed two
putative nuclear localization signals in K-Rta, between aa 6–12
(NLS1) and 516–530 (NLS2; Figure 1). NLS1 regulated nuclear
localization in one publication (Chen et al., 2000), but deletion of
NLS1 had no effect on Rta-mediated function in CV-1, BL-41, and
PEL cells (Bu et al., 2008). Instead, deletion of aa 516–530 (NLS2)
eliminated both K-Rta-mediated transactivation and reactivation
(Bu et al., 2008). Deletion of NLS2 re-localized full-length K-Rta to

the cytoplasm, and fusion of NLS2 to GFP re-localized GFP to the
nucleus. NLS2 was thus a bona ﬁde nuclear localization signal for
K-Rta (Bu et al., 2008; Figure 1). WT K-Rta and each NLS mutant
were tested as independent fusions to ER to determine sub-cellular
localization and transactivation of Mta and PAN reporter plas-
mids. In this experiment, K-Rta with both putative NLSs deleted
(RtaΔNLS1,2-ER) was fully regulatable by addition or subtraction
of OHT to growth media of transfected cells (Bu et al., 2008).

The effect of the regulatable K-Rta allele on KSHV was tested
using Vero cells infected with the recombinant virus rKSHV.219.
This virus constitutively expresses GFP in all infected cells, and
conditionally expresses RFP from a second copy of the PAN pro-
moter as a reporter for viral reactivation (Vieira and O’Hearn,
2004). The RtaΔNLS1,2-ER fusion protein demonstrated OHT-
dependent stimulation of the complete viral reactivation cycle, as
determined by expression of viral RNAs and proteins, RFP induc-
tion, and production of infectious virus in the cell supernatant
(Bu et al., 2008).

To determine which viral genes were transactivated by Rta in
the absence of any other protein expression, RtaΔNLS1,2-ER was
expressed in Vero-rKSHV.219 cells for 3 h prior to addition of
the protein synthesis inhibitor hygromycin to the cells (Bu et al.,
2008). Shut-off of protein synthesis was conﬁrmed by lack of
endogenous RFP and tubulin expression, and lack of luciferase and
beta-galactosidase expression from ectopic reporter plasmids. Fif-
teen hours following hygromycin addition, OHT was added to half
of the cultures. Total RNA was harvested from cells, and analyzed
using a printed oligonucleotide microarray containing detectors
for the entire KSHV transcriptome. Only eight genes were signiﬁ-
cantly induced by nuclear re-localized K-Rta in the absence of de
novo protein synthesis: PAN, Mta, ORF 56, vIL-6, ORF 37, K14,
K9, and ORF 52 (Bu et al., 2008).

This small number of direct K-Rta targets in infected cells is
remarkable considering that the KSHV genome contains at least
260 putative RBP-Jk binding sites, and Rta activates or binds to
approximately half of the KSHV promoters in transiently trans-
fected, uninfected cells. These data suggest that additional viral
and cellular protein expression is required for the lytic cycle to
progress beyond these eight direct transcriptional targets of Rta.
The data also support a model in which KSHV reactivation is con-
trolled not only by induction of K-Rta transcription, but also by
regulation of K-Rta protein function in a manner that requires
on-going translation. In this scenario, K-Rta expression is not suf-
ﬁcient to ensure completion of the entire lytic cascade, but K-Rta’s
function is regulated to direct the progression of reactivation.

REGULATORS OF K-Rta FUNCTION
MTA COOPERATES WITH Rta AS A COMMITMENT FACTOR FOR
REACTIVATION
KSHV Mta was identiﬁed as one of eight direct transcriptional
targets of K-Rta during KSHV reactivation (Bu et al., 2008). Mta’s
promoter has served as a model for understanding K-Rta’s spec-
iﬁcation of transactivation (see “RBP-Jk-dependent promoters,”
above; Figure 4A). Genetic studies demonstrated that Mta is
required for productive viral reactivation, especially for optimal
expression of DNA replication factors (Han and Swaminathan,
2006; Majerciak et al., 2007). Mta was unable to reactivate KSHV

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 11

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

from latency when ectopically expressed in PEL cells, but syn-
ergized with K-Rta to stimulate reactivation (Lukac et al., 1998;
Palmeri et al., 2007). Synergy with K-Rta was detected by expres-
sion of the PAN RNA from the endogenous viral genome in PEL
cells, and release of mature virus to the cell medium (Palmeri et al.,
2007).

Mta is encoded by KSHV ORF 57, and is homologous to reg-
ulators of gene expression in other herpesviruses. In KSHV, ORF
57 is one of the ﬁrst genes transcribed during reactivation, fol-
lowing transcription of K-Rta and other IE genes (Lukac et al.,
1999). The Mta protein localizes to the nuclei of cells transfected
with an ORF 57 expression vector (Kirshner et al., 2000; Majerciak
et al., 2006b). The major monocistronic transcript that encodes
ORF 57 is 1.4 kb and contains a single, small 5
intron (Kirsh-
ner et al., 2000). Mta is expressed as a 49-kDa protein within 1 h
of TPA treatment of PEL cells, following K-Rta protein expres-
sion (Palmeri et al., 2007). Up until 24 h post-TPA, total K-Rta
and Mta proteins increased in abundance, and the percentages of
cells expressing either Mta or Rta also increased (Palmeri et al.,
2007). From 24 to 72 h post-TPA treatment, the percentage of K-
Rta expressing cells continued to increase linearly to 20%, while
the percentage of Mta-expressing cells plateaued at 10–12%. Mta
expression thus marked a population of cells that diverged from
K-Rta positive cells as reactivation progressed (Palmeri et al.,
2007).

(cid:2)

To determine the relationship between K-Rta and Mta expres-
sion, and complete viral reactivation, the percentages of cells
co-expressing either K-Rta or Mta, together with the true late
protein K8.1, were measured (Palmeri et al., 2007). At all times
post-TPA addition, the proportion of Mta positive cells that also
expressed K8.1 exceeded that of K-Rta positive cells that expressed
K8.1. Beginning at 24 h post-TPA, the proportion of Mta pos-
itive cells that also expressed K8.1 increased and continued for
the duration of the experiment, while the percent of K-Rta pos-
itive cells that expressed K8.1 decreased during that time. At
72 h post-TPA, the latest time point tested, 80% of Mta positive
cells also expressed K8.1, while only 20% of K-Rta positive cells
expressed K8.1 These data showed that although K-Rta was nec-
essary and sufﬁcient to initiate KSHV reactivation, expression of
Mta predicted successful progression of the productive cycle to the
late stage (Palmeri et al., 2007). The expression of Mta therefore
seemed to be required to commit a reactivating virus to the entire
productive cascade.

KSHV Mta has multiple, pleiotropic effects on gene expression.
Mta increased the steady-state abundances of the transcripts for
ORF 59/58 and PAN, but not ORF 74/vGPCR or K5, when the
transcripts were expressed from the CMV promoter in CV-1 cells
(Kirshner et al., 2000). However, Mta showed inconsistent and
<2-fold effects on ﬁreﬂy luciferase expressed under control of the
kaposin, DNA polymerase, PAN, and TK promoters, in CV-1 cells
(Kirshner et al., 2000). These data suggested a post-transcriptional
role for Mta in transactivating gene expression.

Despite Mta’s inability to independently transactivate KSHV
promoters, Mta dramatically synergized with K-Rta in a promoter
speciﬁc fashion (Kirshner et al., 2000; Palmeri et al., 2007). These
effects of expressing K-Rta and Mta alone and together were simi-
lar to their effects on KSHV reactivation. Mta strongly synergized

with K-Rta transactivation of the PAN promoter, and cooperated
to a lesser amount for the ori-Lyt (L), Kaposin, ORF 57, and TK
promoters (Kirshner et al., 2000; Palmeri et al., 2007). The effect
on the PAN promoter was 80- to 243-fold over K-Rta transactiva-
tion alone. However, K-Rta/Mta did not synergize on the K-bZIP
and ORF 50 promoters (Kirshner et al., 2000; Palmeri et al., 2007).
K-Rta/Mta synergy required K-Rta transactivation, since synergy
was eliminated by (1) mutation of the K-Rta binding site in the
PAN promoter, and (2) co-expression of the K-Rta dominant nega-
tive mutant RtaΔSTAD (Kirshner et al., 2000). K-Rta/Mta synergy
was reduced but not eliminated when an intron was added to the
luciferase transcript in the PAN reporter plasmid (Kirshner et al.,
2000). Mta did not increase the amount of K-Rta mRNA and
protein levels in co-transfected cells (Kirshner et al., 2000). These
data suggested that Mta has a K-Rta-dependent, promoter speciﬁc
effect on transactivation in CV-1 cells, and the promoter speciﬁc
effect of Mta is further inﬂuenced by the structure of the resulting
transcript.

Mta binds directly to K-Rta, and requires two regions of Rta:
the LR and aa 275–484 (Palmeri et al., 2007; Figure 1). K-Rta
DNA binding was necessary for synergy with Mta, but it was not
sufﬁcient (Palmeri et al., 2007). Although K-Rta strongly transac-
tivated the PAN promoter when truncated immediately upstream
of the K-Rta binding site, or when the K-Rta binding site was
cloned upstream of a heterologous TATA box, K-Rta/Mta synergy
was severely reduced (Palmeri et al., 2007). Therefore, the K-Rta
binding site, plus additional elements, in the PAN promoter were
necessary for robust K-Rta/Mta synergy.

Further investigation of K-Rta/Mta synergy revealed a cell-
speciﬁc, Rta-independent transcriptional activation function for
Mta (Palmeri et al., 2007). Mta strongly activated the PAN pro-
moter reporter in 293 cells and in Akata-31 cells, a sub-clone of
Akata cells that were cured of EBV infection. Mta transactivation
was promoter speciﬁc in 293 cells, and the WT and mutant pro-
moters that were activated were those on which Mta synergized
with Rta in CV-1 cells (Palmeri et al., 2007). Since Mta and K-
Rta did not synergize in 293 cells, and Mta transactivation was
independent of basal promoter activity, the data suggested that
293 cells endogenously mimic a K-Rta function required for Mta
synergy in CV-1 cells.

Multiple experiments support a direct transcriptional role for
Mta in transactivation. Mta transactivated the PAN promoter in
nuclear run-on transcription assays, demonstrating that it is a bona
ﬁde transcriptional transactivator (Palmeri et al., 2007). Mta also
activated the ORF 50 promoter in cooperation with Rta (Malik
et al., 2004a). Mta and K-Rta ChIP’d the K-Rta and PAN pro-
moters in KSHV infected cells (Malik et al., 2004a; Palmeri et al.,
2007).

However, two observations supported an additional post-
transcriptional role for Mta in synergy with K-Rta. The magnitude
of Mta transactivation in the nuclear run-on experiments was con-
siderably lower than in whole cell reporter assays, and Mta trans-
activation in the presence of actinomycin D suggested that Mta
also stabilized reporter messages (Palmeri et al., 2007). Indeed, the
Mta ORF includes protein domains with putative transcriptional
and post-transcriptional functions, and Mta binds to proteins that
regulate gene expression at various points (Malik et al., 2004a,b;

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 12

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

Nishimura et al., 2004; Majerciak et al., 2006b, 2008, 2011; Boyne
et al., 2010a; Jackson et al., 2011).

In fact, an expanding literature demonstrates multiple post-
transcriptional roles for Mta. Mta enhances the accumulation of
both viral (Kirshner et al., 2000; Han and Swaminathan, 2006;
Majerciak et al., 2006a,c, 2008) and cellular (Gupta et al., 2000)
RNAs in a gene-speciﬁc manner. Mta binds directly to RNAs in a
sequence speciﬁc fashion to stabilize them or to promote escape
from RNA silencing (Majerciak et al., 2006b; Nekorchuk et al.,
2007; Sahin et al., 2010; Kang et al., 2011b; Massimelli et al., 2011;
Sei and Conrad, 2011), enhances RNA splicing (Majerciak et al.,
2008), shuttles between nuclei in heterokaryon assays (Bello et al.,
1999), and promotes the nuclear export of un-spliced RNAs (Malik
et al., 2004b; Boyne et al., 2008; Jackson et al., 2011; Majerciak et al.,
2011; Taylor et al., 2011). Mta also stimulates mRNA translation
(Nishimura et al., 2004; Boyne et al., 2010a). Details of Mta’s post-
transcriptional functions can be found in a number of excellent
literature reviews (Swaminathan, 2005; Conrad, 2009; Majerciak
and Zheng, 2009; Boyne et al., 2010b).

A model that is supported by all of the publications is that
Mta is present at viral promoters prior to or during transcrip-
tional initiation, the earliest step in biogenesis of an RNA. Mta
might subsequently associate with the nascent RNA transcript in
the nucleus, then remain associated with the transcript to regulate
it post-transcriptionally. In this model, sequence speciﬁc transac-
tivation by Mta could be governed by direct interaction with DNA
or RNA, or indirectly by interaction with K-Rta.

K-Rta AUTOREGULATES ITS FUNCTION
K-Rta encodes two independent regions that auto-regulate its
DNA binding and abundance (Chang and Miller, 2004; Chang
et al., 2008). K-Rta aa 520–535 inhibits DNA binding to the PAN
promoter in cis, and aa 590–650 destabilizes K-Rta in concert with
a domain that overlaps aa 520–535 (Figure 1). K-Rta mutants
in aa 520–535 are better DNA binders, but worse transactivators,
of PAN, Mta, and vMIP-I. Fusion of the destabilizing element
to glutathione-S-transferase (GST) destabilizes that protein, also.
Since K-Rta’s NLS2 is located at aa 516–530 (Figure 1), these func-
tions of K-Rta might be co-regulated with proper sub-cellular
localization. Further work is required to determine whether aa
590–650 are involved in K-Rta auto-ubiquitylation.

NEGATIVE REGULATORS OF Rta FUNCTION
Post-translational modiﬁcations and heterologous proteins inhibit
K-Rta. The cellular protein IRF-7 competes with K-Rta for binding
the Mta promoter to inhibit Rta-mediated transactivation (Wang
et al., 2005). The IRF-7 binding site overlaps a CANT repeat
downstream of the RBP-Jk site in the Mta promoter (Figure 4A).
The cellular NF-kB (RelA) protein inhibits K-Rta trans-
activation in 293 cells and reactivation in PELs, promoter
binding by K-Rta and RBP-Jk, and K-Rta binding to RBP-
Jk (Izumiya et al., 2009). RelA repression was promoter spe-
ciﬁc; it did not affect K-Rta transactivation of the Ori-RNA
or Kaposin promoters. RelA bound directly to RBP-Jk. Multi-
ple NF-kB family proteins inhibited Rta transactivation in 293
cells (Brown et al., 2003; Izumiya et al., 2009). The NF-kB
inhibitor Bay11–7082 induced productive cycle gene expression

in latently infected PEL cells, suggesting that high NF-kB levels
help maintain latency (Brown et al., 2003). RelA also inhibited
K-Rta transactivation of the human IL-6 promoter (Roan et al.,
2002).

The cellular protein Trasducin-like enhancer of split (TLE)
2 binds directly to K-Rta aa 170–246 (Figure 1), and competes
with K-Rta binding to RBP-Jk (He et al., 2010). TLE2 down-
regulates K-Rta transactivation of the K-Rta, PAN, K-bZIP, Mta,
and ORF 59 promoters, and reduces K-Rta-mediated reactivation.
Knockdown of TLE2 enhances KSHV reactivation. K-Rta/TLE2
complexes bind to the PAN, K-bZIP, and ORF 59 promoters,
and TLE2 antibody ChIPs the PAN and Mta promoters during
reactivation.

K-Rta’s promoter association and stimulation of reactivation
in PEL cells can be decreased by poly-ADP-ribosylation and phos-
phorylation of its serine-threonine (ST)-rich domain, mediated
by binding to the cellular proteins poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-
(PARP)-1 and human kinase from chicken (KFC; Gwack et al.,
2003; Figure 1).

DUAL POSITIVE/NEGATIVE REGULATORS OF K-Rta FUNCTION
K-Rta makes complex interactions with the KSHV IE protein
K-bZIP that are both positive and negative. In the screen of 83
putative KSHV promoters in 293 cells, K-bZIP activated 21 alone,
synergized with Rta on 19, and repressed Rta transactivation of 3
(Ellison et al., 2009). K-bZIP’s ability to repress K-Rta-mediated
activation required a direct protein-protein interaction (Figure 1),
and was not relieved by overexpressing transcriptional coactiva-
tors (Liao et al., 2003b). Three K-Rta deletions inhibited binding
to K-bZIP: aa 1–109, 110–295, and 293–503.

The cellular protein KSHV Rta binding protein (K-RBP) binds
K-Rta aa 1-272, and contains a Kruppel-associated box (KRAB)
and 12 adjacent zinc ﬁnger motifs (Wang et al., 2001b; Figure 1).
When expressed at low levels, K-RBP synergizes with K-Rta trans-
activation of the Mta, K-bZIP, vIL-6, K-Rta, and vMIP-1 promot-
ers, but at high levels, represses K-Rta transactivation of K-bZIP,
Mta, and PAN promoters (Wang et al., 2001b; Yang and Wood,
2007). K-RBP binds to DNAs that contain a GC-rich core, includ-
ing a 40-bp region of the Mta promoter that contains the RBP-Jk
site and overlaps CANT repeats. K-RBP competes with K-Rta to
bind the Mta promoter, and represses KSHV lytic reactivation
(Yang and Wood, 2007; Yang et al., 2009).

Rta AND CHROMATIN
Latency and reactivation of KSHV is associated with dynamic
chromatin remodeling (Gunther and Grundhoff, 2010; Toth et al.,
2010; Chang et al., 2011; Kang et al., 2011a). Early evidence for the
dependence of reactivation on relief of repressive chromatin came
from the observation that histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi)
reactivate KSHV from latency (Sun et al., 1996). Dominant neg-
ative RtaΔSTAD inhibited reactivation stimulated by the HDACi
sodium butyrate, suggesting that repressive chromatin controls
expression of K-Rta from the latent genome (Lukac et al., 1999).
Similar to many DBPs, chromatin structure also plays an inte-
gral role in K-Rta’s accessibility to DNA. ChIPs speciﬁc for his-
tone H3-K9 acetylation (H3acK9), a marker for active chromatin,
showed that at 12 h post-K-Rta induction, H3acK9 was ChIP’d

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 13

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

on 48 promoters (Ellison et al., 2009). There was a correlation
between the increase in active chromatin and progression of reac-
tivation, and H3acK9 was ChIP’d before, or concurrent with, ChIP
of K-Rta. The data suggested that chromatin accessibility regulated
K-Rta’s access to its transcriptional targets.

The cellular protein Kruppel-associated box domain-associated
protein-1 (KAP-1) regulates formation of heterochromatin, and
was found associated with most KSHV productive cycle pro-
moters during latency (Chang et al., 2009). During reactivation,
KAP-1 dissociated from promoters, concomitant with K-Rta DNA
binding. KAP-1 knockdown induced reactivation (Chang et al.,
2009).

The cellular protein high mobility group protein (HMG) B1
binds and bends DNA, and enhances K-Rta DNA binding. The
effect of HMGB1 is greater for low afﬁnity K-Rta binding sites
(Song et al., 2004). Ectopic expression of HMGB1 enhanced K-
Rta transactivation of the PAN, kaposin, vIL-6, Mta, and K-Rta
promoters (Song et al., 2004; Harrison and Whitehouse, 2008).

Rta COUNTERACTS ITS NEGATIVE REGULATORS
K-Rta encodes a ubiquitin E3 ligase activity that regulates KSHV
reactivation by targeting transcriptional repressors of K-Rta trans-
activation (Yu et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2008). K-Rta contains a
Cys/His-Rich domain reminiscent of catalytic regions of E3 ligases
(Figure 1). K-Rta targets the cellular protein IRF-7 for poly-
ubiquitylation and degradation in a proteasome and Cys/His-
dependent manner (Yu et al., 2005). IRF-7 binds directly to K-Rta
aa 273–544 (Yu et al., 2005; Figure 1).

K-Rta similarly targets the cellular protein K-RBP for degra-
dation (Yang et al., 2008), but also requires K-Rta aa 621–641 for
this effect (Figure 1). Poly-ubiquitylation by K-Rta corresponds
with its ability to counteract transcriptional repression mediated
by K-RBP. K-Rta expression is also associated with reduction of
K-bZIP, LANA, and NF-kB p65 protein levels in 293 cells. Pro-
teasome inhibitors reduced Rta-stimulated reactivation of KSHV
in PEL cells. While Rta also autoregulates its own degradation by
self-ubiquitylation (Yu et al., 2005), the biological signiﬁcance has
not been directly tested.

CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
SUMMARY
Small DNA tumor viruses transform cells in non-productive,
dead-end infections. The large DNA tumor virus KSHV estab-
lishes latent, or non-productive infections, which are reversible
in a process called reactivation. In reactivation, KSHV genes are
expressed in kinetically distinct cascades, leading to viral DNA
replication and release of infectious virus. A single KSHV protein,
K-Rta, is necessary and sufﬁcient to initiate the productive cascade
of gene expression and the complete viral productive cycle. K-Rta is
a nuclear, gene-speciﬁc transcriptional transactivator. K-Rta spec-
iﬁes promoters for transactivation by binding DNA directly and
interacting with cellular DBPs.

Reactivation of KSHV from latency requires the cellular protein
RBP-Jk to specify many of K-Rta’s transcriptional targets. Thus,
K-Rta transactivation of KSHV promoters is either RBP-Jk inde-
pendent or RBP-Jk-dependent. K-Rta transactivates RBP-Jk inde-
pendent promoters by binding to a short, conserved, high afﬁnity

K-Rta binding site (Figure 2). K-Rta transactivates the RBP-Jk-
dependent promoter, Mta, by binding to an extended element that
contains multiple copies of a repetitive CANT DNA sequence, and
stimulating RBP-Jk DNA binding (Figure 4A). CANT repeats are
found in proximity to many RBP-Jk sites across the KSHV genome,
and K-Rta stimulates RBP-Jk DNA binding broadly, but speciﬁ-
cally, to the KSHV genome. A putative, working model based on
genetic studies proposes that K-Rta stimulates RBP-Jk DNA bind-
ing by contacting CANT DNA repeats ﬂanking an RBP-Jk site;
biophysical investigations of this model are on-going. The inability
of NICD1 and EBNA-2 to reactivate the complete KSHV produc-
tive cycle supports the existence of non-canonical regulation of
RBP-Jk in KSHV infected cells.

Although K-Rta transactivates many of the KSHV promoters
in transient transfections, and the KSHV genome contains at least
260 putative RBP-Jk binding sites, K-Rta only transactivates eight
genes in the absence of de novo protein synthesis during reactiva-
tion. These data suggest that continued progression of reactivation
is regulated after K-Rta expression.

Indeed, K-Rta appears to be a relatively inefﬁcient reactivating
switch, and can be regulated positively and negatively by many
viral and cellular factors. One positively acting, K-Rta regulating
factor is the essential KSHV protein Mta, which was identiﬁed as
one of K-Rta’s direct transcriptional targets. Mta cannot reacti-
vate KSHV alone, but synergizes with K-Rta to induce complete
reactivation. Single cell expression of Mta suggests that it is a com-
mitment factor that commits a K-Rta expressing cell to complete
reactivation. Mta has multiple, pleiotropic effects on gene expres-
sion. It is a cell and promoter speciﬁc transcriptional transactiva-
tor, and a transcript-speciﬁc post-transcriptional transactivator.
Mta synergizes with K-Rta in a promoter speciﬁc manner, then
might continue to transactivate post-transcriptionally by main-
taining association with nascent RNAs. K-Rta also autoregulates
its stability and DNA binding.

CONTROVERSIES IN Rta PROMOTER SPECIFICATION
Promoter speciﬁcation by K-Rta has been controversial. Dis-
agreements in published studies might be explained by technical
variations in the strategies used to evaluate K-Rta DNA binding.
Three examples of important technical differences might explain
the divergent views. These disagreements raise some interesting
biological questions about K-Rta.

In the ﬁrst example, many reports agree that K-Rta binds
to short segments of the Mta promoter directly (Duan et al.,
2001; Lukac et al., 2001; Song et al., 2003; Carroll et al., 2006;
Wen et al., 2009; Palmeri et al., 2011), yet other reports pro-
pose that K-Rta binds only indirectly to the Mta promoter (and
others), by “piggybacking” onto DNA-bound RBP-Jk (Zhang
et al., 1998; Sakakibara et al., 2001; Wang et al., 2003a,b, 2004a;
Liang and Ganem, 2004; Chang et al., 2005c; Wang and Yuan,
2006). A recent publication demonstrated that K-Rta binds to
a longer region of the Mta promoter then previously recog-
nized. High afﬁnity DNA binding (i.e., nM) of K-Rta requires
seven copies of a CANT DNA element repeated over 62 bp of
the Mta promoter. Conversely, K-Rta binds DNAs containing
three or fewer CANT repeats with 35-fold lower afﬁnity. The ear-
lier studies that concluded that K-Rta binds the Mta promoter

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 14

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

indirectly all used similar short DNAs that contained three or
fewer CANT repeats as K-Rta targets (Duan et al., 2001; Lukac
et al., 2001; Song et al., 2003; Carroll et al., 2006; Wen et al.,
2009). Thus, the Mta promoter is not an indirect target of K-
Rta, but rather, a high afﬁnity RBP-Jk-dependent target. Biolog-
ically, the data suggest that K-Rta’s afﬁnity will vary signiﬁcantly
for natural promoters that contain varying numbers of CANT
repeats.

In the second example, the choice of K-Rta expression system
has led to disagreements regarding K-Rta’s promoter speciﬁcity.
In vitro, K-Rta only binds to Mta promoter DNAs when made in
bacteria (Duan et al., 2001; Lukac et al., 2001; Song et al., 2003;
Carroll et al., 2006; Wen et al., 2009; Palmeri et al., 2011), but never
when made in mammalian systems (Wang et al., 2003a,b; Chang
et al., 2005c). These data suggest that mammalian modiﬁcations,
or co-purifying proteins, inhibit DNA binding of K-Rta to the Mta
promoter. Interestingly, even though K-Rta aa 1–272 made in bac-
teria is sufﬁcient to bind to the Mta promoter, its speciﬁcity seems
to be more stringent than FL K-Rta made in bacteria (Carroll et al.,
2006).

In the third example, different consensus sequences for K-
Rta DNA binding have been derived from KSHV genome-wide
screens. In one study, ChIP-on-ChIP of K-Rta aa 1–390 expressed
in BCBL-1 cells was performed 6 h after TPA induction, and
generated a 40-bp consensus binding sequence that was some-
times found in tandem repeats (Chen et al., 2009). In another
study, in vitro binding of K-Rta aa 1–530 to 200–300 nt frag-
ments of the KSHV genome generated an 8-bp consensus binding
sequence (Ziegelbauer et al., 2006). Besides deriving different K-
Rta binding sites, the studies shared only two signiﬁcant hits.
The use of different sources and lengths of K-Rta protein, and
an in vivo or in vitro approach, likely led to the different con-
clusions of the two studies. A third study screened 83 putative
KSHV promoters using ChIP of FL K-Rta expressed in BCBL-1
cells 12 h after inducing reactivation, and identiﬁed 22 signiﬁcant
promoter hits (Ellison et al., 2009). Only eight of these pro-
moters were also identiﬁed in the ChIP-on-ChIP screen (Chen
et al., 2009). However, this study demonstrated that the choice of
time point following reactivation could dramatically inﬂuence the
number of K-Rta targets identiﬁed (Ellison et al., 2009). There-
fore, it is likely that different conclusions between the two ChIP
approaches could be explained by time after stimulation of reacti-
vation, the use of different lengths of K-Rta protein, and different
antibodies.

Clearly, there is much to be learned about K-Rta promoter
speciﬁcation and how it is regulated. In fact, the potential exists
for disparity in one additional aspect of K-Rta DNA binding:
the interpretation of phenotypes of K-Rta N-terminal mutants.
The minimal K-Rta DNA binding domain maps to aa 1–272
(Lukac et al., 2001; Carroll et al., 2006), and overlaps with nine
domains attributed to other functions of K-Rta (Figure 1): homo-
oligomerization (Bu et al., 2007), RBP-Jk binding (Liang et al.,
2002), Oct-1 binding (Carroll et al., 2007), E3 Ubiquitin ligation
(Yu et al., 2005; Yang et al., 2008), inhibiting p53 (Gwack et al.,
2001), K-RBP binding and degradation (Wang et al., 2001b; Yang
et al., 2008), C/EBP binding (Wang et al., 2003a), and TLE2 bind-
ing (He et al., 2010). In fact, two publications have described

single N-terminal point mutants that affect both DNA bind-
ing and interactions with either Oct-1 or C/EBPα (Wang et al.,
2003a; Carroll et al., 2007). Many of these other N-terminal K-
Rta functions have the potential to inﬂuence K-Rta promoter
speciﬁcation. A full understanding of K-Rta promoter selectiv-
ity requires more reﬁnement of the K-Rta structure/function
map to establish whether these functions are co-regulated or
separable.

K-Rta PROMOTER SPECIFICATION AND PROGRESSION OF VIRAL
REACTIVATION
The conclusion that K-Rta is an inefﬁcient switch protein is based
on results of single cell assays. K-Rta expressing PEL cells appear
to have two fates that can be distinguished by Mta expression
(Palmeri et al., 2007). In K-Rta expressing cells that co-express
Mta, viral reactivation proceeds down the entire lytic cascade to
release mature virus (see top of Figure 6). K-Rta activates Mta
transcription, then Mta protein cooperates with K-Rta to transac-
tivate additional DE genes, driving progression of reactivation.
However, most K-Rta expressing cells do not co-express Mta,
and are observed during KSHV reactivation up to 72 h post-TPA
addition or post-Rta vector transfection (Palmeri et al., 2007; see
bottom of Figure 6). Finally, a third fate of K-Rta expressing cells
is suggested by the observation that both K-Rta and Mta are gene-
speciﬁc transactivators: K-Rta expression accompanied by a class
of DE genes that are transactivated by K-Rta in the absence of Mta
expression (see middle of Figure 6).

The other positive and negative regulators of K-Rta function
can be considered using the single cell paradigm illustrated in
Figure 6. Factors that stimulate K-Rta transactivation would drive
reactivation toward the productive pathway (upwards), while fac-
tors that inhibit or temper K-Rta function would drive reactivation
toward the non-productive pathways (downwards).

AUTOREGULATION OF K-Rta EXPRESSION
Numerous positive and negative regulatory events control K-Rta
expression, and the K-Rta dosage clearly is proportional to the
magnitude of reactivation (Sun et al., 1998). The key regulatory
event in the latent to lytic switch is initiation of K-Rta transcrip-
tion, which is not covered in detail here due to limitations of
the publication format. However, following its expression, K-Rta
auto-transactivates ORF 50 transcription in collaboration with
Mta, Oct-1, AP-1, C/EBPα, K-RBP, HMGB1, and XBP-1s (Deng
et al., 2000; Sakakibara et al., 2001; Wang et al., 2001b, 2003a,b,
2004a; Malik et al., 2004a; Wilson et al., 2007; Harrison and White-
house, 2008; Di Bartolo et al., 2009). K-Rta auto-transactivation is
inhibited by both cellular and viral factors, including TLE2, NF-
kB, Oct-2, Hey1, and LANA. (Brown et al., 2003; Lan et al., 2004,
2005a; Yada et al., 2006; Di Bartolo et al., 2009; He et al., 2010).
Oct-2 inhibits K-Rta activation of the K-Rta promoter by pre-
venting DNA binding of Oct-1 and K-Rta to the K-Rta promoter
(Di Bartolo et al., 2009). LANA binds to both K-Rta and RBP-Jk,
and competes with Rta for binding to RBP-Jk (Lan et al., 2004,
2005a), resulting in reduction of productive replication. Interest-
ingly, K-Rta activates Hey1 and LANA, the latter in an RBP-Jk-
dependent fashion (Lan et al., 2005b; Yada et al., 2006), to establish
negative-feedback loops on its expression. Therefore, expression

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 15

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

FIGURE 6 | Single cell model for progression of KSHV reactivation and
its putative inﬂuence on cellular growth. As described in text, Rta
expressing PEL cells are depicted as having three fates: complete reactivation
(top), expression of a sub-set of DE genes without complete reactivation
(middle), and completely abortive reactivation, in which K-Rta might feedback
to activate itself (bottom). Modulators of K-Rta function that were discussed

in the text are listed in the light blue boxes. Negative regulators (red text)
might favor the non-productive reactivation fates, while positive regulators
(green text) might favor the productive reactivation fate. DE oncogenes
expressed in the top or middle fates, might cooperate with latent proteins to
stimulate cell growth (red lines and text). IE, immediate early; DE, delayed
early; vDNA repl, viral DNA replication.

levels of K-Rta itself and of K-Rta’s regulators of expression and
function, work together to drive reactivation toward, or steer reac-
tivation away from, the productive pathway (Figure 6). Any of
K-Rta’s regulatory factors that inﬂuence K-Rta’s promoter speciﬁ-
cation could favor a speciﬁc path as illustrated, or a hypothetical
“sub-path.”

PROGRESSION OF VIRAL REACTIVATION AND KSHV DISEASE
Both latent and productive cycle genes are sufﬁcient to transform
cells when expressed alone, and animal models of KS demonstrate
that productive cycle genes dramatically potentiate transforma-
tion driven by latent genes (reviewed in Martin and Gutkind,
2008; Mesri et al., 2010). This combinatorial effect would be con-
sistent with the top and middle pathways of Figure 6. Most of
KSHV’s oncogenes are expressed in the DE class, suggesting that
regulation of K-Rta’s function can inﬂuence cell growth. Indeed,
tissue culture models of KSHV infection support a role for K-Rta
in contributing to growth of infected cells. In BC-1 PEL cells co-
infected by KSHV and EBV, KSHV reactivation induced expression
of the EBV oncogene latent membrane protein (LMP)-1 (Spadav-
ecchia et al., 2010). RtaΔSTAD, but not the non-functional mutant
RtaΔSTADΔLR, reduced growth of BC-1 cells within 24 h after
transfection. As a control, RtaΔSTAD had no effect on growth of

uninfected BL-41 cells, proving that its growth suppressing effect
required cells to be infected by EBV and KSHV.

Since BC-1 cells were not uniformly transfected by the
RtaΔSTAD expression vector, the data suggested that the BC-
1 cell population spontaneously expressed endogenous Rta in a
non-synchronous and unsustained manner, which contributed to
growth of BC-1 cells. In turn, LMP-1 is known to inhibit K-Rta
expression and reactivation (Xu et al., 2007). Together, the data
suggested a model in which spontaneously expressed Rta activated
LMP-1, and LMP-1 provided a negative-feedback loop to promote
a cellular environment in which Rta indirectly contributes to PEL
growth without productively reactivating KSHV and lysing the
infected cell.

In this system, K-Rta activated LMP-1 in an RBP-Jk-dependent
manner, as if it was a KSHV DE gene (Spadavecchia et al., 2010).
Although the role of KSHV oncogenes in RtaΔSTAD’s growth
effect in BC-1 cells has not been examined, it is reasonable to pre-
dict a similar contribution of RtaΔSTAD to the growth of singly
infected, KSHV+ PEL cells. PEL cells characteristically display
spontaneous reactivation in a small percentage of cells. Non-
uniform expression of RtaΔSTAD in PEL cells inhibits sponta-
neous KSHV reactivation (Lukac et al., 1999). K-Rta transactivates
many of the KSHV productive cycle, cellular survival and growth

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 16

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

genes. In fact, three of these genes were identiﬁed as direct tran-
scriptional targets of K-Rta: vIL-6, vIRF1, and K14 (Bu et al., 2008).
K14 is co-transcribed with ORF 74, the viral G-protein coupled
receptor (vGPCR; Kirshner et al., 1999). vGPCR negatively regu-
lates Rta expression (Cannon et al., 2006) in a negative-feedback
loop, similar to the effect of LMP-1 in co-infected cells.

The plethora of regulators of K-Rta function thus have the
potential to inﬂuence cellular growth by modulating the progres-
sion of reactivation (Figure 6). In the examples of LMP-1 and
vGPCR, the oncogenes downstream of K-Rta are themselves the
negative regulators of K-Rta expression (i.e., the center pathway

in Figure 6). However, the models proposed in Figure 6 do not
require the K-Rta regulators to be the actual oncogenes. Further-
more, expression of productive cycle oncogenes in the absence
of K-Rta could also satisfy a model for unproductive reactivation
(Chatterjee et al., 2002; Chang et al., 2005a). The applicability of
these models to KSHV infection of endothelial cells is tempting
but untested.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are supported by the NIH (R01AI078138 and
T32CA134268).

REFERENCES
An, F. Q., Folarin, H. M., Compitello,
N., Roth, J., Gerson, S. L., Mccrae,
K. R., Fakhari, F. D., Dittmer, D. P.,
and Renne, R. (2006). Long-term-
telomerase-immortalized
infected
endothelial
for
sarcoma-associated her-
Kaposi’s
pesvirus latency in vitro and in vivo.
J. Virol. 80, 4833–4846.

a model

cells:

AuCoin, D. P., Colletti, K. S., Cei, S.
A., Papouskova, I., Tarrant, M., and
Pari, G. S. (2004). Ampliﬁcation
of the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus/human herpesvirus 8
lytic origin of DNA replication is
dependent upon a cis-acting AT-rich
region and an ORF50 response ele-
ment and the trans-acting factors
ORF50 (K-Rta) and K8 (K-bZIP).
Virology 318, 542–555.

Bechtel, J. T., Liang, Y., Hvidding, J.,
and Ganem, D. (2003). Host range
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus in cultured cells. J. Virol. 77,
6474–6481.

Bello, L., Davison, A., Glenn, M., White-
house, A., Rethmeier, N., Schulz,
T., and Clements, J. (1999). The
human herpesvirus-8 ORF57 gene
and its properties. J. Gen. Virol. 80,
3207–3215.

J.,

and Steitz,

Borah, S., Darricarrere, N., Darnell,
J.
A., Myoung,
A. (2011). A viral nuclear non-
coding RNA binds
re-localized
poly(A) binding protein and is
required for late KSHV gene expres-
sion. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002300.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002300

Strauchen,

Boshoff, C., Gao, S.-J., Healy, L.,
Matthews, T., Thomas, A., Coignet,
L., Warnke, R.,
J.,
Matutes, E., Kamel, O., Moore,
P., Weiss, R.,
and Chang, Y.
a KSHV+
(1998). Establishing
cell
from periph-
eral blood and characterizing its
growth in Nod/SCID mice. Blood 91,
1671–1679.

line (BCP-1)

Bowser, B. S., Morris, S., Song, M.
J., Sun, R.,
and Damania, B.
(2006). Characterization of Kaposi’s

Boyne,

sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
(KSHV) K1 promoter activation by
Rta. Virology 348, 309–327.
J. R., Colgan, K.

J., and
(2008). Recruit-
Whitehouse, A.
ment of
complete hTREX
complex is required for Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
nuclear
intron
replication.
export
PLoS
e1000194.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000194

less mRNA
and
Pathog.

virus
4,

the

(2010a). Kaposi’s

Boyne, J. R., Jackson, B. R., Taylor, A.,
Macnab, S. A., and Whitehouse,
A.
sarcoma-
associated
herpesvirus ORF57
protein interacts with PYM to
enhance
viral
intronless mRNAs. EMBO J. 29,
1851–1864.

translation

of

Boyne, J. R., Jackson, B. R., and White-
house, A. (2010b). ORF57: master
regulator of KSHV mRNA biogen-
esis. Cell Cycle 9, 2702–2703.

Brown, H. J., Song, M. J., Deng, H.,
Wu, T. T., Cheng, G., and Sun, R.
(2003). NF-kappaB inhibits gamma-
herpesvirus lytic replication. J. Virol.
77, 8532–8540.

Bu, W., Carroll, K. D., Palmeri, D.,
(2007). The
and Lukac, D. M.
sarcoma-associated her-
Kaposi’s
herpesvirus-8
pesvirus/human
switch protein
ORF50/Rta
functions as a tetramer. J. Virol. 81,
5788–5806.

lytic

Bu, W., Palmeri, D., Krishnan, R., Marin,
R., Aris,V. M., Soteropoulous, P., and
Lukac, D. M. (2008). Identiﬁcation
of direct transcriptional targets of
the KSHV Rta lytic switch protein
by conditional nuclear localization.
J. Virol. 82, 10709–10723.

Budt, M., Hristozova, T., Hille, G.,
Berger, K., and Brune, W. (2011).
Construction of a lytically replicat-
ing Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus. J. Virol. 85, 10415–10420.
Cai, X., Lu, S., Zhang, Z., Gonzalez, C.
M., Damania, B., and Cullen, B. R.
(2005). Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus expresses an array of
viral microRNAs in latently infected

cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102,
5570–5575.

Cannon, M., Cesarman, E., and Boshoff,
C.
(2006). KSHV G protein-
coupled receptor inhibits lytic gene
transcription in primary-effusion
lymphoma cells via p21-mediated
inhibition of Cdk2. Blood 107,
277–284.

Carroll, K. D., Bu, W., Palmeri, D.,
Spadavecchia, S., Lynch, S. J., Mar-
ras, S. A., Tyagi, S., and Lukac,
D. M. (2006). Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus lytic switch
protein stimulates DNA binding of
RBP-Jk/CSL to activate the Notch
pathway. J. Virol. 80, 9697–9709.

Carroll, K. D., Khadim, F., Spadavec-
chia, S., Palmeri, D., and Lukac, D.
M. (2007). Direct interactions of
KSHV/HHV-8 ORF50/Rta protein
with the cellular protein Octamer-
1 and DNA are critical for speci-
fying transactivation of a delayed-
early promoter and stimulating viral
reactivation. J. Virol. 81, 8451–8467.
Cesarman, E., Moore, P. S., Rao, P.
H.,
Inghirami, G., Knowles, D.
M., and Chang, Y. (1995). In vitro
establishment and characterization
of two acquired immunodeﬁciency
syndrome-related lymphoma cell
lines (BC-1 and BC-2) contain-
ing Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus-like
(KSHV) DNA
sequences. Blood 86, 2708–2714.

transcript
limiting-dilution

Chandriani, S., and Ganem, D. (2010).
proﬁling
Array-based
and
reverse
transcription-PCR analysis identify
additional latent genes in Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. J.
Virol. 84, 5565–5573.

Chandriani, S., Xu, Y., and Ganem,
D. (2010). The lytic transcriptome
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus reveals extensive transcrip-
tion of noncoding regions, includ-
ing regions antisense to important
genes. J. Virol. 84, 7934–7942.

Chang, H., Dittmer, D. P., Chul, S. Y.,
Hong, Y., and Jung, J. U. (2005a).
Role of Notch signal transduction

in Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus gene expression. J. Virol. 79,
14371–14382.

Chang, H., Gwack, Y., Kingston, D.,
Souvlis, J., Liang, X., Means, R.
E., Cesarman, E., Hutt-Fletcher, L.,
and Jung, J. U. (2005b). Activa-
tion of CD21 and CD23 gene
expression by Kaposi’s
sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus RTA. J. Virol.
79, 4651–4663.

Chang, P. J., Shedd, D., and Miller, G.
(2005c). Two subclasses of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus lytic
cycle promoters distinguished by
open reading frame 50 mutant pro-
teins that are deﬁcient in binding to
DNA. J. Virol. 79, 8750–8763.

Chang, P. C., Fitzgerald, L. D., Hsia, D.
A., Izumiya, Y., Wu, C. Y., Hsieh,
W. P., Lin, S. F., Campbell, M.,
Lam, K. S., Luciw, P. A., Tepper,
C. G., and Kung, H.
J. (2011).
Histone demethylase JMJD2A reg-
ulates Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus replication and is tar-
geted by a viral transcriptional fac-
tor. J. Virol. 85, 3283–3293.

Chang, P. C., Fitzgerald, L. D., Van Gee-
len, A., Izumiya, Y., Ellison, T. J.,
Wang, D. H., Ann, D. K., Luciw, P.
A., and Kung, H. J. (2009). Kruppel-
associated box domain-associated
protein-1 as a latency regulator
for Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus and its modulation by the
viral protein kinase. Cancer Res. 69,
5681–5689.

Chang, P. J., Boonsiri, J., Wang, S.
S., Chen, L. Y., and Miller, G.
(2010). Binding of RBP-Jkappa
(CSL) protein to the promoter of
the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus ORF47 (gL) gene is a crit-
ical but not sufﬁcient determinant
of transactivation by ORF50 protein.
Virology 398, 38–48.

Chang, P. J., and Miller, G. (2004).
Autoregulation of DNA binding
and protein stability of Kaposi’s
herpesvirus
sarcoma-associated
ORF50
78,
10657–10673.

J. Virol.

protein.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 17

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

Chang, P. J., Shedd, D., Gradoville,
L., Cho, M. S., Chen, L. W.,
Chang, J., and Miller, G. (2002).
Open reading frame 50 protein
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus directly activates the viral
PAN and K12 genes by binding to
related response elements. J. Virol.
76, 3168–3178.

Chang, P. J., Shedd, D., and Miller, G.
(2008). A mobile functional region
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus ORF50 protein indepen-
dently regulates DNA binding and
protein abundance.
J. Virol. 82,
9700–9716.

Chang, Y., and Moore, P. S. (2011).
Merkel cell carcinoma: a virus-
induced human cancer. Annu. Rev.
Pathol. PMID: 21942528.
[Epub
ahead of print].

Chatterjee, M., Osborne, J., Bestetti, G.,
Chang, Y., and Moore, P. S. (2002).
Viral IL-6-induced cell proliferation
and immune evasion of interferon
activity. Science 298, 1432–1435.

Chen,

J., Ueka, K., Sakakibara, S.,
Okuno, T., and Yamanishi, K. (2000).
Transcriptional regulation of
the
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus viral interferon regulatory
factor gene. J. Virol. 74, 8623–8634.
Chen, J., Ye, F., Xie, J., Kuhne, K.,
and Gao, S. J. (2009). Genome-
wide identiﬁcation of binding sites
for Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus lytic switch protein, RTA.
Virology 386, 290–302.

Conrad, N. K. (2009). Posttranscrip-
tional gene regulation in Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus.
Adv. Appl. Microbiol. 68, 241–261.

Damania, B., Jeong, J. H., Bowser, B. S.,
Dewire, S. M., Staudt, M. R., and
Dittmer, D. P. (2004). Comparison
of the Rta/Orf50 transactivator pro-
teins of gamma-2-herpesviruses. J.
Virol. 78, 5491–5499.

Deng, H., Young, A., and Sun, R. (2000).
the rta gene
Auto-activation of
of human herpesvirus-8/Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. J.
Gen. Virol. 81, 3043–3048.

Di Bartolo, D. L., Hyjek, E., Keller, S.,
Guasparri, I., Deng, H., Sun, R.,
Chadburn, A., Knowles, D. M., and
Cesarman, E. (2009). Role of defec-
tive Oct-2 and OCA-B expression
in immunoglobulin production and
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus lytic reactivation in pri-
mary effusion lymphoma. J. Virol.
83, 4308–4315.

and Carbone, A.

Drexler, H., Uphoff, C., Gaidano,
G.,
(1998).
Lymphoma
in vitro
models for the study of HHV-8+
primary effusion lymphomas (body

lines:

cell

cavity-based lymhomas). Leukemia
12, 1507–1517.

Duan, W., Wang, S., Liu, S., and
Wood, C. (2001). Characterization
of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus/human herpesvirus-8
ORF57 promoter. Arch. Virol. 146,
403–413.

Ellison, T.

J., Izumiya, Y., Izumiya,
C., Luciw, P. A., and Kung, H. J.
(2009). A comprehensive analysis
of recruitment and transactivation
potential of K-Rta and K-bZIP dur-
ing reactivation of Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus. Virology 387,
76–88.

Fakhari, F. D., and Dittmer, D. P.
(2002). Charting latency transcripts
in Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus by whole-genome real-
time quantitative PCR. J. Virol. 76,
6213–6223.

Ganem, D. (2007). “Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus,” in Fields
Virology, eds D. M. Knipe and P. M.
Howley (Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins), 2848–2888.
Gradoville, L., Gerlach, J., Grogan, E.,
Shedd, D., Nikiforow, S., Metroka,
C., and Miller, G. (2000). Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
open reading frame 50/Rta protein
activates the entire lytic cycle in the
HH-B2 primary effusion lymphoma
cell line. J. Virol. 74, 6207–6212.

Grundhoff, A., and Ganem, D. (2004).
Inefﬁcient establishment of KSHV
latency suggests an additional role
for continued lytic replication in
Kaposi
J.
Clin. Invest. 113, 124–136.

sarcoma pathogenesis.

Gunther, T.,

latent

and Grundhoff, A.
(2010). The epigenetic landscape
sarcoma-
of
associated herpesvirus
genomes.
PLoS
e1000935.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000935

Pathog.

Kaposi

6,

Gupta, A. K., Ruvolo, V., Patterson, C.,
and Swaminathan, S. (2000). The
human herpesvirus 8 homolog of
Epstein-Barr virus SM protein (KS-
SM) is a posttranscriptional activa-
tor of gene expression. J. Virol. 74,
1038–1044.

Gwack, Y., Hwang, S., Byun, H., Lim,
C., Kim, J. W., Choi, E. J., and
Choe, J. (2001). Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus open read-
ing frame 50 represses p53-induced
transcriptional activity and apopto-
sis. J. Virol. 75, 6245–6248.

Gwack, Y., Hwang, S., Lim, C., Won,
Y. S., Lee, C. H., and Choe, J.
(2002). Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus open reading frame 50
stimulates the transcriptional activ-
ity of STAT3. J. Biol. Chem. 277,
6438–6442.

Gwack, Y., Nakamura, H., Lee, S. H.,
Souvlis, J., Yustein, J. T., Gygi, S.,
Kung, H. J., and Jung, J. U. (2003).
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 and
Ste20-like kinase hKFC act as tran-
scriptional repressors for gamma-
2 herpesvirus lytic replication. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 23, 8282–8294.

Han, Z., and Swaminathan, S. (2006).
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus lytic gene ORF57 is essential
for infectious virion production. J.
Virol. 80, 5251–5260.

(KSHV) Rta

Harrison, S. M., and Whitehouse, A.
(2008). Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
and
herpesvirus
cellular HMGB1 proteins
syner-
gistically transactivate the KSHV
ORF50 promoter. FEBS Lett. 582,
3080–3084.

He, Z., Liu, Y., Liang, D., Wang, Z.,
Robertson, E. S., and Lan, K. (2010).
Cellular corepressor TLE2 inhibits
replication-and-transcription-
activator-mediated transactivation
and lytic reactivation of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. J.
Virol. 84, 2047–2062.

Izumiya, Y., Izumiya, C., Hsia, D., Elli-
son, T. J., Luciw, P. A., and Kung,
H. J. (2009). NF-kappaB serves as a
cellular sensor of Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus latency and
negatively regulates K-Rta by antag-
onizing the RBP-Jkappa coactivator.
J. Virol. 83, 4435–4446.

Jackson, B. R., Boyne, J. R., Noerenberg,
M., Taylor, A., Hautbergue, G. M.,
Walsh, M. J., Wheat, R., Blackbourn,
D. J., Wilson, S. A., and White-
house, A. (2011). An interaction
between KSHV ORF57 and UIF pro-
vides mRNA-adaptor redundancy
in herpesvirus
intronless mRNA
export. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002138.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002138

Jenner, R., Alba, M., Boshoff, C., and
Kellam, P. (2001). Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus latent and
lytic gene expression as revealed
by DNA arrays.
75,
891–902.

J. Virol.

(2011a).

Kang, H., Wiedmer, A., Yuan, Y.,
and Lieberman,
Robertson, E.,
P. M.
Coordina-
tion of KSHV latent and lytic
gene
control by CTCF-cohesin
mediated chromosome conforma-
tion. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002140.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002140

Kang,

J. G., Pripuzova, N., Majer-
S.
ciak, V., Kruhlak, M., Le,
(2011b).
Y., and Zheng, Z. M.
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus ORF57 promotes escape of
viral and human interleukin-6 from
microRNA-mediated suppression. J.
Virol. 85, 2620–2630.

Kato-Noah, T., Xu, Y., Rossetto, C.
C., Colletti, K., Papouskova,
I.,
and Pari, G. S. (2007). Overex-
pression of the kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus transactiva-
tor K-Rta can complement a K-
bZIP deletion BACmid and yields
an enhanced growth phenotype. J.
Virol. 81, 13519–13532.

Kieff, E., and Rickinson, A. (2007).
“Epstein-barr virus and its replica-
tion,” in Fields Virology, 5th Edn.
eds D. M. Knipe and P. M. How-
ley (Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins), 2603–2654.
Kirshner, J. R., Lukac, D. M., Chang,
J., and Ganem, D. (2000). Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
open reading frame 57 encodes a
posttranscriptional regulator with
multiple distinct activities. J. Virol.
74, 3586–3597.

Kirshner, J. R., Staskus, K., Haase, A.,
Lagunoff, M., and Ganem, D. (1999).
Expression of
the open reading
frame 74 (G-protein-coupled recep-
tor) gene of Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS)-
associated herpesvirus; implications
for KS pathogenesis. J. Virol. 73,
6006–6014.

Lan, K., Kuppers, D. A., and Robertson,
E. S. (2005a). Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus reactivation
regulated by
is
interaction of
latency-associated
anti-
nuclear
gen with recombination signal
sequence-binding protein Jkappa,
the major downstream effector of
the Notch signaling pathway.
J.
Virol. 79, 3468–3478.

Lan, K., Kuppers, D. A., Verma, S.
C., Sharma, N., Murakami, M., and
Robertson, E. S. (2005b). Induction
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus latency-associated nuclear
antigen by the lytic transactivator
RTA: a novel mechanism for estab-
lishment of
latency. J. Virol. 79,
7453–7465.

Lan, K., Kuppers, D. A., Verma, S. C.,
and Robertson, E. S. (2004). Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus-
encoded latency-associated nuclear
antigen inhibits lytic replication by
targeting Rta: a potential mecha-
nism for virus-mediated control of
latency. J. Virol. 78, 6585–6594.

Liang, Y., Chang, J., Lynch, S., Lukac, D.
M., and Ganem, D. (2002). The lytic
switch protein of KSHV activates
gene expression via functional inter-
action with RBP-Jk, the target of the
Notch signaling pathway. Genes Dev.
16, 1977–1989.

Liang, Y., and Ganem, D.

(2003).
Lytic but not latent infection by
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus requires host CSL protein,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 18

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

the mediator of Notch signaling.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100,
8490–8495.

(CSL)

is essential

Liang, Y., and Ganem, D. (2004). RBP-
J
for activa-
tion of the K14/vGPCR promoter
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus by the lytic switch protein
RTA. J. Virol. 78, 6818–6826.

J.,

Liao, W., Tang, Y., Kuo, Y. L., Liu,
B. Y., Xu, C.
and Giam,
C. Z. (2003a). Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus/human her-
pesvirus 8 transcriptional activator
Rta is an oligomeric DNA-binding
protein that interacts with tandem
arrays of phased A/T-trinucleotide
motifs. J. Virol. 77, 9399–9411.

of Kaposi’s

Liao, W., Tang, Y., Lin, S. F., Kung,
H. J., and Giam, C. Z. (2003b).
sarcoma-
K-bZIP
associated
herpesvirus/human
herpesvirus 8 (KSHV/HHV-8) binds
KSHV/HHV-8 Rta and represses
Rta-mediated
J.
Virol. 77, 3809–3815.

transactivation.

Liu, Y., Cao, Y., Liang, D., Gao, Y., Xia,
T., Robertson, E. S., and Lan, K.
(2008). Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus RTA activates the pro-
cessivity factor ORF59 through
interaction with RBP-Jkappa and a
cis-acting RTA responsive element.
Virology 380, 264–275.

Lu, M., Suen, J., Frias, C., Pfeiffer,
R., Tsai, M. H., Chuang, E., and
Zeichner, S. L. (2004). Dissection of
the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus gene expression program
by using the viral DNA replica-
tion inhibitor cidofovir. J. Virol. 78,
13637–13652.

Lukac, D., Garibyan, L., Kirshner,
J., Palmeri, D., and Ganem, D.
(2001). DNA binding by the Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus lytic
switch protein is necessary for tran-
scriptional activation of two viral
delayed early promoters. J. Virol. 75,
6786–6799.

Lukac, D. M., Kirshner, J. R., and
Ganem, D. (1999). Transcriptional
activation by the product of open
reading
50 of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus is
required for lytic viral reactivation
in B cells. J. Virol. 73, 9348–9361.

frame

Lukac, D. M., Renne, R., Kirshner, J.
R., and Ganem, D. (1998). Reactiva-
tion of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus infection from latency
by expression of
the ORF 50
transactivator, a homolog of the EBV
R protein. Virology 252, 304–312.

Majerciak, V., Pripuzova, N., Mccoy,
J. P., Gao, S. J., and Zheng, Z.
M. (2006a). Targeted disruption of
KSHV ORF57 in the viral genome

is detrimental for the expression of
ORF59, K8{alpha}, and K8.1 and
the production of infectious virus.
J. Virol. 81, 1062–1071.

Majerciak, V., Yamanegi, K., Nie, S.
H., and Zheng, Z. M. (2006b).
Structural and functional analyses
of Kaposi sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus ORF57 nuclear localization
signals in living cells. J. Biol. Chem.
281, 28365–28378.

Majerciak, V., Yamanegi, K., and Zheng,
Z. M. (2006c). Gene structure and
expression of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-
associated
herpesvirus ORF56,
ORF57, ORF58, and ORF59. J. Virol.
80, 11968–11981.

Majerciak, V., Pripuzova, N., Mccoy,
J. P., Gao, S. J., and Zheng, Z.
M. (2007). Targeted disruption of
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus ORF57 in the viral genome
is detrimental for the expression of
ORF59, K8alpha, and K8.1 and the
production of
infectious virus. J.
Virol. 81, 1062–1071.

J., Bear,

Majerciak, V., Uranishi, H., Kruh-
lak, M., Pilkington, G. R., Mas-
simelli, M.
J., Pavlakis,
G. N., Felber, B. K., and Zheng,
Z. M. (2011). Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus ORF57 inter-
acts with cellular RNA export cofac-
tors RBM15 and OTT3 to promote
expression of viral ORF59. J. Virol.
85, 1528–1540.

Majerciak, V., Yamanegi, K., Alle-
mand, E., Kruhlak, M., Krainer,
A. R., and Zheng, Z. M. (2008).
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus ORF57 functions as a
viral splicing factor and promotes
intron-containing
expression of
viral
lytic genes in spliceosome-
mediated RNA splicing. J. Virol. 82,
2792–2801.

Majerciak, V., and Zheng, Z. M. (2009).
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus ORF57 in viral RNA pro-
cessing. Front. Biosci. 14, 1516–1528.
Malik, P., Blackbourn, D. J., Cheng, M.
F., Hayward, G. S., and Clements, J.
B. (2004a). Functional co-operation
between the Kaposi’s
sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus ORF57 and
ORF50 regulatory proteins. J. Gen.
Virol. 85, 2155–2166.

Malik, P., Blackbourn, D.

conserved

J., and
Clements, J. B. (2004b). The evo-
Kaposi’s
lutionarily
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
ORF57
interacts with
REF protein and acts as an RNA
export factor. J. Biol. Chem. 279,
33001–33011.

protein

Martin, D., and Gutkind, J. S. (2008).
Human tumor-associated viruses
and new insights into the molecular

mechanisms of cancer. Oncogene
27(Suppl. 2), S31–S42.

Massimelli, M. J., Kang, J. G., Majerciak,
V., Le, S. Y., Liewehr, D. J., Steinberg,
S. M., and Zheng, Z. M. (2011). Sta-
bility of a long noncoding viral RNA
depends on a 9-nt core element at
(cid:2)
end to interact with viral
the RNA 5
ORF57 and cellular PABPC1. Int. J.
Biol. Sci. 7, 1145–1160.

Mesri, E. A., Cesarman, E., and Boshoff,
C. (2010). Kaposi’s sarcoma and
its associated herpesvirus. Nat. Rev.
Cancer 10, 707–719.

Moody, C. A., and Laimins, L. A. (2010).
Human papillomavirus oncopro-
teins: pathways to transformation.
Nat. Rev. Cancer 10, 550–560.

Moore, P. S., Gao, S. J., Dominguez, G.,
Cesarman, E., Lungu, O., Knowles,
D. M., Garber, R., Pellett, P. E.,
Mcgeoch, D.
J., and Chang, Y.
(1996). Primary characterization of
a herpesvirus agent associated with
Kaposi’s
J. Virol. 70,
549–558.

sarcomae.

Nakamura, H., Lu, M., Gwack, Y., Sou-
vlis, J., Zeichner, S. L., and Jung,
J. U. (2003). Global changes in
Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated virus
gene expression patterns
follow-
ing expression of a tetracycline-
inducible Rta transactivator. J. Virol.
77, 4205–4220.

Nekorchuk, M., Han, Z., Hsieh, T.
T., and Swaminathan, S. (2007).
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus ORF57 protein enhances
mRNA accumulation independently
of effects on nuclear RNA export. J.
Virol. 81, 9990–9998.

Nishimura, K., Ueda, K., Guwanan,
E., Sakakibara, S., Do, E., Osaki, E.,
Yada, K., Okuno, T., and Yamanishi,
K.
(2004). A posttranscriptional
sarcoma-
regulator of Kaposi’s
associated
herpesvirus
interacts
with RNA-binding protein PCBP1
and
expression
through the IRES. Virology 325,
364–378.

controls

gene

Osada, S., Yamamoto, H., Nishi-
hara, T., and Imagawa, M. (1996).
DNA binding speciﬁcity of
the
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
transcription factor family. J. Biol.
Chem. 271, 3891–3896.

Palmeri, D., Carroll, K. D., Gonzalez-
Lopez, O., and Lukac, D. M. (2011).
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus Rta tetramers make high-
afﬁnity interactions with repetitive
DNA elements in the Mta promoter
to stimulate DNA binding of RBP-
Jk/CSL. J. Virol. 85, 11901–11915.

Palmeri, D., Spadavecchia, S., Car-
roll, K.,
Lukac, D. M.
(2007). Promoter and cell-speciﬁc

and

transcriptional activation by the
sarcoma-associated her-
Kaposi’s
pesvirus ORF57/Mta protein.
J.
Virol. 81, 13299–13314.

Paulose-Murphy, M., Ha, N.-K., Xiang,
C., Chen, Y., Gillim, L., Yarchoan,
R., Meltzer, P., Bittner, M., Trent, J.,
and Zeichner, S. (2001). Transcrip-
tion program of Human herpesvirus
8 (Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus). J. Virol. 75, 4843–4853.

Persson, L. M., and Wilson, A. C.
(2010). Wide-scale use of Notch
signaling factor CSL/RBP-Jkappa in
RTA-mediated activation of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus lytic
genes. J. Virol. 84, 1334–1347.

J.,

Renne, R., Blackbourn, D., Whitby,
D., Levy,
and Ganem, D.
(1998). Limited transmission of
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus in cultured cells. J. Virol. 72,
5182–5188.

Renne, R., Zhong, W., Herndier, B.,
Mcgrath, M., Abbey, N., Kedes, D.,
and Ganem, D. (1996). Lytic growth
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus (human herpesvirus 8) in
culture. Nat. Med. 2, 342–346.

Rickinson, A., and Kieff, E. (2007).
“Epstein-barr virus,” in Fields Virol-
ogy, eds D. M. Knipe and P. M. How-
ley (Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins), 2656–2700.
Rimessi, P., Bonaccorsi, A., Sturzl,
M., Fabris, M., Brocca-Cofano, E.,
Caputo, A., Melucci-Vigo, G., Falchi,
M., Cafaro, A., Cassai, E., Ensoli, B.,
and Monini, P. (2001). Transcrip-
tion pattern of human herpesvirus 8
open reading frame K3 in primary
effusion lymphoma and Kaposi’s
sarcoma. J. Virol. 75, 7161–7174.

Roan, F., Inoue, N., and Offermann,
M. K. (2002). Activation of cellular
and heterologous promoters by the
human herpesvirus 8 replication and
transcription activator. Virology 301,
293–304.

Russo, J. J., Bohenzky, R. A., Chien, M.
C., Chen, J., Yan, M., Maddalena,
D., Parry, J. P., Peruzzi, D., Edel-
man, I. S., Chang, Y., and Moore,
P. S. (1996). Nucleotide sequence of
the Kaposi sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus (HHV8). Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 93, 14862–14867.

Sahin, B. B., Patel, D., and Conrad, N. K.
(2010). Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus ORF57 protein binds
and protects a nuclear noncod-
ing RNA from cellular RNA decay
pathways. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000799.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000799

Sakakibara,

S., Ueda, K., Chen,
and Yamanishi,
J., Okuno, T.,
K.
Octamer-binding
sequence is a key element for the

(2001).

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 19

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

autoregulation of Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus ORF50/Lyta
gene
75,
6894–6800.

expression.

J. Virol.

Samols, M. A., Hu, J., Skalsky, R. L.,
and Renne, R.
(2005). Cloning
and identiﬁcation of a microRNA
cluster within the latency-associated
region
sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus. J. Virol. 79,
9301–9305.

Kaposi’s

of

Sarid, R., Flore, O., Bohenzky, R.
A., Chang, Y., and Moore, P. S.
(1998). Transcription mapping of
the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus
(human herpesvirus 8)
genome in a body cavity-based lym-
phoma cell line (BC-1). J. Virol. 72,
1005–1012.

Seaman, W., Ye, D., Wang, R., Hale,
E., Weisse, M., and Quinlivan,
E. (1999). Gene expression from
the ORF50/K8 region of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus.
Virology 263, 436–449.

Sei, E., and Conrad, N. K. (2011).
Delineation of a core RNA ele-
ment required for Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus ORF57 bind-
ing and activity. Virology
419,
107–116.

Song, M., Brown, H., Wu, T.-T., and Sun,
R. (2001). Transcription activation
of polyadenylated nuclear RNA by
Rta in human herpesvirus 8/Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. J.
Virol. 75, 3129–3140.

Song, M. J., Deng, H., and Sun, R.
(2003). Comparative study of reg-
ulation of RTA-responsive genes
in Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus/human herpesvirus 8.
J.
Virol. 77, 9451–9462.

Song, M. J., Hwang, S., Wong, W.,
Round, J., Martinez-Guzman, D.,
Turpaz, Y., Liang, J., Wong, B., John-
son, R. C., Carey, M., and Sun,
R. (2004). The DNA architectural
protein HMGB1 facilitates RTA-
mediated viral gene expression in
gamma-2 herpesviruses. J. Virol. 78,
12940–12950.

Song, M. J., Li, X., Brown, H. J., and
Sun, R. (2002). Characterization of
interactions between RTA and the
promoter of polyadenylated nuclear
RNA in Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus/human herpesvirus 8. J.
Virol. 76, 5000–5013.

Spadavecchia, S., Gonzalez-Lopez, O.,
Carroll, K. D., Palmeri, D, and
Lukac, D. M. (2010). Convergence
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus reactivation with Epstein-
Barr virus
latency and cellular
growth mediated by the notch sig-
naling pathway in coinfected cells. J.
Virol. 84, 10488–10500.

Staskus, K. A., Sun, R., Miller, G.,
Racz, P., Jaslowski, A., Metroka, C.,
Brett-Smith, H., and Haase, A. T.
(1999). Cellular tropism and viral
interleukin-6 expression distinguish
human herpesvirus 8 involvement
in Kaposi’s sarcoma, primary effu-
sion lymphoma, and multicentric
Castleman’s disease.
J. Virol. 73,
4181–4187.

Staskus, K. A., Zhong, W., Gebhard,
K., Herndier, B., Wang, H., Renne,
R., Beneke, J., Pudney, J., Ander-
son, D. J., Ganem, D., and Haase,
A. T. (1997). Kaposi’s
sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus gene expres-
sion in endothelial (spindle) tumor
cells. J. Virol. 71, 715–719.

Sun, R., Lin,

S., Gradoville, L.,
and Miller, G. (1996). Polyadeny-
lated nuclear RNA encoded by
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
93, 11883–11888.

Sun, R., Lin, S. F., Gradoville, L.,Yuan,Y.,
Zhu, F., and Miller, G. (1998). A viral
gene that activates lytic cycle expres-
sion of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 95, 10866–10871.

Sun, R., Lin,

S.-F.,

Staskus, K.,
Gradoville, L., Grogan, E., Haase,
A., and Miller, G. (1999). Kinetics
of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus gene expression. J. Virol.
73, 2232–2242.

Swaminathan,

S.

(2005).

Post-
transcriptional
regulation
by gamma herpesviruses. J. Cell.
Biochem. 95, 698–711.

gene

Tanigaki, K., and Honjo, T. (2010). Two
opposing roles of RBP-J in Notch
signaling. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 92,
231–252.
Taylor, A.,

Jackson, B. R., Noeren-
berg, M., Hughes, D.
J., Boyne,
J. R., Verow, M., Harris, M.,
and Whitehouse, A. (2011). Muta-
tion of a C-terminal motif affects
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus ORF57 RNA binding,
nuclear trafﬁcking, and multimer-
ization. J. Virol. 85, 7881–7891.

Toth, Z., Maglinte, D. T., Lee, S. H.,
Lee, H. R., Wong, L. Y., Bru-
lois, K. F., Lee, S., Buckley,
J.
D., Laird, P. W., Marquez, V. E.,
and Jung, J. U. (2010). Epigenetic
analysis of KSHV latent and lytic
genomes. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1001013.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1001013

Ueda, K.,

Ishikawa, K., Nishimura,
K., Sakakibara, S., Do, E., and
(2002). Kaposi’s
Yamanishi, K.
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
(human herpesvirus 8) replication
and transcription factor activates
the K9 (vIRF) gene through two

distinct cis elements by a non-DNA-
binding mechanism. J. Virol. 76,
12044–12054.

Vieira, J., and O’Hearn, P. M. (2004).
Use of the red ﬂuorescent protein
as a marker of Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus
lytic gene
expression. Virology 325, 225–240.

Wang, J., Zhang, J., Zhang, L., Harring-
ton, W. Jr., West, J. T., and Wood,
C. (2005). Modulation of human
herpesvirus
sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus replication
and transcription activator trans-
activation by interferon regulatory
factor 7. J. Virol. 79, 2420–2431.

8/Kaposi’s

Wang, S., Liu, S., Wu, M., Geng, Y., and
Wood, C. (2001a). Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated
herpesvirus/human
herpesvirus-8 ORF50 gene prod-
uct contains a potent C-terminal
activation domain which activates
gene
speciﬁc
target sequence. Arch. Virol. 146,
1415–1426.

expression via

a

Wang, S., Liu, S., Wu, M. H., Geng,
Y., and Wood, C. (2001b). Identi-
ﬁcation of a cellular protein that
interacts and synergizes with the
RTA (ORF50) protein of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus in
transcriptional activation. J. Virol.
75, 11961–11973.

Wang, S. E., Wu, F. Y., Chen, H.,
and
Shamay, M., Zheng, Q.,
Hayward, G. S.
(2004a). Early
activation of the Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus RTA, RAP,
and MTA promoters
the
by
tetradecanoyl
phorbol
acetate-
induced AP1 pathway. J. Virol. 78,
4248–4267.

Wang, Y., Li, H., Chan, M. Y., Zhu, F. X.,
Lukac, D. M., and Yuan, Y. (2004b).
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus ori-Lyt-dependent DNA
replication: cis-acting requirements
ori-Lyt-
for
associated
transcription.
J. Virol. 78, 8615–8629.

replication

RNA

and

Wang, S. E., Wu, F. Y., Fujimuro,
M., Zong, J., Hayward, S. D., and
Hayward, G. S. (2003a). Role of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
alpha (C/EBPalpha) in activation
of the Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
lytic-cycle
herpesvirus
(KSHV)
protein
replication-associated
(RAP) promoter
in cooperation
with the KSHV replication and
transcription activator (RTA) and
RAP. J. Virol. 77, 600–623.

S.

Wang, S. E., Wu, F. Y., Yu, Y.,
(2003b).

and Hayward, G.
CCAAT/enhancer-binding
dur-
protein-alpha
ing the early stages of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus

induced

is

(KSHV) lytic cycle reactivation and
together with the KSHV replication
and transcription activator (RTA)
cooperatively stimulates the viral
RTA, MTA, and PAN promoters. J.
Virol. 77, 9590–9612.

Wang, S. S., Chen, L. W., Chen, L. Y.,
Tsai, H. H., Shih, Y. C., Yang, C. T.,
and Chang, P. J. (2010). Transcrip-
tional regulation of the ORF61 and
ORF60 genes of Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus. Virology 397,
311–321.

Wang, Y., Tang, Q., Maul, G. G.,
and Yuan, Y.
(2006). Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus ori-
Lyt-dependent DNA replication:
dual role of replication and tran-
scription activator.
J. Virol. 80,
12171–12186.

Wang, Y., and Yuan, Y. (2006). Essen-
tial role of RBP-Jkappa in activation
of the K8 delayed-early promoter
of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus by ORF50/RTA. Virology
359, 19–27.

Wen, H. J., Minhas, V., and Wood, C.
(2009). Identiﬁcation and character-
ization of a new Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus replication
and transcription activator (RTA)-
responsive element involved in RTA-
mediated transactivation.
J. Gen.
Virol. 90, 944–953.

Wilson, S.

J., Tsao, E. H., Webb,
B. L., Ye, H., Dalton-Grifﬁn, L.,
Tsantoulas, C., Gale, C. V., Du,
M. Q., Whitehouse, A., and Kel-
lam, P.
(2007). X box binding
protein XBP-1s transactivates the
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus (KSHV) ORF50 promoter,
linking plasma cell differentiation to
KSHV reactivation from latency. J.
Virol. 81, 13578–13586.

Xu, D., Coleman, T., Zhang,

J.,
Fagot, A., Kotalik, C., Zhao, L.,
Trivedi, P., Jones, C., and Zhang, L.
(2007). Epstein-barr virus inhibits
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus lytic replication in primary
effusion lymphomas. J. Virol. 81,
6068–6078.

Xu, Y., Aucoin, D. P., Huete, A. R.,
Cei, S. A., Hanson, L. J., and Pari,
G. S. (2005). A Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus/human her-
pesvirus 8 ORF50 deletion mutant
is defective for reactivation of latent
virus and DNA replication. J. Virol.
79, 3479–3487.

sense of

antisense:

Xu, Y., and Ganem, D. (2010). Mak-
ing
seem-
ingly noncoding RNAs antisense to
the master regulator of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus lytic
replication do not regulate that
transcript but
serve as mRNAs

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 20

Guito and Lukac

Regulation of KSHV Rta function

encoding small peptides. J. Virol. 84,
5465–5475.

Yada, K., Do, E., Sakakibara, S.,
Ohsaki, E., Ito, E., Watanabe, S.,
and Ueda, K. (2006). KSHV RTA
induces a transcriptional repressor,
HEY1 that represses rta promoter.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
345, 410–418.

Yang, Z., Wen, H. J., Minhas, V., and
Wood, C. (2009). The zinc ﬁn-
ger DNA-binding domain of K-RBP
plays an important role in regulating
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus RTA-mediated gene expres-
sion. Virology 391, 221–231.

Yang, Z., and Wood, C. (2007). The tran-
scriptional repressor K-RBP modu-
lates RTA-mediated transactivation
and lytic replication of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. J.
Virol. 81, 6294–6306.

Yang, Z., Yan, Z., and Wood, C.
(2008). Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated

herpesvirus transactivator RTA pro-
motes degradation of the repressors
to regulate viral lytic replication. J.
Virol. 82, 3590–3603.

Yu, Y., Wang, S. E., and Hayward, G. S.
(2005). The KSHV immediate-early
transcription factor RTA encodes
ubiquitin E3 ligase activity that tar-
gets IRF7 for proteosome-mediated
degradation. Immunity 22, 59–70.

Zhang, J.,Wang, J.,Wood, C., Xu, D., and
Zhang, L. (2005). Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus/human her-
pesvirus 8 replication and transcrip-
tion activator regulates viral and cel-
lular genes via interferon-stimulated
response elements.
J. Virol. 79,
5640–5652.

Zhang, L., Chiu, J., and Lin, J. C. (1998).
Activation of human herpesvirus
8 (HHV-8) thymidine kinase (TK)
TATAA-less promoter by HHV-8
ORF50 gene product is SP1 depen-
dent. DNA Cell Biol. 17, 735–742.

Zhong, W., Wang, H., Herndier, B.,
and Ganem, D. (1996). Restricted
expression of Kaposi
sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus (human her-
pesvirus 8) genes in Kaposi sar-
coma. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
93, 6641–6646.

Zhu, F., Cusano, T., and Yuan, Y. (1999).
the immediate-
Identiﬁcation of
early
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus. J.
Virol. 73, 5556–5567.

transcripts

of

Ziegelbauer,

J., Grundhoff, A., and
Ganem, D. (2006). Exploring the
DNA binding interactions of the
sarcoma-associated her-
Kaposi’s
pesvirus
lytic switch protein by
selective ampliﬁcation of bound
sequences
J. Virol. 80,
2958–2967.

in vitro.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was

conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

14

February 2012.

Received: 08 December 2011; paper
pending published: 27 December 2011;
accepted: 18 January 2012; published
online:
Citation: Guito J and Lukac DM (2012)
KSHV Rta promoter speciﬁcation and
viral reactivation. Front. Microbio. 3:30.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00030
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Virology, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Guito and Lukac. This
is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attri-
bution Non Commercial License, which
permits non-commercial use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in other forums,
provided the original authors and source
are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 30 | 21

