Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

Yeala Shaked 1,2* and Hagar Lis 1,2

1 Interuniversity Institute for Marine Sciences in Eilat, Eilat, Israel
2 Institute of Earth Sciences, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel

REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 17 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00123

Edited by:
Martha Gledhill, University of
Southampton, UK
Reviewed by:
Andrew Rose, Southern Cross
University, Australia
Mark Wells, University of Maine, USA
Micha Rijkenberg, Royal Netherlands
Institute for Sea Research,
Netherlands
*Correspondence:
Yeala Shaked, Interuniversity Institute
for Marine Sciences in Eilat, P. O. Box
469, Eilat 88103, Israel.
e-mail: yshaked@vms.huji.ac.il

The bioavailability of iron to microorganisms and its underlying mechanisms have far reach-
ing repercussions to many natural systems and diverse ﬁelds of research, including ocean
biogeochemistry, carbon cycling and climate, harmful algal blooms, soil and plant research,
bioremediation, pathogenesis, and medicine. Within the framework of ocean sciences,
short supply and restricted bioavailability of Fe to phytoplankton is thought to limit primary
production and curtail atmospheric CO2 drawdown in vast ocean regions. Yet a clear-cut
deﬁnition of bioavailability remains elusive, with elements of iron speciation and kinetics,
phytoplankton physiology, light, temperature, and microbial interactions, to name a few, all
intricately intertwined into this concept. Here, in a synthesis of published and new data,
we attempt to disassemble the complex concept of iron bioavailability to phytoplankton
by individually exploring some of its facets. We distinguish between the fundamentals
of bioavailability – the acquisition of Fe-substrate by phytoplankton – and added levels of
complexity involving interactions among organisms, iron, and ecosystem processes. We
ﬁrst examine how phytoplankton acquire free and organically bound iron, drawing attention
to the pervasiveness of the reductive uptake pathway in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic
autotrophs. Turning to acquisition rates, we propose to view the availability of various Fe-
substrates to phytoplankton as a spectrum rather than an absolute “all or nothing.” We
then demonstrate the use of uptake rate constants to make comparisons across different
studies, organisms, Fe-compounds, and environments, and for gaging the contribution of
various Fe-substrates to phytoplankton growth in situ. Last, we describe the inﬂuence of
aquatic microorganisms on iron chemistry and fate by way of organic complexation and
bio-mediated redox transformations and examine the bioavailability of these bio-modiﬁed
Fe species.

Keywords: iron, bioavailability, uptake, phytoplankton, speciation, redox reactions, biogeochemistry, organic
complexation

INTRODUCTION
By virtue of its ﬂexible redox chemistry, iron (Fe) plays an inte-
gral role in many biological processes such as photosynthesis,
respiration, processing of reactive oxygen species, and nutrient
acquisition. In view of these functions, it is not surprising that
iron inputs and bioavailability in aquatic environments have far
reaching repercussions for many natural systems and diverse areas
of study as brieﬂy outlined in Box 1. At the basis of these lies the
role of iron in controlling phytoplankton growth. Photosynthetic
life on Earth originated in reduced, low oxygen aquatic environ-
ments where the soluble ferrous iron – Fe(II) – was abundant and
freely available. The rise of oxygenic photosynthesis favored the
oxidized ferric form – Fe(III) – which rapidly precipitates out of
oxic solutions as iron oxides or hydroxides. Modern day oceans and
lakes thus cater poorly to the Fe requirements of phytoplankton
with surface waters bearing picomolar to nanomolar concentra-
(cid:2)
tions of dissolved unchelated inorganic iron, Fe
(Johnson et al.,
1997), the most readily available form of Fe to phytoplankton, be
(cid:2)
it in ferrous Fe(II)

(cid:2)
or ferric form Fe(III)

(Morel et al., 2008).

Extensive research on iron bioavailability to phytoplankton has
been conducted over recent decades, yet a clear-cut deﬁnition of
this term remains elusive. Bioavailability may be deﬁned as the

degree to which a certain compound can be accessed and utilized
by an organism. However this deﬁnition may be oversimplistic as
elements of iron speciation and kinetics, phytoplankton physiol-
ogy, light, temperature, and microbial interactions, to name a few,
are all intricately intertwined into what we term “bioavailability”
(Wells et al., 1995; Worms et al., 2006). Given the complex and
interdisciplinary nature of Fe bioavailability, progress in under-
standing this concept depends on addressing its sub-aspects by
means of well-deﬁned questions and multiple analytical tech-
niques. In this contribution, rather than seeking a deﬁnition
capable of encompassing the multiple aspects and scales of Fe
bioavailability to phytoplankton, we attempt to disassemble this
concept into its composing facets and explore them further.

At a fundamental level, cellular Fe acquisition or uptake rates
are indicative of the availability of any single Fe-substrate to a spe-
ciﬁc phytoplankton species (Figure 1). Fe uptake rate, in turn,
is a function of the uptake pathways expressed by an organ-
ism and the chemical compatibility or exchange kinetics of the
Fe-substrate with the transport systems (Figure 1). Rates of Fe
acquisition can be determined experimentally using model or
naturally occurring phytoplankton and Fe-substrates. In the next
two sections we discuss the experimental evaluation of Fe uptake

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 1

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

FIGURE 1 | A conceptual diagram disassembling the multivariable
concept of iron bioavailability to phytoplankton. The ﬁgure outlines the
composing facets of Fe bioavailability where green text highlights topics
elaborated in the paper. At the most basic level, the availability of an iron
species to a phytoplankton species is determined by the rate at which it is
acquired by the organism. Fe uptake rate, in turn, is a function of the uptake
pathways expressed by an organism and the chemical compatibility or
exchange kinetics of the Fe-substrate with the transport systems (upper box).
In Sections “Fundamentals of Fe Bioavailability: Phytoplankton Fe Acquisition

Systems” and “Fundamentals of Fe Bioavailability: Phytoplankton Fe
Acquisition Rates” we discuss the experimental evaluation of Fe uptake rates
by laboratory cultures and natural populations. In the environment, many
other chemical, biological, and physical factors are important for determining
Fe availability to phytoplankton, some of which are detailed in the lower box.
In Section “Added Complexity to Bioavailability: Bio-Mediated Transformations
of Fe Speciation” we turn to organism–Fe interactions and discuss how
secretion of organic compounds and bio-mediated redox processes alter Fe
speciation and inﬂuence Fe availability.

pathways and rates and suggest the use of uptake rate constants
as a means of comparing between organisms, Fe species, and
environments, and gaging the relative contribution of speciﬁc Fe-
compounds to phytoplankton in a natural setting. Needless to
say, the availability of Fe to natural phytoplankton assemblages
in oceans and lakes is inﬂuenced by many chemical, biologi-
cal, and physical factors outside the experimental beaker (see
Figure 1 for an outline of some of these factors). For example,
both Fe speciation and phytoplankton physiology are dynamic
in time and space and to complicate matters even further, these
two factors are interconnected. Moreover, interactions among
the various organisms in the ecosystem, in addition to a host
of environmental variables, can strongly impact the ability of
phytoplankton to meet their Fe requirements. While a complete
description of this added complexity to bioavailability is beyond
the scope of this contribution, in the last section we describe
how aquatic microorganisms inﬂuence iron chemistry and fate
by way of organic complexation and bio-mediated redox transfor-
mations, emphasizing the resulting effects on Fe bioavailability to
phytoplankton.

the concentration of various Fe species and their uptake by
phytoplankton. As such, phytoplankton iron transport systems,
uptake strategies, and rates are important for our understanding
of Fe availability. In the next two sections we tackle the question
of bioavailability at the organism level and look at mechanistic
studies of iron acquisition pathways and rates under controlled
conditions – an approach which has provided much insight into
Fe bioavailability in natural systems (Hudson and Morel, 1993;
Sunda and Huntsman, 1995; Hutchins et al., 1999; Maldonado
and Price, 1999; Maldonado et al., 1999; Shaked et al., 2005;
Morel et al., 2008). In Section “Uptake Pathways of Aquatic Phy-
toplankton” we explore two well-studied iron uptake pathways in
aquatic phytoplankton – siderophore mediated and reductive Fe
uptake – looking at the environmental relevance of each strat-
egy. Since our focus is phytoplankton, we will not cover Fe uptake
pathways of heterotrophic bacteria. More on this subject can be
found in a recent report by Hopkinson and Barbeau (2012). In
Section “Behavioral Patterns of Iron Mining” we brieﬂy mention
some behavioral patterns amongst phytoplankton which may be
relevant to Fe acquisition from seawater.

FUNDAMENTALS OF Fe BIOAVAILABILITY: PHYTOPLANKTON
Fe ACQUISITION SYSTEMS
In order to determine the effects of Fe inputs on phytoplank-
ton productivity it is essential to identify the relationship between

UPTAKE PATHWAYS OF AQUATIC PHYTOPLANKTON
Several uptake pathways for free inorganic iron (Fe
) and organ-
ically bound iron (FeL) have been described amongst aquatic
(cid:2)
phytoplankton. While Fe
is clearly an important iron source,

(cid:2)

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 2

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

Box 1 Scope of iron inﬂuence on natural systems and research ﬁelds.

Aquatic iron biogeochemistry has been in the limelight over the past
three decades with numerous studies linking Fe to carbon cycling
and global climate (Martin et al., 1990; Watson et al., 2000; Blain
et al., 2007; Martinez-Garcia et al., 2011). A particular emphasis has
been placed on Fe availability to phytoplankton since over 45% of
global photosynthesis occurs in aquatic environments (Falkowski
et al., 1998) and photosynthetic systems are heavily dependent on
iron (e.g., Raven, 1990; Greene et al., 1991). It is now well estab-
lished that limited iron availability lowers phytoplankton pigment
content and light harvesting capabilities, hinders photosynthesis
and growth rates, and subsequently diminishes the production of
organic matter and biogenic minerals (CaCO3 and opal) and curtails
CO2 drawdown in vast ocean regions (Figure 2; Boyd et al., 2007).
Many biogenic gases other than CO2 are important determinants
of atmospheric chemistry and climate, but far less is known about
the controls iron exerts on the sea-atmosphere ﬂuxes of such gases
(Figure 2; Liss, 2007; Buesseler et al., 2008). What is known how-
ever, is that phytoplankton growth, death, and decomposition, all
of which may be controlled by Fe availability, result in emissions
of dimethylsulﬁde (DMS) and isoprene (cloud formation promoters),
N2O and CH4 (potent greenhouse gases), and CO and OH (reac-
tive species inﬂuencing the atmosphere oxidation potential; Law
and Ling, 2001; Meskhidze and Nenes, 2006). The combined effects
of these emissions on atmospheric radiative forcing remain largely
unknown (Lampitt et al., 2008).

By controlling phytoplankton standing stocks, Fe availability may
also inﬂuence the surface ocean light ﬁeld, and subsequently

play a role in the surface ocean heat budget (Figure 2; Man-
izza et al., 2005). In addition to constraining primary productiv-
ity, iron deﬁciency impedes biogenic element cycling since phy-
toplankton cannot synthesize the enzymes required for utilizing
major nutrients such as nitrate and N2 (Figure 2; Milligan and
Harrison, 2000; Kustka et al., 2002; Sohm et al., 2011). Low iron
availability may also alter ecosystem structure and function: under
Fe limitation smaller phytoplankton are favored, resulting in rapid
carbon regeneration and lowered carbon export ﬂux to the deep
ocean (Figure 2; Price et al., 1994; Finkel et al., 2010). As lim-
ited Fe availability alters nutrient assimilation ratios and phyto-
plankton species composition, it bares implications for the recon-
struction of ocean paleo-productivity and paleo-nutrient distribu-
tions. Examples include the intensively studied sedimentary records
of diatoms, whose abundance, morphology, and composition is
strongly regulated by Fe (Figure 2; Strzepek and Harrison, 2004;
Marchetti et al., 2006; Marchetti and Cassar, 2009). An additional,
less explored example, is the recently reported effect of Fe limita-
tion on cadmium (Cd) drawdown from seawater by phytoplankton
(Lane et al., 2009), Subsequently, Fe limitation may alter seawa-
ter Cd:P ratios (Cullen et al., 1999) and thus bias past reconstruc-
tion of PO3−
4 distributions which is based on seawater Cd:P ratios
(Figure 2; Boyle, 1988; Elderﬁeld and Rickaby, 2000). Recent atten-
tion has also been drawn to the effect of iron inputs and avail-
ability on toxic algal species occurrence and toxin production in
oceans and lakes (Figure 2; e.g., Trick et al., 2010; Alexova et al.,
2011).

FIGURE 2 | Summary of processes, systems, and research ﬁelds which are inﬂuenced by iron inputs and bioavailability (see text for details).

we focus on FeL, where the transport machinery an organ-
ism employs will dictate the accessibility of a speciﬁc com-
pound (Morel et al., 2008). To date, two major FeL uptake
pathways have been described for phytoplankton: siderophore
mediated Fe acquisition (e.g., Goldman et al., 1983; Soria-Dengg
et al., 2001) and the reductive iron uptake pathway (Allnutt and
Bonner, 1987; Eckhardt and Buckhout, 1998; Maldonado and
Price, 2001; Shaked et al., 2005). According to a prevalent para-
digm shared by many oceanographers, prokaryotic phytoplankton

adopt siderophore-based Fe uptake systems while eukaryotes
utilize a reductive strategy (e.g., Hutchins et al., 1999). How-
ever, genetic evidence (Webb et al., 2001; Hopkinson and Morel,
2009) as well as results of short term iron uptake experiments
(Rose et al., 2005; Lis and Shaked, 2009; Fujii et al., 2010;
Kranzler et al., 2011), contradict this paradigm. We propose
that the occurrence of siderophore vs. reductive iron uptake
can be put down to environmental rather than taxonomic con-
siderations and that reductive iron uptake is a prevalent Fe

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 3

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

acquisition strategy amongst phytoplankton (Figure 3; Table A1
in Appendix).

Siderophore mediated Fe uptake involves the synthesis and
secretion of ferric iron chelators which are capable of solubilizing,
capturing, and delivering Fe(III) to the cell (Kraemer, 2004). The
efﬁciency of this uptake pathway depends on: (a) the probability of
the siderophore ﬁnding an Fe-substrate and (b) the probability of
the ferrisiderophore complex ﬁnding its way back to the secreting
cell. The build-up and maintenance of an Fe-siderophore diffusion
gradient bringing iron back to the host cell is an essential feature
of this strategy (Hutchins et al., 1991; Völker and Wolf-Gladrow,
1999). Therefore, siderophore production works best at high cell
densities and in quiet waters or contained environments where
turbulent disruption is unlikely (e.g., within biogenic aggregates
or dense algal colonies). Consequently, siderophore production
would be impractical in open waters, with high turbulence, and
low cell densities (Hutchins et al., 1991). Indeed, a conspicuous
lack of siderophore synthesis or uptake genes amongst open ocean
cyanobacteria and eukaryotic phytoplankton (Hopkinson and
Morel, 2009) suggests that this strategy may be ill suited to free-
living aquatic phototrophs. Given the limitations of siderophore
mediated iron uptake in dilute media, particularly open ocean
waters, we turn our attention to an alternative strategy better suited
to these conditions – Fe acquisition by means of reduction.

Reductive iron uptake offers a practical alternative to
siderophore production as demonstrated in the numerical model
constructed by Völker and Wolf-Gladrow (1999) comparing the

(cid:2)

efﬁciency of these two strategies in the marine environment. Sev-
eral studies, as well as our own data, support the prevalence of
reductive iron uptake amongst a variety of representative phyto-
plankton from both eukaryotic and prokaryotic taxa as well as
in natural phytoplankton communities in high Fe and low Fe
environments (Figure 3; Table A1 in Appendix). Reduction oper-
ates on both Fe
and FeL where it involves the dissociation of
Fe from its chelating ligand followed by transport of free iron
into the cell (Atkinson and Guerinot, 2011). A key feature of this
uptake pathway is the formation of an Fe(II) intermediate and thus
experimental assays for reductive Fe uptake employ a ferrous iron
binding ligand such as ferrozine or bathophenanthrolinedisulfonic
acid (BPDS) which competes with the cell for Fe(II) and inhibits
Fe uptake (see Figures A1 and A2 in Appendix; Shaked et al.,
2004, 2005). On a genetic level, cell surface ferric reductases, simi-
lar to those in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, have been found
in green algae (Allen et al., 2007) and ocean dwelling diatoms
(Kustka et al., 2007; Bowler et al., 2010). These reductases may
operate in conjunction with permease–oxidase complexes which
reoxidize the Fe(II) as it is transported into the cell (Maldonado
et al., 2006; Chen et al., 2008; Terzulli and Kosman, 2010). Not
much is known about the reductive processes only recently shown
to exist in aquatic cyanobacteria (Rose et al., 2005; Lis and Shaked,
2009; Kranzler et al., 2011).

The greatest advantage of the reductive strategy is its potential
to operate not only on Fe
but also across a range of organi-
cally bound iron complexes, even Fe bound to strong siderophores

(cid:2)

FIGURE 3 | Prevalence of the reductive iron uptake pathway amongst
phytoplankton. Listed are laboratory cultures and natural environments for
which inhibition of uptake by Fe(II) binding ligands (Ferrozine/BPDS) was
observed experimentally and taken to indicate the formation of an Fe(II)
intermediate during iron transport. For some species, genomic and proteomic
research identiﬁed various components of the reductive iron uptake pathway
including ferrireductases and multicopper oxidases. See Appendix for
supporting data and methodology (Tables A1 and A2 and Figures A1 and A2
in Appendix). Note on locations: The Gulf of Aqaba is located at the northern

tip of the Red Sea, Loch Scridain is a sea loch located on the Atlantic coastline
of the island of Mull, Scotland, and Lake Kinneret (Sea of Galilee) is a fresh
water lake in the north of Israel. References: aEckhardt and Buckhout (1998),
bWeger (1999), cKeshtacher et al. (1999), dAllnutt and Bonner (1987),
eMiddlemiss et al. (2001), fSasaki et al. (1998), gShaked et al. (2002), hShaked
et al. (2005), iJones and Morel (1988), jMaldonado and Price (2001),
kSoria-Dengg and Horstmann (1995), lKranzler et al. (2011), mFujii et al. (2010),
nRose et al. (2005), oMaldonado et al. (2005), pMaldonado and Price (1999),
qShaked et al. (2004), rLis and Shaked (2009), ‡ Lis and Shaked, in preparation.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 4

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

such as ferrioxamine B (FeDFB; Maldonado et al., 2005; Shaked
et al., 2005; Lis and Shaked, 2009; Shi et al., 2010; Kranzler et al.,
2011). Phytoplankton equipped with this strategy would be able
to integrate iron from a variety of sources, giving them an obvious
competitive advantage in Fe acquisition. While we advance the idea
of reduction as a prevalent Fe uptake strategy in aquatic systems,
we by no means claim it to be exclusive. A single organism may
possess both direct FeL uptake pathways (e.g., ferrisiderophore
transporters) as well as iron reductases, a classic example being
baker’s yeast (Kosman, 2003). Moreover, siderophore mediated
and reductive iron uptake do not discount the existence of other
Fe uptake pathways, be they under investigation (e.g., Stintzi et al.,
2000; Pick et al., 2008; Sutak et al., 2010; Wirtz et al., 2010) or
undiscovered.

BEHAVIORAL PATTERNS OF IRON MINING
The data covered thus far clearly demonstrates that phytoplankton
are not passive in their quest for iron. A major energetic investment
is clearly required in order to accumulate intracellular Fe concen-
trations that are four to six orders of magnitude greater than those
in their surrounding environment (Morel and Price, 2003). Some
phytoplankton take this a step further and exhibit behavioral pat-
terns which aid in the active mining of iron from the environment.
The most striking example is the collection and processing of iron-
rich dust particles by colonies of the globally important N2 ﬁxing
cyanobacterium Trichodesmium spp. (Rueter et al., 1992; Rubin
et al., 2011). The positively buoyant Trichodesmium forms mas-
sive blooms at the sea surface where it is likely to encounter dust
deposits. Recently, we reafﬁrmed previous observations on efﬁ-
cient capturing and retention of dust by natural Trichodesmium
colonies and documented a specialized ability to actively shufﬂe
dust and iron oxides from the colony periphery to its core (Rubin
et al., 2011). Packaging of dust in the colony interior can minimize
its detachment and loss and also facilitate its chemical processing
within a semi-enclosed microenvironment (Rubin et al., 2011).
We found that Trichodesmium colonies were able to mediate dust
dissolution, most likely via reduction (Rubin et al., 2011; Shaked,
unpublished). Our mechanistic study complements several ﬁeld
observations documenting the ability of Trichodesmium to utilize
iron from dust (Moore et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2011). Additionally,
large diatoms (such as Rhizosolenia spp. and Ethmodiscus spp.) and
dinoﬂagellates (such as Alexandrium spp. and Gymnodinium spp.)
are known to migrate vertically to the nutricline to stock up on
nutrients (Villareal et al., 1999; Ralston et al., 2007). While vertical
migration was repeatedly proven efﬁcient in nitrogen accumula-
tion (Singler and Villareal, 2005), no clear evidence for iron mining
at depth is present (McKay et al., 2000).

FUNDAMENTALS OF Fe BIOAVAILABILITY: PHYTOPLANKTON
Fe ACQUISITION RATES
The discussion so far has centered on the mechanisms phyto-
plankton employ for acquiring Fe, knowledge which is crucial for
analyzing and predicting their ability to access iron from various
Fe pools in the environment (Shaked et al., 2005; Morel et al.,
2008). We now focus on a more common approach to deter-
mining Fe availability: rate of transport. In this line of research
the bioavailability of an Fe-substrate is ascertained by means of

growth or short term iron uptake experiments. Although this
approach is very promising, it faces signiﬁcant challenges in terms
of quantitative extrapolation to systems outside the experimental
framework (be it a beaker or a grow-out incubation). In Section
“Experimental Probing of Availability” we discuss the importance
of experimental design, stressing the use of well-deﬁned experi-
mental media and organisms in the pursuit of unambiguous data
regarding the accessibility of different Fe species to various phyto-
plankton. However, even when high quality data are obtained, it
is very difﬁcult to reach a consensus regarding the availability of
any one Fe-compound. The same Fe-substrate, for example, may
be available to one organism but not to another, making bioavail-
ability not only a question of “what?” but also of “to whom?”.
Moreover, the same organism may employ additional transport
pathways upon Fe limitation, further extending the question to
“when?” and “where?” in natural environments. In Section “Com-
puting Availability Using Uptake Constants,”we describe the use of
uptake rate constants for comparing between studies, organisms,
compounds, and environments as well as for gauging the contri-
bution of speciﬁc Fe species to phytoplankton growth in situ. We
propose that the availability of Fe species to phytoplankton can be
viewed as a spectrum rather than an absolute “all or nothing” and
establish a relative scale of bioavailability for a range of Fe species
and various phytoplankton cultures and natural populations.

EXPERIMENTAL PROBING OF AVAILABILITY
Two common experimental approaches for probing the bioavail-
ability of a given Fe-compound are: (1) long term or steady state
iron uptake experiments which follow growth rates and/or intra-
cellular Fe quotas of cells grown on a certain Fe-substrate, and (2)
short term uptake experiments where the change in intracellular
iron is followed over several hours. In order to enable inter- and
intra-study comparisons, common grounds in methodology must
be established by means of a robust experimental design in which
medium and/or organism are well-deﬁned.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Due to the fast hydrolysis and precipitation of Fe(III), an arti-
ﬁcial or natural Fe complexing agent is required to keep dissolved
iron in solution during experiments. For the study of free inorganic
iron (Fe
), EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid), and other car-
boxylic acid compounds are typically used (e.g., Anderson and
Morel, 1982). The FeEDTA complex itself is membrane imperme-
able and not bioavailable (Shaked et al., 2005) and EDTA buffers
an easily calculated pool of unchelated iron or Fe
in the medium
(Sunda et al., 2005). There has been some criticism of the applic-
ability of EDTA based studies to natural systems (Gerringa et al.,
2000) but the alternative of using uncomplexed FeCl3 when trying
to measure free inorganic iron uptake rates has serious pitfalls.
When spiking experimental media with FeCl3, the iron is found in
two pools – dissolved Fe and freshly precipitated colloids – whose
relative proportions and bioavailability ﬂuctuate over time (Wells
et al., 1983; Kuma et al., 1996). When examining the bioavailabil-
ity of organically bound iron (FeL, where L is an organic ligand)
many chemical factors such as ligand strength, metal to ligand
ratios, FeL equilibration time, and photolability should be taken
into consideration. Sufﬁciently high FeL complex stability and/or
a sufﬁcient excess of the ligand compared to Fe are important
in order to prevent iron precipitation. On the other hand, high

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 5

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

concentrations of free ligand (L) were shown to slow Fe uptake
rates down due to competition with the cells for unchelated Fe
which is formed during reductive uptake (Maldonado and Price,
2001; Shaked et al., 2005; Lis and Shaked, 2009). Experiments
probing the bioavailability of partially complexed, particulate, or
colloidal iron require careful support measurements and/or use of
chemical speciation modeling software which establish Fe specia-
tion in the experimental medium (e.g., Nodwell and Price, 2001;
Rijkenberg et al., 2006, 2008; Hassler et al., 2011a). The concen-
tration of Fe used in short term uptake experiments is often a
compromise between environmentally relevant low concentra-
tions and those required for adequate signal. However, it must
be noted that in order to compare between experiments Fe con-
centrations must be sub-saturating (see Computing Availability
Using Uptake Constants).

Characterization of the experimental organism is no less
important than deﬁning Fe speciation, as physiological status and
growth phase can greatly affect experimental outcomes. Iron lim-
itation, for example, is known to cause the upregulation of high
afﬁnity Fe acquisition systems (Maldonado and Price, 1999, 2001;
Maldonado et al., 2006; Kustka et al., 2007; Allen et al., 2008),
allowing access to previously unavailable Fe pools. This high
afﬁnity acquisition system allows iron limited diatoms to acquire
iron bound to the xenosiderophore ferrioxamine B (FeDFB),
whereas this complex is non-accessible to iron replete diatoms (see
Figure 5A; Maldonado and Price, 2001). Growth phase may also
affect Fe uptake since various transport pathways may be inac-
tivated during different growth phases (Lis and Shaked, unpub-
lished). In addition, the presence of bacteria in uptake assays
using non-axenic cultures or natural assemblages may inﬂuence
the availability of speciﬁc compounds to the studied algae or bias
the uptake signal through bacterial acquisition of compounds
unavailable to the studied organism (Soria-Dengg et al., 2001; Roe
et al., 2011). Experimental choices regarding cell density, illumi-
nation, temperature, use of pH buffers, and experiment duration,
to name a few, may alter uptake rates by inﬂuencing both algal
physiology and Fe chemistry, and should be carefully evaluated in
preliminary experiments. As a rule of thumb, cell density should
be kept as low as possible to minimize bio-mediated changes in Fe
chemistry (e.g., through the secretion of Fe-binding compounds
into the medium), and experimental length should be kept short
to avoid changes in the transport systems (Sunda et al., 2005).
Short experiments (4–12 h) are preferably conducted in the dark or
under red light (which prevents Fe photochemistry while supply-
ing photo-synthetically active irradiation (Kranzler et al., 2011).
Many organic pH buffers bind Fe and their effect on uptake rates
should be carefully examined (Shi et al., 2009). Whenever possi-
ble, data points should be collected several times throughout the
experiment rather than at its beginning and end. This ensures the
measurement of meaningful rates that can be extrapolated further.
Once answers to fundamental questions of bioavailability have
been established using model phytoplankton species and Fe-
substrates, the next level of complexity may be added by con-
ducting experiments with either natural aquatic communities or
natural ligands (e.g., Maldonado et al., 2005; Shi et al., 2010). This
combination of basic laboratory based research and ﬁeld work
has proven to be a powerful tool in unraveling the complexities of

natural systems. Experiments of this kind are analytically challeng-
ing and involve considerable planning and careful determination
of the desired goals. Examples include studying the effect of pho-
tochemistry on the availability of model and natural Fe complexes
to size fractionated natural phytoplankton communities (Maldon-
ado et al., 2005) and the use of well-studied model organisms to
report on changes in the availability of natural Fe-compounds due
to variations in pH (Shi et al., 2010).

COMPUTING AVAILABILITY USING UPTAKE CONSTANTS
As stated above, uptake data are experiment-speciﬁc and thus
often hard to extrapolate to other organisms or environments.
Here we propose a relatively straight forward approach using
the uptake rate constant – kup – for comparing between exper-
iments conducted with strongly bound organically complexed Fe
(FeL) or unchelated Fe (Fe
). When an Fe-substrate is applied
at sub-saturating concentrations, its rate of cellular uptake (ρ) is
proportional to its concentration (Eq. 1, Figure 4):

(cid:2)

ρ = kup × [Fe]

−1 day

−1 day

(1)
−1) and [Fe]
where ρ is cellular Fe uptake rate (mol Fe cell
−1). Under these conditions
is Fe-substrate concentration (mol L
(linear range in Figure 4), the dependency of cellar uptake rate on
Fe concentration is described by the uptake constant – kup with
−1 (different units may be used in accordance
units of L cell
with the units of uptake rate). Unlike cellular uptake rate (ρ), which
varies with Fe concentration, kup is a more faithful representation
of the ability of an organism to internalize the iron. In order to
convert uptake rates to uptake constants, an action which can also
be regarded as normalization, we need to deﬁne the concentration
of Fe that serves as a substrate for uptake. In experiments probing
the uptake of strongly complexed FeL, where Fe
concentrations
are negligible, the substrate for uptake equals the total Fe added to
the experiment as precomplexed FeL (Figure 4). In contrast, when
probing Fe
uptake in the presence of the metal buffer EDTA, the
total Fe is present predominantly as FeEDTA which is biologically
unavailable, while Fe
– the substrate for uptake is found at minute
concentrations (Shaked et al., 2005). The kup calculation cannot
be performed for weak FeL complexes as the experimental media
contains both Fe
and FeL. Experiments using FeCl3 are also hard
to analyze due to Fe precipitation, unless Fe is added at concen-
trations lower than its solubility limits in seawater (0.2–0.5 nM;
Liu and Millero, 2002). Despite its limitations, the uptake rate
constant, kup, is highly useful in comparing the “relative bioavail-
ability” of different Fe-substrates to various phytoplankton, both
in the laboratory or in natural environments. Moreover, we can
use kup to predict if a speciﬁc Fe-compound can support phyto-
plankton Fe demands in situ. These two applications are described
below and in Figures 4 and 5 and Table 1.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Relative bioavailability scale as a means of comparing organisms,
Fe species, and environments
We ﬁrst demonstrate the use of kup in comparing the bioavailabil-
ity of Fe
and FeDFB (where DFB is the strong siderophore ferriox-
amine B) to Fe-limited cultures of the open ocean coccolithophore
Emiliania huxleyi (Figure 4). In these experiments we determined

(cid:2)

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 6

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

FIGURE 4 | Schematic representation of experimental probing
and calculation of the uptake rate constant – k up – exempliﬁed
with Fe-limited Emiliania huxleyi uptake data. Note that the
complexing ligand L for strong ligands such as DFB should be in

sufﬁcient excess of Fe to rule out the presence of Fe(cid:2) (which would
bias uptake rate since Fe(cid:2) is taken up more readily than FeL). But
L:Fe should be minimal to prevent ligand from competing with cells
for Fe (and thus decreasing uptake rates).

Table 1 | A comparison between the minimal daily Fe requirements and the daily FeDFB uptake capacity of Synechococcus spp.

Daily FeDFB uptake capacity: k up × [Fe]

k up (DFB)−
Uptake rate constant for FeDFBa
∼3× 10-13 L cell−1 day−1

[Fe]−
Fe-substrate concentrationb
∼4× 10−9 mol L−1

∼1.2× 10−21 mol Fe cell−1 day−1

Q−
intracellular Fe quota for Synechococcus spp.c
∼10−18 mol cell−1

Minimal daily Fe requirement: Q× μ
μ−
Fe-limited growth rated
∼0.4 day−1

∼4× 10−18 mol Fe cell−1 day−1

Minimal daily Fe requirements are calculated by multiplying intracellular Fe quota (Q) by Fe-limited growth rates (μ). Uptake capacity is calculated by multiplying kup
by the concentration of Fe-substrate [Fe] in the environment. Calculating for FeDFB, we take a generous estimate of dissolved iron concentrations in open ocean
waters and assume this pool it is made up entirely of FeDFB-like compounds.
aSee Figure A1; in Appendix, ρ= 2.6× 10−20 ± 8.2× 10−22 mol Fe cell−1 day−1; FeDFB= 90 nM.
bHypothetical dissolved iron value in open ocean waters. We assume all dissolved iron is FeDFB.
cHenley and Yin (1998).
dBased on Kudo and Harrison (1997) and Brand (1991).

Fe uptake rates of E. huxleyi from 100 nM radiolabeled FeDFB
(Fe:DFB ratio 1:1.1) to 90 nM radiolabeled FeEDTA (Fe:EDTA
ratio 1:1111; Fe
(in the presence
of EDTA) is only about twice as fast as for FeDFB, the uptake

∼80 pM). While uptake rate of Fe

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

= 1.7 × 10
−8
(cid:2)
constants span four orders of magnitude with kFe
−1 day
−1
up
mol Fe cell
(Figure 4). This marked difference in kup stems from the much
(cid:2)
lower substrate concentration of Fe
as compared to FeDFB. While

−12 mol Fe cell

−1 and kFeDFB

= 1.7× 10

−1 day

up

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 7

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

FIGURE 5 | Relative scale of Fe availability established from
phytoplankton uptake rates obtained for cultures (A) and natural
assemblages (B). By converting experimental data to uptake-rate
constants, and normalizing it further relative to Fe’, comparisons across
organisms, Fe-substrates and environments are made possible (see text
and Figure 4 for details). Different Fe-complexes are presented as
different colors, while bar length represents variations among
experiments, and circles denote no uptake. Abbreviations: Goe, goethite;
DFB, desferrioxamine B; AB, Aerobactin; FC, ferrichrome; PYN, Porphyrin;

MS, Monosaccharides; PS, Polysaccharides; AZ, Azotochelin; DPS, DNA
binding protein from starved cells (iron storage proteins); CAT,
Gallocatechin; DFE, desferrioxamine E. See Appendix for supporting data
and Figure 3 for location descriptions. References: aShaked et al. (2005),
bChen and Wang (2008), cNodwell and Price (2001), dKustka et al. (2005),
eMaldonado and Price (2001), fHassler and Schoemann (2009), gHassler
et al. (2011b), hKranzler et al. (2011), iMaldonado and Price (1999),
jMaldonado et al. (2005), kWells et al. (1994); lLis and Shaked (2009), ‡ Lis
and Shaked, unpublished.

browsing through published uptake data it becomes apparent that
kup values for any speciﬁc Fe-compound varies among organisms
in accordance with their sizes and degree of Fe limitation (Sunda
and Huntsman, 1995; Shaked et al., 2005). Seeking a way to present
data on many Fe-compounds and many phytoplankton species
simultaneously, we chose to establish a relative bioavailability scale
which is illustrated in Figure 5. Here, we divide the uptake con-
stants of various Fe complexes by the uptake constant of Fe
where
both constants are obtained from a single study. The resulting ratio

(cid:2)

(cid:2)
,
represents the availability of model Fe-compounds relative to Fe
shown on a logarithmic scale for a variety of cultured phytoplank-
ton in Figure 5A. A similar calculation was conducted for natural
phytoplankton populations as shown in Figure 5B.

The data presented in Figure 5 clearly show that both in the
laboratory and natural environment Fe
is highly bioavailable as
compared to most organically bound iron forms and colloids, as
previously suggested by Morel et al. (2008). A notable exception
to this is the recently reported high availability of Fe bound to

(cid:2)

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 8

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

saccharides, tested using model mono-and polysaccharides with
several cultured species, and natural phytoplankton (Figures 5A,B
and references therein). Iron bound to siderophores such as fer-
richrome (FC), ferrioxamine B (DFB), aerobactin (AB), and azo-
tochelin (AZ) is accessible to several cultured phytoplankton at a
(cid:2)
low to intermediate degree as compared to Fe
. However, when
grown under Fe-replete conditions, diatoms from the genus Tha-
lassiosira (and we estimate that this is probably true for other
diatoms) are unable to access siderophore bound Fe (Figure 5A).
Similarly, ferrioxamine complexes are more accessible to nat-
ural phytoplankton assemblages in low Fe than high Fe waters
(e.g., Southern Ocean vs. Loch Scridain or offshore vs. coastal
stations in the subarctic Paciﬁc, Figure 5B). While centric Tha-
lassiosira spp. diatoms acquire Fe from a wide range of organic
substrates, they are unable to internalize stable Fe oxides (Rich
and Morel, 1990). On the other hand, mixotrophic dinoﬂagellates
capable of consuming particles (e.g., Chrysochromulina ericina)
are able to utilize goethite but not FeDFB (Maranger et al., 1998;
Nodwell and Price, 2001). It is important to keep in mind that
the source of variation between phytoplankton species and Fe-
compounds in Figure 5 may also be attributed to experimental
conditions. For example, the relative bioavailability FeDFB may
change depending on the amount of excess free DFB present in the
experimental medium, where a higher excess makes FeDFB seem
less bioavailable. Nonetheless, we ﬁnd this method of comparison
illuminating when considering the bioavailability of different Fe-
substrates to aquatic phytoplankton. In this respect, the use of
EDTA to buffer known Fe
concentrations is indispensable since
Fe
is easily calculated despite differences in experimental set-ups.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

−6 L cell

−9 L cell

−1 day
(cid:2)
−1 and Fe

up ∼ 2× 10
−1 day

Gauging the contribution of Fe-substrates to meeting phytoplankton
Fe demand in situ
Experimentally obtained uptake rate constants can help exam-
ine the availability of various Fe species in natural settings. This
is done by multiplying kup by measured or predicted concen-
trations of a speciﬁc Fe-compound. For example, multiplying
typical HNLC Fe concentrations of 70 pM chelated Fe (FeL) and
0.07 pM unchelated Fe (Fe
, Rue and Bruland, 1995) by rep-
−1 and
resentative uptake constants- kFeL
up ∼ 1× 10
−1 (Shaked et al., 2005), results in FeL
−1 day
(cid:2)
kFe
uptake rate of ∼1.4× 10
−19 mol Fe cell
uptake
rate of ∼7× 10
−1 day
−20 mol Fe cell
−1. The overall uptake rate
of 2× 10
−1 day
−19 mol Fe cell
−1, contributed 2/3 by FeL and 1/3
(cid:2)
by Fe
, is well within the estimated steady state uptake of natural
phytoplankton of 2× 10
−20–4× 10
−1 (e.g.,
Strzepek et al., 2005). Since the kup of most FeL complexes is
much lower than that of Fe
in the ocean
can be equated to 100–10000 pM of organically bound Fe, making
Fe
a potentially important Fe source, despite its low concentra-
tions. Therefore, Fe
formed by processes such as photoreductive
dissolution of Fe oxides (Waite and Morel, 1984; Wells et al., 1991;
Barbeau and Moffett, 2000) or the degradation of photolabile Fe
complexes (Barbeau et al., 2001; Rijkenberg et al., 2006; Amin et al.,
2009; Steigenberger et al., 2010) may contribute to a transient yet
signiﬁcant Fe pool which caters, at least partially, to phytoplankton
iron requirements in surface waters (Morel et al., 2008).

−18 mol Fe cell

−1 day
(cid:2)

(Figure 5A), 1 pM Fe

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Such calculations can also be used to examine if a speciﬁc com-
pound is likely to support in situ growth of certain phytoplankton
species by comparison to the minimal daily Fe requirements. As
an example we examine the ability of FeDFB to support Syne-
chococcus spp. growth. Table 1 details the calculation and shows
that the minimal theoretical daily Fe requirement of Synechococ-
cus is three orders of magnitude greater than its FeDFB uptake
capacity, even given an overshoot in the estimated concentration
of FeDFB-like Fe complexes in natural waters. Therefore while
Synechococcus is capable of transporting DFB bound iron (i.e.,
FeDFB can be termed bioavailable should uptake be the single cri-
terion for bioavailability), FeDFB or similar compounds alone are
insufﬁcient in meeting the Fe demands of this organism.

Needless to say, care should be taken in the use of kup as a
tool of comparison: factors such as experimental conditions and
environmental constraints should be taken into account. When
synthesizing laboratory and ﬁeld data it is important to bear in
mind that the degree to which a speciﬁc organic Fe complex (FeL)
supports phytoplankton growth in situ is inﬂuenced by factors
other than its direct uptake rate. The residence time of FeL in
surface water and its tendency to undergo chemical and physi-
cal transformations all inﬂuence its ﬁnal availability, an issue we
further explore in the next section.

ADDED COMPLEXITY TO BIOAVAILABILITY: BIO-MEDIATED
TRANSFORMATIONS OF Fe SPECIATION
Having discussed the fundamentals of bioavailability in the form
of uptake pathways and rates – we now turn our attention to the
added complexity of Fe–organism interactions (Figure 1). While
iron inputs and availability are widely recognized as factors shap-
ing the biology of marine and fresh water environments, biological
activities, in turn, exert strong control on iron speciation and
cycling in aquatic ecosystems, and may even inﬂuence its inputs
(Figure 6). Here we explore how Fe–organism interactions can
affect iron bioavailability in complex and sometimes unexpected
ways due to the many players and intricacies involved in natural
systems. We endeavor to address some of these complexities in the
present section.

Basic life processes signiﬁcantly impact the inputs, speciation
and fate of iron in aquatic ecosystems (Figure 6). Secretion of
exopolymers and siderophores, bacterial Fe-oxide respiration, and
food web interactions involving bacteria, phytoplankton, grazers,
and viruses may all alter iron chemistry and resulting bioavailabil-
ity (Figure 6; e.g., Poorvin et al., 2004; Boye et al., 2005; Sarthou
et al., 2008; Schlosser and Croot, 2009). Thus, far from being slaves
to Fe, microorganisms are able to manipulate iron speciation in
their surroundings to some extent. Having said this, it should be
noted that very few microbial processes inﬂuencing iron chemistry
are clearly intended to serve iron acquisition purposes and more
importantly, not all biological modiﬁcations of iron speciation
inﬂuence its bioavailability favorably. In this section we classify
a number of major pathways by which microbial communities
alter iron speciation in aquatic environments. Microorganisms are
able to mediate Fe redox transformations in their immediate sur-
roundings while biological production and release of Fe-binding
ligands are imperative to keeping iron in solution. No less impor-
tant is the role microbial food web interactions play in the rapid

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 9

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

FIGURE 6 | Selected examples of biological interactions with
external iron inputs (e.g., aeolian dust deposition, sediment
resuspension, ﬂuvial, and hydrothermal Fe) and organism mediated
inﬂuences on iron speciation and recycling in aquatic environments.
While the microbial web in its entirety (from grazers to primary
producers, viruses and heterotrophic bacteria) inﬂuences iron dynamics
and availability to all community members, we focus on resultant Fe
bioavailability to photosynthetic microorganisms. Abbreviations: dFe,

dissolved iron; cFe, colloidal iron; pFe, particulate Fe. References:
aSander and Koschinsky (2011), bWu et al. (2011), cLohan and Bruland
(2008), dSevermann et al. (2010), eBatchelli et al. (2010), fBoyd et al.
(2010b), gRubin et al. (2011), hBarbeau et al. (1996), iTang et al. (2011),
jSato et al. (2007), kBuck et al. (2010), lBalzano et al. (2009), mMaldonado
and Price (1999), nShaked et al. (2002), oHiggins et al. (2009), pStrzepek
et al. (2005), qTsuda et al. (2007), rBoyd et al. (2010a), sBoyd and Ellwood
(2010), tKuma et al. (1996).

recycling of iron in surface waters. Iron regeneration has received
some recent attention (Strzepek et al., 2005; Boyd et al., 2010a)
and will not be discussed in detail here. Rather, we will focus on
the two former processes and their impact on the Fe pool available
to phytoplankton.

BIOLOGICAL CONTROL ON Fe REDOX TRANSFORMATIONS
Iron has two oxidation states of importance to its aquatic chem-
istry – Fe(II) and Fe(III). Processes of Fe oxidation and reduction,
known as redox reactions, take place throughout the water column,
across chemical gradients, in sediments, and microenvironments.
Redox reactions are central in determining the physical and chem-
ical form of iron and its subsequent chemical and biological reac-
tivity (Figure 7; Table 2). While both abiotic and biotic processes
regulate iron redox transformations, we focus on the role biology
plays in mediating iron redox cycling and the resulting effects on
Fe availability to phytoplankton. We also attempt to distinguish
between redox reactions of dissolved inorganic, dissolved organic
and colloidal/particulate iron, as the governing factors and the
ensuing changes in Fe bioavailability are likely to vary between the
different iron species (Figure 7; Table 2).

Speciation and reactions
In oxygenated, neutral pH surface waters iron persists predomi-
nantly in its oxidized form – Fe(III), as ﬂuxes of the thermodynam-
ically unstable Fe(II) will undergo prompt oxidation by oxygen and
hydrogen peroxide (Figure 7; Table 2; Gonzalez-Davila et al., 2005;
Santana-Casiano et al., 2005). Fe(II) oxidation rates are not only
regulated by the abiotic factors of temperature, pH, and salinity
(Santana-Casiano et al., 2006), but also by biology. Bio-generated
redox reactive species, oxygen consumption and release via respi-
ration, as well as photosynthesis are able to inﬂuence oxidizing
agent type and concentration as well as local pH conditions.
In environments characterized by high biomass, low turbulence,

poor ventilation, or low alkalinity (e.g., marine aggregates, coastal
waters, oxygen minimum zones, and lakes) signiﬁcant biological
modiﬁcations of the reactants and/or conditions involved in Fe(II)
oxidation have been reported (Emmenegger et al., 2001; Shaked
et al., 2002; Moffett et al., 2007; Lohan and Bruland, 2008). In
pelagic, low biomass surface ocean waters, biology is thought to
exert minor controls on Fe(II) oxidation rates (e.g., Miller et al.,
1995; Shaked, 2008). However, this view may require reassessment
given the biological production of superoxide and hydrogen per-
oxide recently observed in several new open ocean studies (Rose
et al., 2008; Hansard et al., 2010; Vermilyea et al., 2010).

In order for Fe(II) to persist at measurable concentrations in
oxygen rich water, continuous Fe(II) production and/or Fe(II)
supply must take place (Figure 7; Table 2). Multiple Fe reduc-
tion pathways were studied and suggested to operate at varying
degrees in surface waters, including direct photochemical reduc-
tion, reduction by superoxide of photochemical or biological
origin, thermal reduction, reduction by phytoplankton cell sur-
face enzymes, and microbial reduction in isolated suboxic and
anoxic microenvironments such as settling fecal pellets and aggre-
gates (Table 2; Alldredge and Cohen, 1987; Kuma et al., 1992;
Johnson et al., 1994; Voelker and Sedlak, 1995; Maldonado and
Price, 2001; Shaked et al., 2002; Kustka et al., 2005; Rose et al.,
2005; Barbeau, 2006; Rijkenberg et al., 2006; Balzano et al., 2009;
Roy and Wells, 2011). Fe(II) may be supplied from external sources
such as sediments, anoxic or suboxic water, hydrothermal vents,
rain and aerosols, or originate from the in situ recycling of cellu-
lar iron through grazing and viral lysis (Kieber et al., 2001; Croot
et al., 2005; Statham et al., 2005; Buck et al., 2006; Breitbarth et al.,
2009). In addition, retardation of Fe(II) oxidation by low tempera-
ture, low pH, or complexation by Fe(II) stabilizing organic ligands
are thought to contribute to the maintenance of measurable Fe(II)
concentrations (Croot et al., 2001, 2008; Roy et al., 2008).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 10

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

FIGURE 7 | Redox reactions of different Fe species in aquatic environments. See Table 2 below for details on processes 1–6 in the ﬁgure.

Table 2 | Redox reactions of different Fe species in aquatic environments, their governing factors, and potential inﬂuence on Fe speciation and
bioavailability (this table accompanies Figure 7).

Mediators and governing factors
1. Fe(II)(cid:2) OXIDATION
• O2, O
−
2 , H2O2
• Regulated by pH, temp, salinity
2. Fe(III)(cid:2) REDUCTION
• Enzymatic– phytoplankton (assimilatory) & bacteria
(dissimilatory – low oxygen)
• Direct photolysis or reduction by photo-produced reactive
transients
• O
−
2 (photochemical/biological origin)
• Humic and fulvic acids
3. Fe(III)L REDUCTION AND DISSOCIATION
• Enzymatic (as above)
• Photochemical (as above)
• Superoxide (as above)

4. Fe(II)L OXIDATION
• O2, O
−
2 , H2O2
• Ligands (L)– some stabilize the complex as Fe(II)L, some
accelerate its oxidation
5. REDUCTIVE DISSOLUTION OF SOLID PHASE IRON
• Bacterial dissimilatory reduction in aggregates
• Ingested colloids (zooplankton)
• Direct photolysis and light enhanced siderophore
mediated dissolution
6. OXIDATION OF SURFACE ADSORBED Fe(II)
• O2 and mineral surfaces (O2 oxidizes surface bound Fe(II)
much faster than dissolved Fe(II))

Effects on speciation and bioavailability

References

• Fe(III) formation and subsequent hydrolysis and precipitation,
decreases bioavailability

• Elevated [Fe(II)s.s] and maintenance of active redox cycle, both of
which slow down Fe(III) hydrolysis and precipitation
• Availability is enhanced when [Fe(cid:2)] increases (as Fe(III) and Fe(II) are
equally bioavailable)

• Weaker ligand binding to Fe(II) (compared to Fe(III)L) may favor
dissociation of free Fe(II) and increase in [Fe(cid:2)] and bioavailability
• If Fe(II) remains complexed – its oxidation may be
stalled/accelerated compared to Fe(II). Bioavailability of
Fe(II)L – unknown
• Rates are slower/faster than Fe(II) oxidation resulting in
elevated/lowered [Fe(II)Ls.s]
• Bioavailability of Fe(II)L – unknown
• Elevated [Fe(cid:2)] due to increased Fe(II) ﬂux
• Elevated FeL (when ligands are at play)
• Dissolution enhances bioavailability as solid phase iron is largely
inaccessible
• If oxidation precedes detachment of Fe(II): decreased ﬂux of Fe(II)
• Following oxidation, the newly precipitated Fe is more reactive than
the original mineral

a–c

d–g

h–i

j–k

l–m

n

[Fe(II)s.s] , steady state Fe(II) concentrations.
References: a. Santana-Casiano et al. (2005), b. Gonzalez-Davila et al. (2005), c. King et al. (1995), d. Shaked et al. (2002), e. Kustka et al. (2005), f. Voelker and Sedlak
(1995), g. Miller et al. (1995), h. Barbeau et al. (2001), i. Rijkenberg et al. (2006), j. Rose and Waite (2002), k. Rose and Waite (2003), l. Balzano et al. (2009), m. Barbeau
et al. (1996), n. Stumm and Sulzberger (1992).

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 11

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

Thanks to the development of rapid and sensitive ﬂow injec-
tion based chemiluminescence techniques (FI-CL), Fe(II) datasets
in the oxygenated upper waters of oceans and lakes have recently
begun to accumulate (Emmenegger et al., 2001; Shaked et al., 2002;
Ussher et al., 2007; Shaked, 2008; Hansard et al., 2009; Sarthou
et al., 2011). Some of these measurements point to a strong biolog-
ical control on Fe(II) formation as attested to by the co-variance of
chlorophyll and Fe(II) concentrations as well as measurable night-
time Fe(II) levels. Commonly, the presence of non-photochemical
Fe(II) in the photic zone is suggested to reﬂect Fe reduction by
assimilatory cell surface enzymes of phytoplankton or by biologi-
cally produced superoxide (e.g., Sarthou et al., 2011). Assimilatory
Fe reduction by cell surface enzymes is not likely to generate
high ﬂuxes of Fe(II), as the Fe(II) is probably generated within
an enclosed protein complex and subsequently internalized by an
adjacent transport protein (Kustka et al., 2005; Shaked et al., 2005).
Rather, superoxide, a diffusible reducing agent which has recently
been shown to be generated non-photochemically throughout
the photic zone (Rose et al., 2008, 2010; Hansard et al., 2010),
may be a central player in Fe(II) formation. Similarly, experi-
mental observations of phytoplankton mediated Fe reduction in
ﬂow through systems [where Fe(II) is detected downstream of
membrane-mounted cells], may be caused by superoxide released
from the cells (Milne et al., 2009; Saragosti et al., 2010) in addition
to or rather than cell surface enzymes. Despite emerging evi-
dence for non-photochemical Fe(II) formation, photochemistry
should not be underestimated as a strong mediator of Fe redox
reactions. Currently, it is analytically challenging to detect photo-
chemically produced Fe(II) as it oxidizes completely by the time
the water is retrieved and analyzed. Minimizing collection time
with high throughput pumps, Shaked (2008) observed a highly
active photo-induced redox cycle in the surface waters of the Gulf
of Aqaba.

Bioavailability
As Fe(II) is far more soluble than Fe(III), reductive processes gen-
erating Fe(II) and/or the occurrence of the thermodynamically
unstable Fe(II) in surface waters are commonly linked to enhanced
iron bioavailability (e.g., Sunda, 2001). This often justiﬁed notion
merits careful consideration as some Fe(II) species may not be
available and since not all reductive processes increase Fe avail-
ability. Aided with Table 2 and Figure 7, we outline the effects of
several reductive processes on Fe bioavailability below.

While Fe(II) is potentially the more bioavailable redox state of
Fe, several factors will determine whether iron availability is indeed
increased by reductive processes. These include the characteristics
of the Fe species undergoing reduction, the reductive pathway, the
presence of other ligands and oxidants in the immediate surround-
ings, and ultimately the uptake machinery of the phytoplankton
utilizing this iron. As a rule of thumb, redox processes that increase
the concentrations of dissolved inorganic Fe (be it Fe(II)’ or
Fe(III)’), will generally tend to boost the bioavailability of iron.
With this in mind, we discuss the potential for Fe
release and/or
changes to Fe lability occurring in different reductive processes.

(cid:2)

Reductive dissolution of solid phase Fe. As solid phase Fe
is considered unavailable to phytoplankton (Rich and Morel,
1990; Wells et al., 1991), reductive dissolution of mineral Fe or

(cid:2)

(cid:2)
surface adsorbed Fe generate Fe
, and thus enhance Fe availability
(Figure 7; Table 2). Even when the Fe
formed through reductive
dissolution exceeds its solubility limit, it will hydrolyze and form
fresh hydroxides which serve as a better iron source than their par-
ent minerals (Stumm and Sulzberger, 1992; Yoshida et al., 2006).
When reductive dissolution of mineral Fe is mediated, assisted, or
occurs in the presence of organic ligands, it results in FeL (organi-
cally bound Fe) rather than Fe
(Kraemer, 2004; Borer et al., 2005).
As stated previously, Fe
is acquired at faster rates than most stud-
ied dissolved organic Fe-complexes (see section“Phytoplankton Fe
Acquisition Rates”, Figure 5), and hence the presence of organics
may slow uptake down. On the other hand, organic complexation
may sustain dissolved Fe in surface waters for longer and at concen-
trations exceeding its solubility limit (see next section “Biological
Production and Release of Iron Binding Ligands”), subsequently
providing phytoplankton with Fe over a longer duration.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Reduction of organically bound Fe(III). As reasoned above,
reductive release of Fe
from organic complexes is likely to enhance
uptake, at least over short time scales (Figure 7; Table 2). When the
ligand (L) undergoes photo-destruction, free, unchelated Fe(II) is
liberated and Fe
increases, as has been extensively demonstrated
for Fe(III)EDTA (Hudson and Morel, 1993; Sunda and Huntsman,
1997). In other cases, Fe(II) may remain complexed as Fe(II)L,
undergo reoxidation to Fe(III)L or dissociate as unchelated Fe(II)
due to reduced ligand afﬁnity for Fe(II) (Harrington and Crum-
bliss, 2009). Hence, some of these redox transformations will
ultimately not alter Fe speciation, but others may temporarily
shift Fe(III) from strong complexes into weak complexes, possibly
enhancing Fe bioavailability.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Reduction of Fe(III)’. Unlike the former reductive processes
which enhance Fe
concentrations, the total unchelated iron
pool remains unchanged when ferric Fe
transforms into ferrous
Fe(II)’ (Figure 7; Table 2). Nonetheless, this reaction mediated
by enzymes on the cell surface, is central to the acquisition of
(cid:2)
Fe
through the reductive uptake pathway described in Section
“Uptake Pathways of Aquatic Phytoplankton,” at least for eukary-
otes (Shaked et al., 2005). Fe(III)’ may alternatively undergo
reduction by superoxide in the bulk solution (Voelker and Sedlak,
1995), but the effect of this process on Fe availability is dis-
(cid:2)
putable. Kustka et al. (2005) found that Fe
uptake by diatoms
remained unaffected by superoxide mediated reduction of Fe(III)’
in the experimental medium, while Rose et al. (2005) reported that
(cid:2)
superoxide enhanced Fe
uptake by cyanobacteria. More work is
(cid:2)
required to evaluate the importance of bulk solution Fe
reduction
in increasing Fe availability.

Thus far we examined the effect of reductive processes on Fe
availability and now we turn to the chemical nature and bioavail-
ability of Fe(II), where increasing reports suggest that some of the
measured Fe(II) in the ocean is organically bound (Croot et al.,
2008; Roy et al., 2008). The existence of Fe(II) binding ligands is
deduced from deviations in Fe(II) oxidation kinetics in some nat-
ural samples as compared to seawater free of organic matter (Roy
et al., 2008). Currently, neither the identity nor the bioavailabil-
ity of these complexes is known and hence elevated Fe(II) levels
are not necessarily indicative of enhanced bioavailability. Indeed,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 12

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

phytoplankton iron stress was not alleviated in Fe fertilized areas
where Fe(II) accounted for a signiﬁcant fraction of the dissolved
iron pool (Croot et al., 2008; Roy et al., 2008). Moreover, as the
iron in Fe(II)L complexes is already reduced, phytoplankton can-
not employ reductive pathways to liberate it from the complex
prior to transport as they do for Fe(III)L (see Uptake Pathways
of Aquatic Phytoplankton). Thus, if these Fe(II)L are slow to oxi-
dize, we are faced with yet another challenge in determining the
transport pathways of Fe(II)L.

BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTION AND RELEASE OF IRON BINDING LIGANDS
Over the course of their short life span, aquatic microbes release
copious amounts of biomolecules into their immediate envi-
ronments. These diverse secretions and exudates include waste
products, secondary metabolites, sugars, and proteins as well as
cellular contents released via grazing, viral attack or programmed
cell death (Bidle and Falkowski, 2004; Poorvin et al., 2004; Strzepek
et al., 2005; Dalbec and Twining, 2009; Boyd et al., 2010a). While
the minority of microbial secretions are synthesized and released
with the explicit purpose of binding iron, many do possess an
Fe-binding capacity of some kind (Rijkenberg et al., 2008; Has-
sler et al., 2011a; Levy et al., 2011). It is now well established that
the overwhelming majority of dissolved (and in some cases col-
loidal) iron in most aquatic environments is found as organic
complexes (Hunter and Boyd, 2007; Vraspir and Butler, 2009).
Research efforts to elucidate the nature and origin of these Fe-
binding organic ligands have yielded ambiguous results, reﬂecting
the fact that (a) organic ligands may be introduced into aquatic sys-
tems via multiple pathways within and outside the water column
and (b) organically bound iron (FeL) may be subjected to fur-
ther biological and chemical transformations (Figure 7; Table 3).
Not all organic Fe complexes are available to all phytoplankton,
and even those FeL which are utilized are most likely less available
; Figure 5; Morel et al., 2008).
than dissolved inorganic iron (Fe
Nonetheless, iron binding ligands are vital for the maintenance of
dissolved iron concentrations well above the Fe solubility limit and
for retarding Fe aggregation and loss from surface waters (Kuma
et al., 1996). Here we provide an abridged overview of some of the
organic Fe complexes thought to exist in seawater, highlighting
the ways in which organic complexation affects Fe speciation and
bioavailability.

(cid:2)

Speciation
Organic ligands capable of binding iron (and other metals), were
detected in pelagic and coastal ocean waters, estuaries, lakes, and
rivers, often in excess of dissolved Fe concentrations (Boye et al.,
2001; Nagai et al., 2007; Duckworth et al., 2009; Hassler et al.,
2009; Laglera and van den Berg, 2009; Buck et al., 2010). Using
competitive ligand exchange (CLE) techniques, researchers have
classiﬁed two major organic Fe ligand groups based on their sta-
bility constants with regards to Fe3+
– the strong L1 and weaker
L2 class (e.g., Gledhill and van den Berg, 1994; Ibisanmi et al.,
2011). A common view is that the strong L1 ligand class consists
of siderophore-like molecules, while the less strongly complex-
ing L2 ligands consist of cellular degradation products. However,
the picture is probably more complex and there are additional
weaker natural Fe ligands, such as saccharides, overlooked by CLE

Table 3 | The inﬂuence of siderophore and saccharide release on iron
chemistry and availability in aquatic environments.

Siderophores

Saccharides (EPS,TEP)

RESULTING IRON SPECIES
Strongly bound organic dFe & cFe
Fe(III)L
IRON SPECIES ACTED UPON
dFe, cFe, & pFe
IMPACT
• Maintain Fe in solution
• Fe proximity to cell (amphiphilic)
• Particulate Fe dissolution

SUBSEQUENT TRANSFORMATIONS
Photochemical reduction

Organically bound/adsorbed dFe,
cFe, & pFe

dFe & cFe
• Maintain Fe in solution or promote
its aggregation and export from
photic zone
• Fe proximity to cell
• Photochemical reduction
• Ligand exchange
• Adsorption/desorption of dFe

ORGANISMS AT PLAY
Heterotrophic bacteria, fresh water
phytoplankton
BIOAVAILABILITY
Varies between complexes and
organisms but probably lower
compared to Fe(cid:2)
REFERENCE
a–f

Phytoplankton, Bacteria, Viruses,
Zooplankton

As high as Fe(cid:2) for all studied
organisms

g–m

dFe, dissolved iron; cFe, colloidal iron; pFe, particulate Fe.
References: a. Sandy and Butler (2009), b. Vraspir and Butler (2009), c. Holmén
and Casey (1996), d. Martinez et al. (2000), e. Kraemer et al. (2005), f. Barbeau
et al. (2003), g. Hassler et al. (2011a), h. Hassler and Schoemann (2009), i. Steigen-
berger et al. (2010), j. Passow (2002), k. Strmecki et al. (2010), l. Berman-Frank
et al. (2007), m. Decho (1990).

methods (Town and Filella, 2000; Hunter and Boyd, 2007; Boyd
and Ellwood, 2010).

The most

studied microbial Fe-binding exudates

are
siderophores, compounds which have been isolated from both
freshwater and seawater (Table 3; Macrellis et al., 2001; Mawji
et al., 2008; Velasquez et al., 2011). Typiﬁed by an exceptionally
high Fe-binding capacity and low molecular weight, siderophores
are produced under iron limitation by marine heterotrophic bacte-
ria and some fresh water cyanobacteria (e.g., Haygood et al., 1993;
Vraspir and Butler, 2009), while production by marine cyanobac-
teria remains controversial (Hopkinson and Morel, 2009). Less
studied, but widely spread microbial exudates capable of bind-
ing iron are exopolymer substances (EPS) and their transparent
exopolymer particles (TEP) derivatives (Table 3). These high
molecular weight saccharide-rich exopolymers are secreted by
most microorganisms, including phytoplankton, bacteria, and
zooplankton (Decho, 1990; Passow, 2002; Wotton, 2004; Croot
et al., 2007). EPS are thought to weakly bind iron compared to
siderophores based on recent data from several model saccharides
(Hassler et al., 2011a). TEP, on the other hand, have been shown to
have a high afﬁnity for Fe (Quigley et al., 2002). Many other com-
pounds secreted or released due to grazing and lysis contribute to

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 13

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

the “Fe ligand soup” in aquatic environments (Boye et al., 2005;
Tsuda et al., 2007; Strmecki et al., 2010; Poorvin et al., 2011). The
release of iron binding ligands in cultures supplemented with Fe
was reported for the marine haptophyte E. huxleyi and two diatom
species, qualifying these as non-siderophore Fe-binding ligands
(Boye and van den Berg, 2000; Rijkenberg et al., 2008). Some tox-
ins, capable of binding Fe (but not as strongly as siderophores) are
known to be synthesized by harmful bloom forming phytoplank-
ton upon Fe limitation (Rue and Bruland, 2001). Secretion of both
the neurotoxin domoic acid (a water soluble amino acid produced
by Pseudo-nitzschia spp.) and the hepatoxin microcystin (a pep-
tide produced by Microcystis aeruginosa) were shown to improve
growth under low Fe conditions (Maldonado et al., 2002; Wells
et al., 2005; Alexova et al., 2011). Interestingly, these toxins do not
directly provide the cell with Fe, but rather increase copper supply
for Pseudo-nitzschia spp. enabling the synthesis of copper con-
taining high afﬁnity iron uptake proteins (Maldonado et al., 2002;
Wells et al., 2005), and probably aid M. aeruginosa in oxidative
damage protection (Alexova et al., 2011). In addition, terrestrial
humics have recently been suggested to be important iron binding
ligands in open ocean waters (van den Berg, 1995; Laglera and van
den Berg, 2009; Laglera et al., 2011).

Bioavailability
At the cellular level, acquisition of a speciﬁc compound depends to
a large degree on the uptake machinery possessed by an organism
(see Phytoplankton Fe Acquisition Systems). In the natural envi-
ronment, additional parameters such as the compound residence
time in surface waters and its tendency to undergo biological and
chemical transformation inﬂuence its ability to support growth
(Figure 1). In this section we brieﬂy examine the effect of envi-
ronmental and chemical factors on phytoplankton Fe acquisition
from EPS and siderophore bound iron.

At the organism level, recent studies have found that iron bound
to model saccharides is highly available to diatoms and natural
phytoplankton assemblages (Figure 5; Table 3; Hassler and Schoe-
mann, 2009; Hassler et al., 2011a,b). This was accounted for by the
ability of saccharides to stabilize iron in the dissolved and col-
loidal form and increase the labile Fe pool (Hassler et al., 2011b).
In the natural environment, the effect of saccharides on Fe sol-
ubility and residence time in the surface water is less clear. EPS
and TEP were shown to promote aggregate formation and particle
export (Decho, 1990; Passow, 2002), thus possibly shortening the
residence time of saccharide bound Fe in surface waters (Berman-
Frank et al., 2007). Additionally, iron bound to saccharides may
be subjected to chemical and photochemical transformations, fur-
ther altering its fate and accessibility to phytoplankton. Iron is
weakly bound to saccharides and may be exchanged with stronger
ligands such as siderophores (Hunter and Boyd, 2007). Pho-
tochemical Fe(II) production from saccharide bound iron was
recently reported (Steigenberger et al., 2010), but its environmen-
tal repercussions are unexplored as yet. Lastly, EPS often create
protective microenvironments around microbial consortia, single
cells, and cell aggregates (Decho, 1990; Passow, 2002). The forma-
tion of such microhabitats impacts all concentration dependent
processes and, as such, EPS surrounded cells may be diffusion lim-
ited when it comes to acquiring dissolved Fe from the surrounding

waters. However, EPS confers two signiﬁcant advantages on cells:
ﬁrstly, EPS are highly adsorbent allowing for the storage and easier
processing of iron and secondly the conﬁned microenvironment
provides protection from diffusive losses of Fe associated with the
EPS (Sunda, 2001; Hassler et al., 2011a).

The role of siderophores in supporting phytoplankton growth
in situ has received more attention than any other Fe chelator, but
in turn raised many new questions (Table 3; Maldonado et al.,
2005; Pickell et al., 2009). As the acquisition of siderophores was
detailed in Section “Phytoplankton Fe Acquisition Systems,” we
brieﬂy discuss two chemical features of siderophores with poten-
tial repercussions for iron fate and bioavailability. Firstly, many of
the Fe-siderophore complexes isolated from marine bacteria are
photolabile (Barbeau et al., 2001, 2003; Vraspir and Butler, 2009).
However, due to the fast oxidation of Fe(II) within the complex and
since the photoproduct still binds Fe with high afﬁnity, this photo-
reactivity does not seem to confer any clear biological advantage
(Vraspir and Butler, 2009). This is not always the case however:
recently, photo-reduction of iron bound to a newly identiﬁed
(cid:2)
siderophore, vibrioferrin, and the subsequent release of Fe
was
reported to enhance iron uptake by dinoﬂagellates (Amin et al.,
2009). Vibrioferrin undergoes photo-degradation and does not
(cid:2)
retain signiﬁcant Fe-binding capacity, thus releasing Fe
. Secondly,
many marine siderophore isolates also tend to be amphiphilic
and closely associate with bacterial membranes, possibly prevent-
ing their loss by diffusion in the marine environment (Vraspir
and Butler, 2009). Although the study of amphiphilic siderophore
partitioning to membranes is at a very early stage, it may bear
interesting implications for the function of siderophores in iron
acquisition in the ocean.

SUMMATION
The topic of iron bioavailability has garnered wide spread interest
from the scientiﬁc community, yet due to its intrinsic complex-
ity a well-rounded understanding of this concept is lacking. In
this contribution we have attempted to disassemble bioavailability
and address some of its more biologically orientated facets. Of the
many topics covered in this synthesis, we conclude with a summary
of the principal arguments and perhaps unorthodox perspectives
which we hope lend some insights into Fe bioavailability in the
aquatic environment.
• Iron acquisition by means of reduction is a widespread Fe
uptake strategy in the ocean, common to both eukaryotic and
prokaryotic phytoplankton. Both experimental and genomic
data challenge the prevalent paradigm of siderophore-based Fe
uptake as an exclusive iron acquisition pathway amongst marine
cyanobacteria. We propose that the occurrence of siderophore
vs. reductive iron uptake can be put down to environmen-
tal rather than taxonomic considerations. Organisms resid-
ing in densely populated, low turbulence environments (e.g.,
fecal pellets, marine snow, or colony-consortiums) will favor
siderophore-based Fe acquisition, while pelagic phytoplankton
will favor the non-speciﬁc reductive strategy enabling them to
access the dilute, heterogeneous Fe pool.
• The availability of various Fe-substrates to phytoplankton can
be viewed as a spectrum rather than an absolute“all or nothing.”

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 14

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

A bioavailability scale can be established by comparing sub-
strate normalized uptake rates (by means of the uptake rate
constant – kup). We suggest that a further normalization of FeL
uptake constants relative to the Fe
uptake constant is highly
useful in the comparison of different studies, organisms and
environments. Hence, in order to establish a baseline for the
determination of relative bioavailability, we urge for the use of
EDTA in order to better regulate Fe
instead of or in addition
to ligand-free FeCl3. Looking beyond short term uptake, kup
can be used to gage if a speciﬁc compound is likely to be a sig-
niﬁcant contributor to the Fe requirements of phytoplankton
in the environment. This same approach can be extended to
natural systems where kup values of natural ligands by known
organisms may be compared to model ligands while the kup
values of known Fe-substrates by natural communities may be
contrasted with those of model organisms.
• For a fuller understanding of iron bioavailability we look beyond
phytoplankton iron uptake pathways and rates. Microorganisms
are not only inﬂuenced by their environment but are them-
selves agents of change when it comes to Fe bioavailability.
Bio-mediated redox transformations, microbial exudates and
secretions as well as food web interactions impact iron specia-
tion, residence time in surface waters and ultimate accessibility
to phytoplankton be it in a positive or negative manner.

• Due to the greater solubility of Fe(II) compared to Fe(III),
the occurrence of reductive processes and/or measurable Fe(II)
concentrations is often equated with increased bioavailability.
Accumulating evidence suggests that Fe(II) in seawater is organ-
ically bound may alter this view, as it is unclear to what degree
Fe(II)L is accessible to phytoplankton. Moreover, iron avail-
ability does not necessarily increase following its reduction.
Factors such as the characteristics of the Fe species undergoing
reduction, the reductive pathway, the presence of other ligands
and oxidants in the immediate surroundings, and ultimately
the uptake machinery of the phytoplankton utilizing this iron,
should be considered when evaluating the effect of reductive
processes on iron availability.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We wish to thank M. Maldonado, B. Sunda, B. Hopkinson, F.
Morel, P. Croot, and C. Kranzler for their insights prior and dur-
ing the preparation of this manuscript as well as the reviewers and
editor for their valuable comments. This work was supported in
part by the Israel Science Foundation grant 933/07, the Israel USA
Binational Science Foundation grant 2008097 and the Assemble
FP7 research grant awarded to H. Lis. This work is in partial ful-
ﬁllment of the requirements for a Ph. D thesis to H. Lis from the
Hebrew University.

REFERENCES
Alexova, R., Fujii, M., Birch, D., Cheng,
J., Waite, T. D., Ferrari, B. C.,
and Neilan, B. A.
Iron
uptake and toxin synthesis in the
bloom-forming Microcystis aerugi-
nosa under iron limitation. Environ.
Microbiol. 13, 1064–1077.

(2011).

Alldredge, A. L., and Cohen, Y. (1987).
Can microscale chemical patches
persist in the sea – microelectrode
study of marine snow, fecal pellets.
Science 235, 689–691.

Allen, A. E., Laroche, J., Maheswari, U.,
Lommer, M., Schauer, N., Lopez, P. J.,
Finazzi, G., Fernie, A. R., and Bowler,
C. (2008). Whole-cell response of
the pennate diatom Phaeodacty-
lum tricornutum to iron starvation.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
10438–10443.

Allen, M. D., Del Campo, J. A., Kropat,
J., and Merchant, S. S.
(2007).
FEA1, FEA2, and FRE1, encoding
two homologous secreted proteins
and a candidate ferrireductase, are
expressed coordinately with FOX1
and FTR1 in iron-deﬁcient Chlamy-
domonas reinhardtii. Eukaryotic Cell
6, 1841–1852.

Allnutt, F. C. T., and Bonner, W. D.
J. (1987). Evaluation of reductive
release as a mechanism for iron
uptake from ferrioxamine B by
Chlorella vulgaris. Plant Physiol. 85,
751–756.

Amin, S. A., Green, D. H., Kuep-
J.

per, F. C., and Carrano, C.

siderophore:

(2009). Vibrioferrin, an unusual
marine
iron bind-
ing, photochemistry, and biologi-
cal implications. Inorg. Chem. 48,
11451–11458.

Anderson, M. A., and Morel, F. M.
M. (1982). The inﬂuence of aque-
ous iron chemistry on the uptake of
iron by the coastal diatom Thalas-
siosira weissﬂogii. Limnol. Oceanogr.
27, 789–813.

Atkinson, A., and Guerinot, M. (2011).
“Metal
transport,” in The Plant
Plasma Membrane, eds A. S. Murphy,
B. Schulz, and W. Peer (Berlin:
Springer), 303–330.

Balzano, S., Statham, P. J., Pancost, R.
D., and Lloyd, J. R. (2009). Role of
microbial populations in the release
of reduced iron to the water col-
umn from marine aggregates. Aquat.
Microb. Ecol. 54, 291–303.

Barbeau, K. (2006). Photochemistry of
organic iron(III) complexing ligands
in oceanic systems. Photochem. Pho-
tobiol. 82, 1505–1516.

Barbeau, K., and Moffett, J. W. (2000).
Laboratory and ﬁeld studies of
colloidal
iron oxide dissolution
as mediated by phagotrophy and
photolysis. Limnol. Oceanogr. 45,
827–835.

Barbeau, K., Moffett, J. W., Caron,
D. A., Croot, P. L., and Erdner,
D. L. (1996). Role of protozoan
grazing in relieving iron limita-
tion of phytoplankton. Nature 380,
61–64.

Barbeau, K., Rue, E. L., Bruland,
K. W., and Butler, A.
(2001).
Photochemical cycling of iron in the
surface ocean mediated by microbial
iron (III) -binding ligands. Nature
413, 409–413.

Barbeau, K., Rue, E. L., Trick, C.
G., Bruland, K. T., and Butler,
A. (2003). Photochemical reactiv-
ity of siderophores produced by
marine heterotrophic bacteria and
cyanobacteria based on characteris-
tic Fe(III) binding groups. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 48, 1069–1078.

Batchelli, S., Muller, F. L. L., Chang, K.-
C., and Lee, C.-L. (2010). Evidence
for strong but dynamic iron-humic
colloidal associations in humic-rich
coastal waters. Environ. Sci. Technol.
44, 8485–8490.

Berman-Frank, I., Rosenberg, G., Lev-
itan, O., Haramaty, L., and Mari,
X. (2007). Coupling between auto-
catalytic cell death and transpar-
ent exopolymeric particle produc-
tion in the marine cyanobacterium
Trichodesmium. Environ. Microbiol.
9, 1415–1422.

Bidle, K. D., and Falkowski, P. G. (2004).
Cell death in planktonic, photo-
synthetic microorganisms. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 2, 643–655.

Blain, S., Queguiner, B., Armand, L.,
Belviso, S., Bombled, B., Bopp, L.,
Bowie, A., Brunet, C., Brussaard,
C., Carlotti, F., Christaki, U., Cor-
biere, A., Durand, I., Ebersbach, F.,
Fuda, J.-L., Garcia, N., Gerringa, L.,

Grifﬁths, B., Guigue, C., Guillerm,
C., Jacquet, S., Jeandel, C., Laan, P.,
Lefevre, D., Lo Monaco, C., Mal-
its, A., Mosseri, J., Obernosterer, I.,
Park, Y.-H., Picheral, M., Pondaven,
P., Remenyi, T., Sandroni, V., Sar-
thou, G., Savoye, N., Scouarnec, L.,
Souhaut, M., Thuiller, D., Timmer-
mans, K., Trull, T., Uitz, J., Van Beek,
P., Veldhuis, M., Vincent, D., Viol-
lier, E., Vong, L., and Wagener, T.
(2007). Effect of natural iron fer-
tilization on carbon sequestration
in the Southern Ocean. Nature 446,
U1070–U1071.

Borer, P. M., Sulzberger, B., Reichard,
P., and Kraemer, S. M. (2005).
Effect of siderophores on the light-
induced dissolution of
colloidal
iron(III) (hydr)oxides. Mar. Chem.
93, 179–193.

Bowler, C., Vardi, A., and Allen, A.
E. (2010). Oceanographic and bio-
geochemical insights from diatom
genomes. Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci. 2,
333–365.

Boyd, P. W., and Ellwood, M. J. (2010).
The biogeochemical cycle of iron in
the ocean. Nat. Geosci. 3, 675–682.

Boyd, P. W., Ibisanmi, E., Sander, S. G.,
Hunter, K. A., and Jackson, G. A.
(2010a). Remineralization of upper
ocean particles: implications for iron
biogeochemistry. Limnol. Oceanogr.
55, 1271–1288.

Boyd, P. W., Mackie, D. S., and Hunter,
K. A. (2010b). Aerosol iron deposi-
tion to the surface ocean – modes of

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 15

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

iron supply and biological responses.
Mar. Chem. 120, 128–143.

Boyd, P. W., Jickells, T., Law, C. S.,
Blain, S., Boyle, E. A., Buesseler,
K. O., Coale, K. H., Cullen, J. J.,
De Baar, H. J. W., Follows, M.,
Harvey, M., Lancelot, C., Levasseur,
M., Owens, N. P. J., Pollard, R.,
Rivkin, R. B., Sarmiento, J., Schoe-
mann, V., Smetacek, V., Takeda, S.,
Tsuda, A., Turner, S., and Watson,
A. J. (2007). Mesoscale iron enrich-
ment experiments 1993–2005: syn-
thesis and future directions. Science
315, 612–617.

Boye, M., Nishioka, J., Croot, P. L., Laan,
P., Timmermans, K. R., and De Baar,
H. J. W. (2005). Major deviations of
iron complexation during 22 days of
a mesoscale iron enrichment in the
open Southern Ocean. Mar. Chem.
96, 257–271.

Boye, M., and van den Berg, C. M.
G. (2000). Iron availability and the
release of iron-complexing ligands
by Emiliania huxleyi. Mar. Chem. 70,
277–287.

Boye, M., Van Den Berg, C. M. G.,
De Jong, J. T. M., Leach, H., Croot,
P., and De Baar, H. J. W. (2001).
Organic complexation of iron in the
Southern Ocean. Deep Sea Res. Part
I Oceanogr. Res. Pap. 48, 1477–1497.
Boyle, E. A. (1988). Cadmium: chemical
tracer of deepwater paleoceanogra-
phy. Paleoceanography 3, 471–489.

Brand, L. E. (1991). Minimum iron
requirements of marine phytoplank-
ton and the implications for biogeo-
chemical control of new production.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 36, 1756–1772.

Breitbarth, E., Gelting, J.,Walve, J., Hoff-
mann, L. J., Turner, D. R., Has-
sellov, M., and Ingri, J. (2009). Dis-
solved iron (II) in the Baltic Sea
surface water and implications for
cyanobacterial bloom development.
Biogeosciences 6, 2397–2420.

Buck, C. S., Landing, W. M., Resing, J.
A., and Lebon, G. T. (2006). Aerosol
iron and aluminum solubility in
the northwest Paciﬁc Ocean: results
from the 2002 IOC cruise. Geochem.
Geophys. Geosyst. 7, Q04M07.

Buck, K. N., Selph, K. E., and Barbeau,
K. A. (2010). Iron-binding ligand
production and copper speciation in
an incubation experiment of Antarc-
tic Peninsula shelf waters from the
Bransﬁeld Strait, Southern Ocean.
Mar. Chem. 122, 148–159.

Buesseler, K. O., Doney, S. C., Karl,
D. M., Boyd, P. W., Caldeira, K.,
Chai, F., Coale, K. H., De Baar, H.
J. W., Falkowski, P. G., Johnson,
K. S., Lampitt, R. S., Michaels, A.
F., Naqvi, S. W. A., Smetacek, V.,
Takeda, S., and Watson, A. J. (2008).

Environment – ocean iron fertiliza-
tion – moving forward in a sea of
uncertainty. Science 319, 162.

Chen, J.-C., Hsieh, S. I., Kropat, J.,
and Merchant, S. S. (2008). A fer-
roxidase encoded by FOX1 con-
tributes to iron assimilation under
conditions of poor iron nutrition in
Chlamydomonas. Eukaryotic Cell 7,
541–545.

Chen, M., and Wang, W. (2008). Accel-
erated uptake by phytoplankton of
iron bound to humic acids. Aquat.
Biol. 3, 155–166.

Chen, Y., Tovar-Sanchez, A., Siefert,
R. L., Sanudo-Wilhelmy, S. A., and
Zhuang, G. (2011). Luxury uptake
of aerosol iron by Trichodesmium in
the western tropical North Atlantic.
Geophys. Res. Lett. 38, L18602.

Croot, P. L., Bluhm, K., Schlosser,
C., Streu, P., Breitbarth, E., Frew,
R., and Van Ardelan, M. (2008).
Regeneration of Fe(II) during EIFeX
and SOFeX. Geophys. Res. Lett. 35,
L19606.

Croot, P. L., Bowie, A. R., Frew, R.
D., Maldonado, M. T., Hall, J. A.,
Saﬁ, K. A., La Roche, J., Boyd, P.
W., and Law, C. S. (2001). Reten-
tion of dissolved iron and Fe-II in
an iron induced Southern Ocean
phytoplankton bloom. Geophys. Res.
Lett. 28, 3425–3428.

Croot, P. L., Laan, P., Nishioka, J., Strass,
V., Cisewski, B., Boye, M., Timmer-
mans, K. R., Bellerby, R. G., Goldson,
L., Nightingale, P., and De Baar, H. J.
W. (2005). Spatial and temporal dis-
tribution of Fe(II) and H2O2 during
EisenEx, an open ocean mescoscale
iron enrichment. Mar. Chem. 95,
65–88.

Croot, P. L., Passow, U., Assmy, P.,
Jansen, S., and Strass, V. H. (2007).
Surface active substances
in the
upper water column during a South-
ern Ocean Iron Fertilization Experi-
ment (EIFEX). Geophys. Res. Lett. 34,
C06015.

Cullen, J. T., Lane, T. W., Morel, F. M. M.,
and Sherrell, R. M. (1999). Modula-
tion of cadmium uptake in phyto-
plankton by seawater CO2 concen-
tration. Nature 402, 165–167.

Dalbec, A., and Twining, B. (2009).
Remineralization of bioavailable
iron by a heterotrophic dinoﬂa-
gellate. Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 54,
279–290.

Decho, A. (1990). Microbial exopoly-
mer secretions in ocean environ-
ments: their role(s) in food webs and
marine processes. Oceanogr. Mar.
Biol. Ann. Rev. 28, 73–153.

Duckworth, O. W., Holmstroem, S. J.
M., Pena, J., and Sposito, G. (2009).
Biogeochemistry of iron oxidation

in a circumneutral freshwater habi-
tat. Chem. Geol. 260, 149–158.

Eckhardt, U., and Buckhout, T. J. (1998).
Iron assimilation in Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii involves ferric reduction
and is similar to strategy I higher
plants. J. Exp. Bot. 49, 1219–1226.

Elderﬁeld, H., and Rickaby, R. E.
M.
(2000). Oceanic Cd/P ratio
and nutrient utilization in the
glacial Southern Ocean. Nature 405,
305–310.

Emmenegger, L., Schonenberger, R.
R., Sigg, L., and Sulzberger, B.
(2001). Light-induced redox cycling
of iron in circumneutral lakes. Lim-
nol. Oceanogr. 46, 49–61.

Falkowski, P. G., Barber, R. T., and
Smetacek, V. (1998). Biogeochemi-
cal controls and feedbacks on ocean
primary production. Science 281,
200–206.

Finkel, Z. V., Beardall, J., Flynn, K.
J., Quigg, A., Rees, T. A. V., and
Raven, J. A. (2010). Phytoplankton
in a changing world: cell size and
elemental stoichiometry. J. Plankton
Res. 32, 119–137.

Fujii, M., Rose, A. L., Omura, T., and
Waite, T. D. (2010). Effect of Fe(II)
and Fe(III) transformation kinetics
on iron acquisition by a toxic strain
of Microcystis aeruginosa. Environ.
Sci. Technol. 44, 1980–1986.

Gerringa, L. J. A., De Baar, H. J. W.,
and Timmermans, K. R. (2000). A
comparison of
iron limitation of
phytoplankton in natural oceanic
waters and laboratory media condi-
tioned with EDTA. Mar. Chem. 68,
335–346.

Gledhill, M., and van den Berg, C.
M. G. (1994). Determination of
complexation of iron(III) with nat-
ural organic complexing ligands in
seawater using cathodic stripping
voltammetry. Mar. Chem. 47, 41–54.
Goldman, S. J., Lammers, P. J., Berman,
M. S., and Sanders-Loehr, J. (1983).
Siderophore-mediated iron uptake
in different strains of Anabaena sp.
J. Bacteriol. 156, 1144–1150.

Gonzalez-Davila, M., Santana-Casiano,
J. M., and Millero, F. J. (2005). Oxi-
dation of Iron(II) nanomolar with
H2O2 in seawater. Geochim. Cos-
mochim. Acta 69, 83–93.

Greene, R. M., Geider, R.

J., and
Falkowski, P. G. (1991). Effect of
iron limitation on photosynthesis in
a marine diatom. Limnol. Oceanogr.
36, 1772–1782.

Hansard, S. P., Landing, W. M., Mea-
sures, C. I., and Voelker, B. M. (2009).
Dissolved iron(II) in the Paciﬁc
Ocean: measurements
from the
PO2 and P16N CLIVAR/CO2 repeat
hydrography expeditions. Deep Sea

Res. Part I Oceanogr. Res. Pap. 56,
1117–1129.

Hansard, S. P., Vermilyea, A. W., and
Voelker, B. M. (2010). Measurements
of superoxide radical concentration
and decay kinetics in the Gulf of
Alaska. Deep Sea Res. Part I Oceanogr.
Res. Pap. 57, 1111–1119.

Harrington,

J., and Crumbliss, A.
(2009). The redox hypothesis in
siderophore-mediated iron uptake.
Biometals 22, 679–689.

Hassler, C. S., Alasonati, E., Nichols,
C. A. M., and Slaveykova, V. I.
(2011a). Exopolysaccharides pro-
duced by bacteria isolated from
the pelagic Southern Ocean – role
in Fe binding, chemical reactivity,
and bioavailability. Mar. Chem. 123,
88–98.

Hassler, C. S., Schoemann, V., Nichols,
C. M., Butler, E. C. V., and Boyd, P. W.
(2011b). Saccharides enhance iron
bioavailability to Southern Ocean
phytoplankton. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 108, 1076–1081.

Hassler, C. S., Havens, S. M., Buller-
jahn, G. S., Mckay, R. M. L., and
Twiss, M. R. (2009). An evalu-
ation of
iron bioavailability and
speciation in western Lake Supe-
rior with the use of combined
physical, chemical, and biological
assessment. Limnol. Oceanogr. 54,
987–1001.

Hassler, C. S., and Schoemann, V.
(2009). Bioavailability of organically
bound Fe to model phytoplankton of
the Southern Ocean. Biogeosciences
6, 2281–2296.

Haygood, M. G., Holt, P. D., and Butler,
A. (1993). Aerobactin production
by a planktonic marine Vibrio Sp.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 38, 1091–1097.

Henley, W. J., and Yin,Y. (1998). Growth
and photosynthesis of marine Syne-
chococcus
(Cyanophyceae) under
iron stress. J. Phycol. 34, 94–103.

Higgins, J. L., Kudo, I., Nishioka, J.,
Tsuda,A., and Wilhelm, S. W. (2009).
The response of the virus commu-
nity to the SEEDS II mesoscale iron
fertilization. Deep Sea Res. Part II
Top. Stud. Oceanogr. 56, 2788–2795.
Holmén, B. A., and Casey, W. H. (1996).
Hydroxamate ligands, surface chem-
istry, and the mechanism of ligand-
promoted dissolution of goethite [α-
FeOOH(s)]. Geochim. Cosmochim.
Acta 60, 4403–4416.

(2012).

Iron transporters

Hopkinson, B. M., and Barbeau, K.
A.
in
marine prokaryotic genomes and
metagenomes. Environ. Microbiol.
14, 114–128.

Hopkinson, B. M., and Morel, F. M. M.
(2009). The role of siderophores in
iron acquisition by photosynthetic

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 16

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

marine microorganisms. Biometals
22, 659–669.

Hudson, R. J. M., and Morel, F. M.
M. (1993). Trace metal transport
by marine microorganisms: implica-
tions of metal coordination kinetics.
Deep Sea Res. A 40, 129–150.

Hunter, K. A., and Boyd, P. W. (2007).
Iron-binding ligands and their role
in the ocean biogeochemistry of
iron. Environ. Chem. 4, 221–232.

Hutchins, D. A., Rueter, J. G., and Fish,
W. (1991). Siderophore production
and nitrogen ﬁxation are mutu-
ally exclusive strategies in Anabaena
7120. Limnol. Oceanogr. 36, 1–12.

Hutchins, D. A., Witter, A. E., But-
ler, A., and Luther, G. W. (1999).
Competition among marine phyto-
plankton for different chelated iron
speciation. Nature 400, 858–861.

Ibisanmi, E., Sander, S. G., Boyd, P.
W., Bowie, A. R., and Hunter, K.
A. (2011). Vertical distributions of
iron-(III) complexing ligands
in
the Southern Ocean. Deep Sea Res.
Part
II Top. Stud. Oceanogr. 58,
2113–2125.

Johnson, K. S., Coale, K. H., Elrod, V.
A., and Tindale, N. W. (1994). Iron
photochemistry in seawater from the
equatorial Paciﬁc. Mar. Chem. 46,
319–334.

Johnson, K. S., Gordon, R. M., and
Coale, K. H. (1997). What con-
trols dissolved iron concentrations
in the world ocean? Mar. Chem. 57,
137–161.

Jones, G. J., and Morel, F. M. M. (1988).
Plasmalemma redox activity in the
diatom Thalassiosira. Plant Physiol.
87, 143–147.

Keshtacher, L. E., Hadar, Y., and Chen,
Y. (1999). Fe nutrition demand
and utilization by the green alga
Dunaliella bardawil. Plant Soil 215,
175–182.

Kieber, R. J., Williams, K., Willey, J.
D., Skrabal, S., and Avery, G. B. Jr.
(2001). Iron speciation in coastal
rainwater: concentration and depo-
sition to seawater. Mar. Chem. 73,
83–95.

King, D. W., Lounsbury, H. A., and
Millero, F.
J. (1995). Rates and
mechanism of Fe(II) oxidation at
nanomolar total
iron concentra-
tions. Environ. Sci. Technol. 29,
818–824.

Kosman, D. J. (2003). Molecular mech-
anisms of iron uptake in fungi. Mol.
Microbiol. 47, 1185–1197.

Kraemer, S. M. (2004). Iron oxide dis-
solution and solubility in the pres-
ence of siderophores. Aquat. Sci. 66,
3–18.

Kraemer, S. M., Butler, A., Borer,
(2005).

P., and Cervini-Silva,

J.

“Siderophores and the dissolution of
iron-bearing minerals in marine sys-
tems,” in Molecular Geomicrobiology,
eds J. E. Banﬁeld, J. Cervini-Silva,
and K. H. Nealson (Mineralogical
Society of America, Geochemical
Society), 53–84.

Kranzler, C., Lis, H., Shaked, Y., and
Keren, N. (2011). The role of reduc-
tion in iron uptake processes in
a unicellular, planktonic cyanobac-
terium. Environ. Microbiol.
13,
2990–2999.

Kudo, I., and Harrison, P. J. (1997).
Effect of
iron nutrition on the
marine cyanobacterium Synechococ-
cus grown on different N sources and
irradiances. J. Phycol. 33, 232–240.

Kuma, K., Nakabayashi, S., Suzuki, Y.,
Kudo, I., and Matsunaga, K. (1992).
Photo-reduction of iron(III) by dis-
solved organic substances and exis-
tence of iron(II) in seawater dur-
ing spring blooms. Mar. Chem. 37,
15–27.

Kuma, K., Nishioka, J., and Matsunaga,
K. (1996). Controls on iron(III)
hydroxide solubility in seawater:
the inﬂuence of pH and natural
organic chelators. Limnol. Oceanogr.
41, 396–407.

Kustka, A., Carpenter, E. J., and Sanudo-
Wilhelmy, S. A. (2002). Iron and
marine nitrogen ﬁxation: progress
and future directions. Res. Microbiol.
153, 255–262.

Kustka, A. B., Allen, A. E., and Morel,
F. M. M. (2007). Sequence analy-
sis and transcriptional regulation of
iron acquisition genes in two marine
diatoms. J. Phycol. 43, 715–729.

Kustka, A. B., Shaked, Y., Milligan, A.
J., King, D. W., and Morel, F. M.
M. (2005). Extracellular production
of superoxide by marine diatoms:
contrasting effects on iron redox
chemistry and bioavailability. Lim-
nol. Oceanogr. 50, 1172–1180.

Laglera, L. M., Battaglia, G., and Van
Den Berg, C. M. G. (2011). Effect of
humic substances on the iron speci-
ation in natural waters by CLE/CSV.
Mar. Chem. 127, 134–143.

Laglera, L. M., and van den Berg, C. M.
G. (2009). Evidence for geochemical
control of iron by humic substances
in seawater. Limnol. Oceanogr. 54,
610–619.

Lampitt, R. S., Achterberg, E. P., Ander-
son, T. R., Hughes, J. A., Iglesias-
Rodriguez, M. D., Kelly-Gerreyn, B.
A., Lucas, M., Popova, E. E., Sanders,
R., Shepherd, J. G., Smythe-Wright,
D., and Yool, A. (2008). Ocean
fertilization: a potential means of
geoengineering? Philos. Transact. R.
Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 366,
3919–3945.

Lane, E. S., Semeniuk, D. M., Strzepek,
R. F., Cullen, J. T., and Maldon-
ado, M. T. (2009). Effects of iron
limitation on intracellular cadmium
of cultured phytoplankton: implica-
tions for surface dissolved cadmium
to phosphate ratios. Mar. Chem. 115,
155–162.

Law, C. S., and Ling, R. D. (2001).
Nitrous oxide ﬂux and response
to increased iron availability in
the Antarctic Circumpolar Current.
Deep Sea Res. Part II Top. Stud.
Oceanogr. 48, 2509–2527.

Levy, J., Zhang, H., Davison, W., and
Groben, R. (2011). Using diffusive
gradients in thin ﬁlms to probe the
kinetics of metal interaction with
algal exudates. Environ. Chem. 8,
517–524.

Lis, H., and Shaked, Y. (2009). Prob-
ing the bioavailability of organically
bound iron: a case study in the Syne-
chococcus-rich waters of the Gulf
of Aqaba. Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 56,
241–253.

Liss, P. S. (2007). Trace gas emissions
from the marine biosphere. Philos.
Transact. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng.
Sci. 365, 1697–1704.

Liu, X. W., and Millero, F. J. (2002). The
solubility of iron in seawater. Mar.
Chem. 77, 43–54.

Lohan, M. C., and Bruland, K. W.
(2008). Elevated Fe(II) and dissolved
Fe in hypoxic shelf waters off Ore-
gon and Washington: an enhanced
source of iron to coastal upwelling
regimes. Environ. Sci. Technol. 42,
6462–6468.

Macrellis, H. M., Trick, C. G., Rue, E.
L., Smith, G., and Bruland, K. W.
(2001). Collection and detection of
natural iron-binding ligands from
seawater. Mar. Chem. 76, 175–187.

and Harris, S. L.

Maldonado, M. T., Allen, A. E., Chong,
J. S., Dan Leus, K. L., Karpenko,
N.,
(2006).
Copper-dependent iron transport in
coastal and oceanic diatoms. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 51, 1729–1743.

Maldonado, M. T., Boyd, P. W., Har-
rison, P.
J., and Price, N. M.
(1999). Co-limitation of phyto-
plankton growth by light and Fe dur-
ing winter in the NE subarctic Paciﬁc
Ocean. Deep Sea Res. Part II Top.
Stud. Oceanogr. 46, 2475–2485.

Maldonado, M. T., Hughes, M. P., Rue,
E. L., and Wells, M. L. (2002). The
effect of Fe and Cu on growth and
domoic acid production by Pseudo-
nitzschia multiseries and Pseudo-
nitzschia australis. Limnol. Oceanogr.
47, 515–526.

Maldonado, M. T., and Price, N. M.
(1999). Utilization of iron bound to
strong organic ligands by plankton

communities in the subarctic Paciﬁc
Ocean. Deep Sea Res. Part II Top.
Stud. Oceanogr. 46, 2447–2473.

Maldonado, M. T., and Price, N. M.
(2001). Reduction and transport of
organically bound iron by Thalas-
siosira oceanica (Bacillariophyceae).
J. Phycol. 37, 298–309.

Maldonado, M. T., Strzepek, R. F.,
Sander, S., and Boyd, P. W. (2005).
Acquisition of iron bound to strong
organic complexes, with different
Fe binding groups and photochem-
ical reactivities, by plankton com-
munities in Fe-limited subantarctic
waters. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 19,
GB4S23.

Manizza, M., Le Quere, C., Watson,
A. J., and Buitenhuis, E. T. (2005).
Bio-optical feedbacks among phyto-
plankton, upper ocean physics and
sea-ice in a global model. Geophys.
Res. Lett. 32, L05603.

Maranger, R., Bird, D. F., and Price,
N. M. (1998). Iron acquisition by
photosynthetic marine phytoplank-
ton from ingested bacteria. Nature
396, 248–251.

Marchetti, A., and Cassar, N. (2009).
Diatom elemental and morpho-
to
logical
changes
review
iron limitation:
with
paleoceano-
graphic applications. Geobiology 7,
419–431.

in response
a brief

potential

Marchetti, A., Maldonado, M. T., Lane,
E. S., and Harrison, P. J. (2006).
Iron requirements of the pennate
diatom Pseudo-nitzschia:
com-
parison of oceanic (high-nitrate,
low-chlorophyll waters) and coastal
species.
51,
2092–2101.

Limnol. Oceanogr.

Martin, J. H., Fitzwater, S. E., and
Gordon, R. M. (1990). Iron deﬁ-
ciency limits phytoplankton growth
in Antarctic waters. Global Bio-
geochem. Cycles 4, 5–12.

Martinez, J. S., Zhang, G. P., Holt,
P. D., Jung, H. T., Carrano, C. J.,
Haygood, M. G., and Butler, A.
(2000). Self-assembling amphiphilic
siderophores from marine bacteria.
Science 287, 1245–1247.

Martinez-Garcia, A., Rosell-Mele, A.,
Jaccard, S. L., Geibert, W., Sigman,
D. M., and Haug, G. H. (2011).
Southern Ocean dust-climate cou-
pling over the past four million
years. Nature 476, 312–315.

Mawji, E., Gledhill, M., Milton, J. A.,
Tarran, G. A., Ussher, S., Thomp-
son, A., Wolff, G. A., Worsfold, P.
J., and Achterberg, E. P. (2008).
Hydroxamate Siderophores: occur-
rence and Importance in the Atlantic
Ocean. Environ. Sci. Technol. 42,
8675–8680.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 17

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

McKay, R. M. L., Villareal, T. A., and
La Roche, J. (2000). Vertical migra-
tion by Rhizosolenia spp. (Bacillario-
phyceae): implications for Fe acqui-
sition. J. Phycol. 36, 669–674.

Meskhidze, N., and Nenes, A. (2006).
Phytoplankton and cloudiness in
the Southern Ocean. Science 314,
1419–1423.

Middlemiss, J. K., Anderson, A. M.,
Stratilo, C. W., and Weger, H. G.
(2001). Oxygen consumption asso-
ciated with ferric reductase activ-
ity and iron uptake by iron-limited
cells of Chlorella kessleri (Chloro-
phyceae). J. Phycol. 37, 393–399.

Miller, W. L., King, D. W., Lin, J.,
and Kester, D. R. (1995). Photo-
chemical redox cycling of iron in
coastal seawater. Mar. Chem. 50,
63–77.

Milligan, A.

J., and Harrison, P.

J.
(2000). Effects of non-steady-state
iron limitation on nitrogen assimila-
tory enzymes in the marine diatom
Thalassiosira weissﬂogii (Bacillario-
phyceae). J. Phycol. 36, 78–86.

Milne, A., Davey, M. S., Worsfold, P. J.,
Achterberg, E. P., and Taylor, A. R.
(2009). Real-time detection of reac-
tive oxygen species generation by
marine phytoplankton using ﬂow-
injection chemiluminescence. Lim-
nol. Oceanogr. Methods 7, 705–716.
Moffett, J. W., Goeffert, T. J., and Naqvi,
S. W. A. (2007). Reduced iron associ-
ated with secondary nitrite maxima
in the Arabian Sea. Deep Sea Res. Part
I Oceanogr. Res. Pap. 54, 1341–1349.
Moore, C. M., Mills, M. M., Achterberg,
E. P., Geider, R. J., Laroche, J., Lucas,
M. I., Mcdonagh, E. L., Pan, X., Poul-
ton, A. J., Rijkenberg, M. J. A., Sug-
gett, D. J., Ussher, S. J., and Wood-
ward, E. M. S. (2009). Large-scale
distribution of Atlantic nitrogen ﬁx-
ation controlled by iron availability.
Nat. Geosci. 2, 867–871.

Morel, F. M. M., Kustka, A. B., and
(2008). The role of
Shaked, Y.
unchelated Fe in the iron nutrition
of phytoplankton. Limnol. Oceanogr.
53, 400–404.

Morel, F. M. M., and Price, N. M. (2003).
The biogeochemical cycles of trace
metals in the oceans. Science 300,
944–947.

Nagai, T., Imai, A., Matsushige, K.,
Yokoi, K., and Fukushima, T. (2007).
Dissolved iron and its speciation
in a shallow eutrophic lake and
its inﬂowing rivers. Water Res. 41,
775–784.

Nodwell, L., and Price, N. (2001). Direct
use of inorganic colloidal iron by
marine mixotrophic phytoplankton.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 46, 755–777.

Passow, U. (2002). Transparent exopoly-
mer particles
in aquatic
environments. Prog. Oceanogr. 55,
287–333.

(TEP)

Pick, U., Paz, Y., Weiss, M., and Katz,
A. (2008). A unique mechanism for
Fe3+ and Fe2+ acquisition in a halo-
tolerant alga. Plant Biol. (Rockville)
2008, 142.

Pickell, L. D., Wells, M. L., Trick, C.
G., and Cochlan, W. P. (2009). A
sea-going continuous culture sys-
tem for investigating phytoplank-
ton community response to macro-
and micro-nutrient manipulations.
Limnol. Oceanogr. Methods 7, 21–32.
J. M.,
Hutchins, D. A., and Wilhelm, S.
W. (2004). Viral release of
iron
and its bioavailability to marine
plankton. Limnol. Oceanogr. 49,
1734–1741.

Poorvin, L., Rinta-Kanto,

Poorvin, L., Sander, S. G., Velasquez,
I., Ibisanmi, E., Lecleir, G. R., and
Wilhelm, S. W. (2011). A compari-
son of Fe bioavailability and bind-
ing of a catecholate siderophore
with virus-mediated lysates from the
marine bacterium Vibrio alginolyti-
cus PWH3a. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol.
399, 43–47.

Price, N. M., Ahner, B. A., and
Morel, F. M. M.
(1994). The
equatorial Paciﬁc Ocean: grazer-
controlled phytoplankton popula-
tions in an iron-limited system. Lim-
nol. Oceanogr. 39, 520–534.

Quigley, M. S., Santschi, P. H., and
Hung, C. C. (2002). Importance
of acid polysaccharides for 234Th
complexation to marine organic
matter.
47,
367–377.

Limnol. Oceanogr.

Ralston, D. K., McGillicuddy, D. J. Jr.,
and Townsend, D. W. (2007). Asyn-
chronous vertical migration and
bimodal distribution of motile phy-
toplankton.
J. Plankton Res. 29,
803–821.

Raven, J. A. (1990). Predictions of
Mn and Fe use efﬁciencies of pho-
totrophic growth as a function of
light availability for growth and of
C assimilation pathway. New Phytol.
116, 1–18.

Rich, H. W., and Morel, F. M. M. (1990).
Availability of well-deﬁned iron col-
loids to the marine diatom Thalas-
siosira weissﬂogii. Limnol. Oceanogr.
35, 652–662.

Rijkenberg, M. J. A., Gerringa, L. J.
A., Carolus, V. E., Velzeboer, I., and
De Baar, H. J. W. (2006). Enhance-
ment and inhibition of iron pho-
toreduction by individual
ligands
in open ocean seawater. Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta 70, 2790–2805.

Rijkenberg, M. J. A., Gerringa, L. J. A.,
Timmermans, K. R., Fischer, A. C.,
Kroon, K. J., Buma, A. G. J., Wolter-
beek, B. T., and De Baar, H. J. W.
(2008). Enhancement of the reactive
iron pool by marine diatoms. Mar.
Chem. 109, 29–44.

Roe, K. L., Barbeau, K., Mann, E. L.,
and Haygood, M. G. (2011). Acqui-
sition of iron by Trichodesmium and
associated bacteria in culture. Env-
iron. Microbiol. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-
2920.2011.02653.x

Rose, A. L., Godrant, A., Furnas, M.,
and Waite, T. D. (2010). Dynamics of
nonphotochemical superoxide pro-
duction and decay in the Great Bar-
rier Reef lagoon. Limnol. Oceanogr.
55, 1521–1536.

Rose, A. L., Salmon, T. P., Lukondeh,
T., Neilan, B. A., and Waite, T. D.
(2005). Use of superoxide as an elec-
tron shuttle for iron acquisition by
the marine cyanobacterium Lyngbya
majuscula. Environ. Sci. Technol. 39,
3708–3715.

Rose, A. L., and Waite, T. D. (2002).
Kinetic model for Fe(II) oxidation in
seawater in the absence and presence
of natural organic matter. Environ.
Sci. Technol. 36, 433–444.

Rose, A. L., and Waite, T. D. (2003).
Effect of dissolved natural organic
matter on the kinetics of ferrous iron
oxygenation in seawater. Environ.
Sci. Technol. 37, 4877–4886.

Rose, A. L., Webb, E. A., Waite, T. D., and
Moffett, J. W. (2008). Measurement
and implications of nonphotochem-
ically generated superoxide in the
equatorial Paciﬁc Ocean. Environ.
Sci. Technol. 42, 2387–2393.

Roy, E. G., and Wells, M. L. (2011). Evi-
dence for regulation of Fe(II) oxida-
tion by organic complexing ligands
in the Eastern Subarctic Paciﬁc. Mar.
Chem. 127, 115–122.

Rubin, M., Berman-Frank,

Roy, E. G., Wells, M. L., and King, D. W.
(2008). Persistence of iron(II) in sur-
face waters of the western subarctic
Paciﬁc. Limnol. Oceanogr. 53, 89–98.
I., and
Shaked, Y. (2011). Dust- and min-
eral-iron utilization by the marine
dinitrogen-ﬁxer
Trichodesmium.
Nat. Geosci. 4, 529–534.

Rue, E., and Bruland, K. (2001). Domoic
acid binds iron and copper: a possi-
ble role for the toxin produced by
the marine diatom Pseudo-nitzschia.
Mar. Chem. 76, 127–134.

Rue, E. L., and Bruland, K. W. (1995).
Complexation of iron(III) by nat-
ural organic ligands in the central
North Paciﬁc as determined by a
new competitive ligand equilibra-
tion/adsorptive cathodic stripping

voltammetric method. Mar. Chem.
50, 117–138.

Rueter, J. G., Hutchins, D. A., Smith,
R. W., and Unsworth, N. L. (1992).
“Iron nutrition in Trichodesmium,”
in Marine Pelagic Cyanobacteria: Tri-
chodesmium and Other Diazotrophs,
eds E. J. Carpenter, D. G. Capone,
and J. G Rueter (Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic), 289–306.

Sander, S. G., and Koschinsky, A. (2011).
Metal ﬂux from hydrothermal vents
increased by organic complexation.
Nat. Geosci. 4, 145–150.

Sandy, M., and Butler, A. (2009). Micro-
bial
iron acquisition: marine and
terrestrial siderophores. Chem. Rev.
109, 4580–4595.

Santana-Casiano,

J. M., Gonzaalez-
Davila, M., and Millero, F.
J.
(2005). Oxidation of nanomolar lev-
els of Fe(II) with oxygen in nat-
ural waters. Environ. Sci. Technol. 39,
2073–2079.

Santana-Casiano,

J. M., Gonzalez-
Davila, A., and Millero, F. J. (2006).
The role of Fe(II) species on the oxi-
dation of Fe(II) in natural waters in
the presence of O-2 and H2O2. Mar.
Chem. 99, 70–82.

Saragosti, E., Tchernov, D., Katsir, A.,
and Shaked, Y. (2010). Extracel-
lular production and degradation
of
superoxide in the coral Sty-
lophora pistillata and cultured Sym-
biodinium. PLoS ONE 5, e12508.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0012508

Sarthou, G., Bucciarelli, E., Chever, F.,
Hansard, S. P., Gonzalez-Davila, M.,
Santana-Casiano, J. M., Planchon, F.,
and Speich, S. (2011). Labile Fe(II)
concentrations in the Atlantic sector
of the Southern Ocean along a tran-
sect from the subtropical domain to
the Weddell Sea Gyre. Biogeosciences
8, 2461–2479.

Sarthou, G., Vincent, D., Christaki, U.,
Obernosterer, I., Timmermans, K.
R., and Brussaard, C. P. D. (2008).
The fate of biogenic iron during
a phytoplankton bloom induced by
natural fertilisation: impact of cope-
pod grazing. Deep Sea Res. Part II
Top. Stud. Oceanogr. 55, 734–751.

Sasaki, T., Kurano, N., and Miyachi, S.
(1998). Induction of ferric reduc-
tase activity and of
iron uptake
activity in Chlococcum littorale cells
underextremely high-CO2 and iron-
deﬁcient conditions. Plant Cell Phys-
iol. 39, 405–410.

Sato, M., Takeda, S., and Furuya,
K. (2007). Iron regeneration and
organic
ligand
production during in situ zooplank-
ton grazing experiment. Mar. Chem.
106, 471–488.

iron(III)-binding

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 18

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

Severmann, S., Mcmanus,

Schlosser, C., and Croot, P. L. (2009).
Controls on seawater Fe(III) solu-
bility in the Mauritanian upwelling
zone. Geophys. Res. Lett. 36, L18606.
J., Berel-
son, W. M., and Hammond, D. E.
(2010). The continental shelf ben-
thic iron ﬂux and its isotope com-
position. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta
74, 3984–4004.

Shaked, Y. (2008). Iron redox dynam-
ics in the surface waters of the Gulf
of Aqaba, Red Sea. Geochim. Cos-
mochim. Acta 72, 1540–1554.

Shaked, Y., Erel, Y., and Sukenik,
A. (2002). Phytoplankton-mediated
redox cycle of iron in the epilimnion
of Lake Kinneret. Environ. Sci. Tech-
nol. 36, 460–467.

Shaked, Y., Kustka, A. B., and Morel,
F. M. M. (2005). A general kinetic
model
iron acquisition by
eukaryotic phytoplankton. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 50, 872–882.

for

Shaked,Y., Kustka,A. B., Morel, F. M. M.,
and Erel, Y. (2004). Simultaneous
determination of iron reduction and
uptake by phytoplankton. Limnol.
Oceanogr. Methods 2, 137–145.

Shi, D., Xu, Y., Hopkinson, B. M., and
Morel, F. M. M. (2010). Effect of
ocean acidiﬁcation on iron availabil-
ity to marine phytoplankton. Science
327, 676–679.

Shi, D., Xu, Y., and Morel, F. M. M.
(2009). Effects of the pH/pCO2 con-
trol method on medium chemistry
and phytoplankton growth. Biogeo-
sciences 6, 1199–1207.

Singler, H. R., and Villareal, T. A. (2005).
Nitrogen inputs into the euphotic
zone by vertically migrating Rhi-
zosolenia mats. J. Plankton Res. 27,
545–556.

Sohm, J. A., Webb, E. A., and Capone,
D. G. (2011). Emerging patterns of
marine nitrogen ﬁxation. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 9, 499–508.

Soria-Dengg, S., and Horstmann, U.
(1995). Ferrioxamines B and E as
iron sources for the marine diatom
Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Mar.
Ecol. Prog. Ser. 127, 269–277.

coastal waters

Soria-Dengg, S., Reissbrodt, R., and
Horstmann, U. (2001). Siderophores
in marine,
and
their relevance for iron uptake by
phytoplankton: experiments with
the diatom Phaeodactylum tricor-
nutum. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 220,
73–82.

Statham, P. J., German, C. R., and
Connelly, D. P. (2005). Iron (II)
distribution and oxidation kinet-
ics in hydrothermal plumes at the
Kairei and Edmond vent sites, Indian
Ocean. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 236,
588–596.

Steigenberger, S., Statham, P. J., Voelker,
C., and Passow, U. (2010). The role
of polysaccharides and diatom exu-
dates in the redox cycling of Fe
and the photoproduction of hydro-
gen peroxide in coastal seawaters.
Biogeosciences 7, 109–119.

Stintzi, A., Barnes, C., Xu, L., and Ray-
mond, K. N. (2000). Microbial iron
transport via a siderophore shut-
tle: a membrane ion transport par-
adigm. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
97, 10691–10696.

Strmecki, S., Plavsic, M., Steigenberger,
S., and Passow, U. (2010). Char-
acterization of phytoplankton exu-
dates and carbohydrates in relation
to their complexation of copper, cad-
mium and iron. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.
408, 33–46.

Photosynthetic

Strzepek, R. F., and Harrison, P. J.
archi-
and
431,

in coastal
diatoms. Nature

(2004).
tecture differs
oceanic
689–692.

Strzepek, R. F., Maldonado, M. T., Hig-
gins, J. L., Hall, J., Saﬁ, K.,Wilhelm, S.
W., and Boyd, P. W. (2005). Spinning
the “Ferrous Wheel”: the impor-
tance of the microbial community
in an iron budget during the FeCy-
cle experiment. Global Biogeochem.
Cycles 19, GB4S26.1–GB4S26.14.

Stumm, W., and Sulzberger, B. (1992).
The cycling of
iron in natural
environments: considerations based
on laboratory studies of hetero-
geneous redox processes. Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta 56, 3233–3257.

Sunda, W., Price, N. M., and Morel, F. M.
M. (2005). “Trace metal ion buffers
and their use in culture studies,”
in Algal Culturing Techniques, ed.
R. Anderson (Burlington: Academic
Press), 35–63.

Sunda, W. G. (2001). “Bioavailability
and bioaccumulation of iron in the
sea,” in Biogeochemistry of Fe in Sea-
water, eds. K. Hunter and D. Turner
(West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons),
41–84.

Sunda, W. G., and Huntsman, S. A.
(1995). Iron uptake and growth lim-
itation in oceanic and coastal phyto-
plankton. Mar. Chem. 50, 189–206.
Sunda, W. G., and Huntsman, S. A.
(1997).
Interrelated inﬂuence of
iron, light and cell size on marine
phytoplankton growth. Nature 390,
389–392.

Sutak, R., Slapeta, J., San Roman, M.,
Camadro, J.-M., and Lesuisse, E.
(2010). Nonreductive iron uptake
mechanism in the marine alveolate
Chromera velia. Plant Physiol. 154,
991–1000.

Tang, K. W., Glud, R. N., Glud, A., Rys-
gaard, S., and Nielsen, T. G. (2011).

Copepod guts as biogeochemical
hotspots in the sea: evidence from
microelectrode proﬁling of Calanus
spp. Limnol. Oceanogr. 56, 666–672.
Terzulli, A., and Kosman, D. J. (2010).
Analysis of the high-afﬁnity iron
uptake
the Chlamy-
domonas reinhardtii plasma mem-
brane. Eukaryotic Cell 9, 815–826.

system at

Town, R. M., and Filella, M. (2000). Dis-
pelling the myths: is the existence
of L1 and L2 ligands necessary to
explain metal ion speciation in nat-
ural waters? Limnol. Oceanogr. 45
1341–1357.

Trick, C. G., Bill, B. D., Cochlan, W. P.,
Wells, M. L., Trainer, V. L., and Pick-
ell, L. D. (2010). Iron enrichment
stimulates
toxic diatom produc-
tion in high-nitrate, low-chlorophyll
areas. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
107, 5887–5892.

Tsuda, A., Takeda, S., Saito, H., Nish-
ioka, J., Kudo, I., Nojiri,Y., Suzuki, K.,
Uematsu, M., Wells, M. L., Tsumune,
D., Yoshimura, T., Aono, T., Ara-
maki, T., Cochlan, W. P., Hayakawa,
M., Imai, K., Isada, T., Iwamoto, Y.,
Johnson, W. K., Kameyama, S., Kato,
S., Kiyosawa, H., Kondo, Y., Lev-
asseur, M., Machida, R. J., Nagao, I.,
Nakagawa, F., Nakanish, T., Nakat-
suka, S., Narita, A., Noiri, Y., Obata,
H., Ogawa, H., Oguma, K., Ono, T.,
Sakuragi, T., Sasakawa, M., Sato, M.,
Shimamoto, A., Takata, H., Trick,
C. G., Watanabe, Y. W., Wong, C.
S., and Yoshie, N. (2007). Evidence
for the grazing hypothesis: grazing
reduces phytoplankton responses
of
the HNLC ecosystem to iron
enrichment in the western subarctic
paciﬁc (SEEDS II). J. Oceanogr. 63,
983–994.

Ussher, S. J., Worsfold, P. J., Achterberg,
E. P., Laes, A., Blain, S., Laan, P., and
De Baar, H. J. W. (2007). Distrib-
ution and redox speciation of dis-
solved iron on the European conti-
nental margin. Limnol. Oceanogr. 52,
2530–2539.

van den Berg, C. M. G. (1995). Evi-
dence for organic complexation of
iron in seawater. Mar. Chem. 50,
139–157.

Velasquez, I., Nunn, B. L., Ibisanmi,
E., Goodlett, D. R., Hunter, K. A.,
and Sander, S. G. (2011). Detec-
tion of hydroxamate siderophores
in coastal and Sub-Antarctic waters
off
the South Eastern Coast of
New Zealand. Mar. Chem. 126,
97–107.

Vermilyea, A. W., Hansard, S. P., and
Voelker, B. M. (2010). Dark pro-
duction of hydrogen peroxide in the
Gulf of Alaska. Limnol. Oceanogr. 55,
580–588.

Villareal, T. A., Joseph, L., Brzezin-
ski, M. A., Shipe, R. F., Lipschultz,
F., and Altabet, M. A. (1999). Bio-
logical and chemical characteris-
tics of the giant diatom Ethmodis-
cus (Bacillariophyceae) in the cen-
tral North Paciﬁc gyre. J. Phycol. 35,
896–902.

Voelker, B. M., and Sedlak, D. L. (1995).
Iron reduction by photoproduced
superoxide in seawater. Mar. Chem.
50, 93–102.

Völker, C., and Wolf-Gladrow, D. A.
(1999). Physical
limits on iron
uptake mediated by siderophores or
surface reductases. Mar. Chem. 65,
227–244.

Vraspir, J. M., and Butler, A. (2009).
Chemistry of marine ligands and
siderophores. Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci. 1,
43–63.

Waite, T. D., and Morel, F. M. M.
(1984). Photoreductive dissolution
of colloidal iron oxides in natural
waters. Environ. Sci. Technol. 18,
860–868.
Watson, A.

J., Bakker, D. C. E.,
Ridgwell, A. J., Boyd, P. W., and
Law, C. G. (2000). Effect of iron
supply on southern ocean CO2
uptake and implications for glacial
atmospheric CO2. Nature
407,
730–733.

Webb, E. A., Moffett, J. W., and Water-
bury, J. B. (2001). Iron stress in open-
ocean cyanobacteria (Synechococcus,
Trichodesmium, and Crocosphaera
spp.): identiﬁcation of the IdiA pro-
tein. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67,
5444–5452.
Weger, H. G.

and
cupric reductase activities in the
green alga Chlamydomonas rein-
hardtii: experiments using iron-
limited chemostats. Planta 207,
377–384.

(1999). Ferric

Wells, M. L., Mayer, L. M., Donard, O. F.
X., De Souza Sierra, M. M., and Ack-
elson, S. G. (1991). The photolysis of
colloidal iron in the oceans. Nature
353, 248–250.

Wells, M. L., Price, N. M., and Bru-
land, K. W. (1994). Iron limitation
cyanobacterium Syne-
and the
in equatorial Paciﬁc
chococcus
waters.
39,
1481–1486.

Limnol. Oceanogr.

Wells, M. L., Price, N. M., and Bru-
land, K. W. (1995). Iron chemistry in
seawater and its relationship to phy-
toplankton: a workshop report. Mar.
Chem. 48, 157–182.

Wells, M. L., Trick, C. G., Cochlan, W.
P., Hughes, M. P., and Trainer, V.
L. (2005). Domoic acid: the syn-
ergy of iron, copper, and the toxic-
ity of diatoms. Limnol. Oceanogr. 50,
1908–1917.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 19

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

Wells, M. L., Zorkin, N. G., and Lewis, A.
G. (1983). The role of colloid chem-
istry in providing a source of iron
to phytoplankton. J. Mar. Res. 41,
731–746.

Wirtz, N. L., Treble, R. G., and
Weger, H. G. (2010). Siderophore-
independent iron uptake by iron-
limited cells of the cynaobacterium
anabaena ﬂos-aquae. J. Phycol. 46,
947–957.

Worms, I., Simon, D. F., Hassler, C.
S., and Wilkinson, K. J. (2006).
Bioavailability
trace met-
to aquatic microorganisms:
als

of

importance of chemical, biological
and physical processes on biouptake.
Biochimie 88, 1721–1731.

Wotton, R. S. (2004). The ubiquity and
many roles of exopolymers (EPS)
in aquatic systems. Sci. Mar. 68,
13–21.

Wu, J., Wells, M. L., and Rember, R.
(2011). Dissolved iron anomaly in
the deep tropical-subtropical Paciﬁc:
evidence for long-range transport of
hydrothermal iron. Geochim. Cos-
mochim. Acta 75, 460–468.

Yoshida, M., Kuma, K., Iwade, S., Isoda,
Y., Takata, H., and Yamada, M.

(2006). Effect of aging time on the
availability of
freshly precipitated
ferric hydroxide to coastal marine
diatoms. Mar. Biol. 149, 379–392.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 30 November 2011; accepted: 14
March 2012; published online: 17 April
2012.

Citation: Shaked Y and Lis H (2012)
Disassembling iron availability to phy-
toplankton. Front. Microbio. 3:123. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00123
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Microbiological Chemistry, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Shaked and Lis. This
is an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attri-
bution Non Commercial License, which
permits non-commercial use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in other forums,
provided the original authors and source
are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 20

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

APPENDIX
DATA IN SUPPORT OF THE PREVALENCE OF REDUCTIVE IRON UPTAKE
AMONGST PHYTOPLANKTON (FIGURE 3)
The laboratory cultures (Table A1) and ﬁeld populations
(Table A2) included in Figure 3 were taken from various stud-
ies which demonstrate the presence of a reductive mechanism by
one or more of the following techniques:

(a) Colorimetric detection of cell-mediated Fe reduction –
measured as accumulation of Fe(II) over time in the pres-
ence of cells and a ferrous trapping ligand that binds Fe(II)
prior to its oxidation by oxygen or transport. Commonly,
cell-mediated Fe reduction is measured via colorimetric meth-
ods in the presence of Ferrozine (Fz) or Bathophenanthro-
linedisulfonic acid (BPDS). This method requires relatively
high micromolar iron concentrations due to its low sensi-
tivity. Shaked et al. (2004) developed a sensitive assay for
cell-mediated Fe
reduction using radiolabeled iron. This
(cid:2)
reduction assay is conducted simultaneously with Fe
uptake at
physiologically relevant nanomolar iron concentrations, and
it was applied for many of the data presented here.

(cid:2)

(b) Genetic studies which ﬁnd components of the reductive

uptake system.

(c) EPR – Electron paramagnetic resonance showing Fe reduc-

tion.

(d) Inhibition of uptake by Fz/BPDS – Comparing uptake rates
in the presence and absence of the membrane imperme-
able Fe(II) ligands, Ferrozine or BPDS. Here, Fe(II) formed
by cell-mediated reduction is trapped and made unavailable
for uptake by the cell, hence inhibiting iron uptake by cells
employing this strategy. An explanatory illustration of this
procedure is found in Figure A1 while Figure A2 provides an
example of experimental data using this method.

DATA SUPPORTING THE RELATIVE BIOAVAILABILITY SCALE (FIGURE 5)
Tables A3 and A4, outline the data used for constructing Figure 5.

Uptake rates obtained from different sources were ﬁrst normalized
(cid:2)
to Fe-substrate concentration (either Fe
for FeEDTA or to FeL for
iron bound to ligand L, providing ligand L complexed iron strongly
and/or was present in sufﬁcient excess to rule out Fe precipitation)
in order to calculate kup according to Eq. 1:
kup = ρ/[Fe].

(A1)
−1], [Fe] is Fe-substrate
where ρ is Fe uptake rate [mol Fe cell
−1]. The calculation applies only to sub-
concentration [mol L
saturating uptake rates. The kup obtained for the different Fe
(cid:2)
up were further normalized by dividing it by kFe
complexes – kFeL
up .

−1 h

Note on Fe-substrates
Goe – goethite is an Fe-oxide mineral (FeOOH); DFB – desfer-
rioxamine B is a trihydroxamate siderophore; AB – Aerobactin is
hydroxamate photolabile siderophore; FC – ferrichrome is a tri-
hydroxamate siderophore; PYN – Porphyrin; MS – Monosaccha-
rides; PS – Polysaccharides; AZ – Azotochelin is a bis-catecholate
siderophore produced by nitrogen-ﬁxing soil bacterium Azotobac-
ter vinelandii; DPS – DNA binding protein from starved cells (iron
storage proteins); CAT – Gallocatechin is a polyhydroxybenzene
catechol derivative found in green tea; DFE-desferrioxamine E is
a trihydroxamate siderophore.

(cid:2)

Note on the saccharides uptake data
In the saccharides uptake experiments no Fe
uptake data was
reported. Since we view these as potentially important experi-
ments we chose to normalize the saccharide uptake constant to
that of FeCl3 added at concentration of 1 nM. Given a solubility
limit of 0.2–0.5 nM (Liu and Millero, 2002), it is possible that some
of the Fe precipitated in the experiments. This was demonstrated
in control measurements – roughly 30% of the FeCl3 remained in
the dissolved fraction, about 12% was in colloidal form and the
remainder in the particulate fraction. To calculate kFe
up we related
to the dissolved fraction as the Fe-substrate concentration.

(cid:2)

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 21

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

FIGURE A1 | Trapping of ferrous iron formed during Fe(cid:2) reduction with
ferrozine (Fz) or Bathophenanthrolinedisulfonic acid (BPDS). The Fe(II)
trap competes with cells over ferrous iron formed during cell-mediated Fe
reduction. The structures of two such traps – ferrozine and BPDS – are shown

on the right top and bottom respectively. Fe(II)Fz3 and Fe(II)BPDS3 are
detected spectrophotometrically at 562 and 533 nm, respectively. Additionally
Fe(II)Fz3 and inhibition of Fe uptake by Fz/BPDS can be detected in radioactive
experiments. Figure based on Lis and Shaked (2009).

FIGURE A2 | Experimental data of iron uptake by Synechococcus WH8102
in the presence and absence of Ferrozine (Fz), on the basis of which the
occurrence of the Fe reductive pathway is deduced. The uptake of iron

from 90 nM 55FeDFB by iron limited Synechococcus WH8102 was inhibited in
the presence of 200 μM Fz. The inhibitory effect stems from the trapping of
Fe(II) formed through cell surface enzymatic reduction during Fe uptake.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 22

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

Table A1 | Experimental evidence showing the existence of an iron reductive uptake pathway in laboratory cultures.

Organism

Type of evidence

Reference

Thalassiosira pseudonana

Thalassiosira weissﬂogii
Thalassiosira oceanica

FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake, Fe reduction
Genetic – Fe reductase, multi-Cu oxidase
FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction
FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction
Cu induced Fe uptake inhibition multi-Cu oxidase
Cylindrotheca fusiformis
FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction
Phaeodactylum tricornutum FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction
Peridinium gatunense
FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction
FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake
Tetraselmis suecica
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
Fe reduction; Genetic – Fe reductase, multi-Cu oxidase

Dunaliella bardawil
Fe reduction; Genetic – Fe reductase
Chlorella vulgaris
FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction EPR
Chlorella kessleri
Fe reduction
Chlorococcum littorale
Fe reduction
Emiliania huxleyi
FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction
Synechococcus WH7803
FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction
Synechococcus WH8102
FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction
Synechocystis PCC6803
FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction
Microcystis aeruginosa
FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction
Lyngbya majuscula
FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction
Trichodesmium erythraeum FZ/BPDS inhibits uptake; Fe reduction

Kustka et al. (2005), Shaked et al. (2005), Maldonado et al. (2006)

Jones et al. (1987), Shaked et al. (2005)
Maldonado and Price (2001), Maldonado et al. (2006)

Lis and Shaked (in preparation)
Soria-Dengg and Horstmann (1995)
Shaked et al. (2002)
Lis and Shaked (in preparation)
Eckhardt and Buckhout (1998), Weger (1999), Allen et al. (2007),
Chen et al. (2008)
Keshtacher et al. (1999), Paz et al. (2007)
Allnutt and Bonner (1987)
Middlemiss et al. (2001)
Sasaki et al. (1998)
Lis and Shaked (in preparation)
Lis and Shaked (in preparation)
Lis and Shaked (in preparation)
Kranzler et al. (2011)
Fujii et al. (2010)
Rose et al. (2005)
Shaked (unpublished)

Table A2 | Experimental evidence showing the existence of the reductive iron uptake pathway in ﬁeld populations.

Field location

Southern ocean
Subarctic Paciﬁc (>3 μm)
Bering Sea (>5 μm)
Gulf of Aqaba (>0.2 μm)
Loch Scridain (>20 μm)
Lake Kinneret

Type of evidence

Reference

Calculation
Uptake
Uptake
Uptake
Uptake
Uptake

Maldonado et al. (2005)
Maldonado and Price (1999)
Shaked et al. (2004)
Lis and Shaked (2009)
Lis and Shaked (in preparation)
Shaked et al. (2002)

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 23

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

Table A3 | Data used in the calculation of relative bioavailability of laboratory cultures (Figure 5A).

Organism

Fe Ligand

Avg k up

Units

Rel. bioavail

Reference

Notes

THALASSIOSIRA PSEUDONANA
Fe-limited

Fe(cid:2)

Fe(cid:2)
Fe(cid:2)
DFB
DFB
Ferrichrome
Goethite
DFB
Ferrichrome

Fe-replete

SYNECHOCYSTIS PCC6803

Fe(cid:2)
DFB
Aerobactin

PHAEOCYSTIS spp

Fe(cid:2)

DFB
Monosaccharides
Polysaccharides

SYNECHOCOCCUS spp

Fe(cid:2)

Fe(cid:2)
DFB
DFB
Ferrichrome

THALASSIOSIRA WEISSFLOGII

Fe(cid:2)

DFB
DFB
Ferrichrome
Deuteroporphyrin
Grazed Fe
Fe-Azotochelin
Fresh ferrihydrite
Fe-dPS

THALASSIOSIRA OCEANICA

Fe(cid:2)
DFB

CHRYSOCHROMULINA ERICINA

Fe(cid:2)
DFB
Goethite

4.6E−09
2.9E−07
3.7E+07
6.0E−13
7.2E−10
1.2E−10
0
0
0
12.9E−10
6.6E−14
2.3E−13
4.1E−09
6.10E−11
4.8E−09
6.2E−09
4.2E−08
2.2E−11
2.8E−11
1.2E−14
2.0E−11
6.00E−08

2.90E−11
2.56E−11
1.6E−10
1.9E−10
3.4E−11
1.6E−10
3.3E−10
4.5E−11
2.56E−08
4.0E−12
2.0E+07
0
5.0E+05

L−1 cell−1 h−1

L−1 μm−2 h−1
L−1 mol−1 day−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 μm−2 h−1
L−1 μm−2 h−1

L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1

L−1 cell−1 h−1

L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1

L−1 μm−2 h−1

L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 μm−2 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 μm−2 h−1

L−1 cell−1 h−1

L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1

L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1

1.3E−04
2.5E−03
4.1E−04
0
0
0

3.4E−04
1.2E−03

1.5E−02
1.2
1.53

6.7E−04
5.4E−04
4.8E−04

4.8E−04
4.3E−04
2.7E−03
3.2E−03
5.6E−04
2.7E−03
5.6E−03
7.5E−04

1.6E−04

Shaked et al. (2005)

Chen and Wang (2008)
Nodwell and Price (2001)
Shaked et al. (2005)
Chen and Wang (2008)
Chen and Wang (2008)
Nodwell and Price (2001)
Chen and Wang (2008)
Chen and Wang (2008)

Kranzler et al. (2011)
Kranzler et al. (2011)
Kranzler et al. (2011)

Hassler and Schoemann (2009)

Hassler and Schoemann (2009)
Hassler and Schoemann (2009)
Hassler and Schoemann (2009)

Chen and Wang (2008)

Fe(diss) estimated at
0.1 nM
Based on growth rates

Fe:DFB (1:5)
Fe:DFB (1:1.1)
Fe:FC (1:200)
Based on growth rates
Fe:DFB (1:5)
Fe:FC (1:200)

Fe:DFB (1:1.3)
Fe:AB (1:2.3)

∼30% of FeCl3 in
dissolved phase
Fe:DFB (1:15)
Fe:MS (1:15)
Fe:PS (1:15)

Fe(diss) estimated at
0.1 nM

Lis and Shaked (in preparation)
Chen and Wang (2008)
Lis and Shaked (in preparation)
Chen and Wang (2008)

Fe:DFB (1:5)
Fe:DFB (1:2)
Fe:FC (1:200)

Fe(cid:2)
from Shaked et al.
(2005) used for allT.w ratio
calculations
Fe:DFB (1:1.1)
Fe:DFB (1:2)

Shaked et al. (2005)

Shaked et al. (2005)
Shi et al. (2010)
Shaked et al. (2005)
Kustka et al. (2005)
Shi et al. (2010)
Shi et al. (2010)
Shi et al. (2010)
Shi et al. (2010)

Maldonado and Price (1996)
Maldonado and Price (2001)

Fe:DFB (1:10)

L−1 mol−1 day−1
L−1 mol−1 day−1
L−1 mol−1 day−1

0
2.53E−02

Nodwell and Price (2001)
Nodwell and Price (2001)
Nodwell and Price (2001)

Based on growth rates
Based on growth rates
Based on growth rates

(Continued)

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 24

Shaked and Lis

Table A3 | Continued

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

Organism

Fe Ligand

Avg k up

Units

Rel. bioavail

Reference

Notes

CHAETOCEROS spp

Fe(cid:2)

DFB
Monosaccharides
Polysaccharides

THALASSIOSIRA ANTARCTICA

Fe(cid:2)

DFB
Monosaccharides
Polysaccharides

2.0E−09
6.1E−11
2.6E−09
3.5E−09
3.67E−08
6.1E−11
2.9E−08
3.5E−08

L−1 cell−1 h−1

L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1

L−1 cell−1 h−1

L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1
L−1 cell−1 h−1

3.1E−02
1.3E+00
1.8E+00

1.7E−03
7.9E−01
9.6E−01

Hassler and Schoemann (2009)

Hassler and Schoemann (2009)
Hassler and Schoemann (2009)
Hassler and Schoemann (2009)

Hassler and Schoemann (2009)

Hassler and Schoemann (2009)
Hassler and Schoemann (2009)
Hassler and Schoemann (2009)

∼30% of FeCl3 in
dissolved phase
Fe:DFB (1:15)
Fe:MS (1:15)
Fe:PS (1:15)

∼30% of FeCl3 in
dissolved phase
Fe:DFB (1:15)
Fe:MS (1:15)
Fe:PS (1:15)

Table A4 | Data used in the calculation of relative bioavailability of natural assemblages (Figure 5B).

Field study location

Fe ligand

Avg k up

Units

Rel. bioavail.

Reference

Notes

SUBARCTIC PACIFIC (>0.2 μm)

Coastal (station P4)

Offshore (station P26)

Fe(cid:2)
DFB

DFE
Fe(cid:2)

DFB
DFE

SOUTHERN OCEAN >0.8 μm
South of polar front

Fe(cid:2)
DFB

Monsaccharides

SOUTHERN OCEAN >0.2 μm

Fe(cid:2)

FeDFB
Gallocatechin

in situ ligands

EQUATORIAL PACIFIC >0.2 μm
Upwelling region
FeDFB

9.2E−01
7.3E−03

7.7E−03
5.8E−02
3.2E−03
3.1E−03
2.5E−13
5.0E−14
3.8E−13
2.6E+02

7.9E+00
4.8E+02
1.1E+02

0

L−1 mol−1 C h−1

L−1 h−1

L−1 mol−1 C h−1

8.0E−03

8.3E−03

5.4E−02
5.2E−02

2.0E−01
1.5E+00

3.0E−02
1.8E+00
4.2E−01

Maldonado and Price
(1999)

Data taken from 1996 study
performed along line P which
runs from coast (P4, high Fe)
to offshore (P26,
lower Fe)
waters

FeL at ratio of 1:5 for DFB and
DFE

Hassler et al. (2011)

Fe(cid:2) assumed to be 1 nM
Uptake rates from lowest con-
centration of ligand additions

Maldonado et al.
(2005)

Uptake rates from dark exper-
iments

FeL is 1:10 for organic ligands,
DFB, and Gallocatechin

Fe:DFB (1:5); population dom-
inated by Synechococcus spp.

Fe:DFB (1:2); population dom-
inated by Pseudo-nitzschia
spp. diatoms

LOCH SCRIDIAN <20 μm
Fe(cid:2)

7.9E−02

L−1 mol−1

7.0E−05

Lis and Shaked (in
preparation)

0

Wells et al. (1994)

DFB

GULF OF AQABA >0.2 μm
Fe(cid:2)

FeDFB

5.6E−06
1.6E−01
2.5E−04

Lis and Shaked (in
preparation)

Fe:DFB (1:2); population dom-
inated by Synechococcus spp.

1.6E−03

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 25

Shaked and Lis

Disassembling iron availability to phytoplankton

REFERENCES
Allen, M. D., Del Campo, J. A., Kropat,
J., and Merchant, S. S.
(2007).
FEA1, FEA2, and FRE1, encoding
two homologous secreted proteins
and a candidate ferrireductase, are
expressed coordinately with FOX1
and FTR1 in iron-deﬁcient Chlamy-
domonas reinhardtii. Eukaryotic Cell
6, 1841–1852.

Allnutt, F. C. T., and Bonner, W. D.
J. (1987). Evaluation of reductive
release as a mechanism for iron
uptake from ferrioxamine B by
Chlorella vulgaris. Plant Physiol. 85,
751–756.

Chen, J.-C., Hsieh, S. I., Kropat, J.,
and Merchant, S. S. (2008). A fer-
roxidase encoded by FOX1 con-
tributes to iron assimilation under
conditions of poor iron nutrition in
Chlamydomonas. Eukaryotic Cell 7,
541–545.

Chen, M., and Wang, W. (2008). Accel-
erated uptake by phytoplankton of
iron bound to humic acids. Aquat.
Biol. 3, 155–166.

Eckhardt, U., and Buckhout, T.

J.
(1998). Iron assimilation in Chlamy-
domonas reinhardtii involves ferric
reduction and is similar to strat-
egy I higher plants. J. Exp. Bot. 49,
1219–1226.

Fujii, M., Rose, A. L., Omura, T., and
Waite, T. D. (2010). Effect of Fe(II)
and Fe(III) transformation kinetics
on iron acquisition by a toxic strain
of Microcystis aeruginosa. Environ.
Sci. Technol. 44, 1980–1986.

Hassler, C. S., and Schoemann, V.
(2009). Bioavailability of organically
bound Fe to model phytoplankton of
the Southern Ocean. Biogeosciences
6, 2281–2296.

Hassler, C. S., Schoemann, V., Nichols,
C. M., Butler, E. C. V., and Boyd, P.

W. (2011). Saccharides enhance iron
bioavailability to Southern Ocean
phytoplankton. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 108, 1076–1081.

Jones, G. J., Palenik, B. P., and Morel, F.
F. M. (1987). Trace metal reduction
by phytoplankton: the role of plas-
malemma redox enzymes. J. Phycol.
23, 237–244.

Keshtacher, L. E., Hadar, Y., and Chen,
Y. (1999). Fe nutrition demand
and utilization by the green alga
Dunaliella bardawil. Plant Soil 215,
175–182.

Kranzler, C., Lis, H., Shaked, Y., and
Keren, N. (2011). The role of reduc-
tion in iron uptake processes in
a unicellular, planktonic cyanobac-
terium. Environ. Microbiol.
13,
2990–2999.

Kustka, A. B., Shaked, Y., Milli-
gan, A.
J., King, D. W., and
Morel, F. M. M. (2005). Extra-
cellular production of
superox-
ide by marine diatoms: contrasting
effects on iron redox chemistry and
bioavailability. Limnol. Oceanogr. 50,
1172–1180.

Lis, H., and Shaked, Y. (2009). Prob-
ing the bioavailability of organically
bound iron: a case study in the Syne-
chococcus-rich waters of the Gulf
of Aqaba. Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 56,
241–253.

Liu, X. W., and Millero, F. J. (2002). The
solubility of iron in seawater. Mar.
Chem. 77, 43–54.

and Harris, S. L.

Maldonado, M. T., Allen, A. E., Chong,
J. S., Dan Leus, K. L., Karpenko,
N.,
(2006).
Copper-dependent iron transport in
coastal and oceanic diatoms. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 51, 1729–1743.

Maldonado, M. T., and Price, N. M.
(1996). Inﬂuence of N substrate on
Fe requirements of marine centric

diatoms. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 141,
161–172.

Maldonado, M. T., and Price, N. M.
(1999). Utilization of iron bound
to strong organic ligands by plank-
ton communities in the subarc-
tic Paciﬁc Ocean. Deep Sea Res.
Part
II Top. Stud. Oceanogr. 46,
2447–2473.

Maldonado, M. T., and Price, N. M.
(2001). Reduction and transport of
organically bound iron by Thalas-
siosira oceanica (Bacillariophyceae).
J. Phycol. 37, 298–309.

Maldonado, M. T., Strzepek, R. F.,
Sander, S., and Boyd, P. W. (2005).
Acquisition of iron bound to strong
organic complexes, with different
Fe binding groups and photochem-
ical reactivities, by plankton com-
munities in Fe-limited subantarctic
waters. Global Biogeochem. Cycles 19,
GB4S23.

Middlemiss, J. K., Anderson, A. M.,
Stratilo, C. W., and Weger, H. G.
(2001). Oxygen consumption asso-
ciated with ferric reductase activ-
ity
iron-
limited cells of Chlorella kess-
leri (Chlorophyceae). J. Phycol. 37,
393–399.

and iron uptake by

Nodwell, L., and Price, N. (2001). Direct
use of inorganic colloidal iron by
marine mixotrophic phytoplankton.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 46, 755–777.

iron

Paz, Y., Katz, A., and Pick, U. (2007).
ferroxidase involved
Multicopper
in
transfer-
rins in Dunaliella salina plasma
membranes.
J. Biol. Chem. 282,
8658–8666.

binding

to

Rose, A. L., Salmon, T. P., Lukondeh,
T., Neilan, B. A., and Waite, T. D.
(2005). Use of superoxide as an elec-
tron shuttle for iron acquisition by
the marine cyanobacterium Lyngbya

majuscula. Environ. Sci. Technol. 39,
3708–3715.

Sasaki, T., Kurano, N., and Miyachi, S.
(1998). Induction of ferric reduc-
tase activity and of
iron uptake
activity in Chlococcum littorale cells
underextremely high-CO2 and iron-
deﬁcient conditions. Plant Cell Phys-
iol. 39, 405–410.

Shaked, Y., Erel, Y., and Sukenik,
A. (2002). Phytoplankton-mediated
redox cycle of iron in the epilimnion
of Lake Kinneret. Environ. Sci. Tech-
nol. 36, 460–467.

Shaked, Y., Kustka, A. B., and Morel,
F. M. M. (2005). A general kinetic
model
iron acquisition by
eukaryotic phytoplankton. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 50, 872–882.

for

Shaked,Y., Kustka,A. B., Morel, F. M. M.,
and Erel, Y. (2004). Simultaneous
determination of iron reduction and
uptake by phytoplankton. Limnol.
Oceanogr. Methods 2, 137–145.

Shi, D., Xu, Y., Hopkinson, B. M., and
Morel, F. M. M. (2010). Effect of
ocean acidiﬁcation on iron availabil-
ity to marine phytoplankton. Science
327, 676–679.

Soria-Dengg, S., and Horstmann, U.
(1995). Ferrioxamines B and E as
iron sources for the marine diatom
Phaeodactylum tricornutum. Mar.
Ecol. Prog. Ser. 127, 269–277.

Weger, H. G.

(1999). Ferric

and
cupric reductase activities in the
green alga Chlamydomonas rein-
hardtii: experiments using iron-
limited chemostats. Planta 207,
377–384.

Wells, M. L., Price, N. M., and Bru-
land, K. W. (1994). Iron limitation
cyanobacterium Syne-
and the
in equatorial Paciﬁc
chococcus
waters.
39,
1481–1486.

Limnol. Oceanogr.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 123 | 26

