ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 22 March 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00106

Increased levels of multiresistant bacteria and resistance
genes after wastewater treatment and their dissemination
into Lake Geneva, Switzerland

Nadine Czekalski 1*,Tom Berthold 2, Serena Caucci 2, Andrea Egli 1 and Helmut Bürgmann1

1 Department of Surface Waters – Research and Management, Eawag: Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, Kastanienbaum, Switzerland
2 Department of Environmental Microbiology, UFZ, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, Leipzig, Germany

Edited by:
Sylvie Nazaret, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientiﬁque, France
Reviewed by:
Chris Rensing, RTI International, USA
Julie Zilles, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, USA
*Correspondence:
Nadine Czekalski, Department of
Surface Waters – Research and
Management, Eawag: Swiss Federal
Institute of Aquatic Science and
Technology, Seestrasse 79, 6047
Kastanienbaum, Switzerland.
e-mail: nadine.czekalski@eawag.ch

At present, very little is known about the fate and persistence of multiresistant bacteria
(MRB) and their resistance genes in natural aquatic environments. Treated, but partly also
untreated sewage of the city of Lausanne, Switzerland is discharged into Vidy Bay (Lake
Geneva) resulting in high levels of contamination in this part of the lake. In the present
work we have studied the prevalence of MRB and resistance genes in the wastewater
stream of Lausanne. Samples from hospital and municipal raw sewage, treated efﬂuent
from Lausanne’s wastewater treatment plant (WTP) as well as lake water and sediment
samples obtained close to the WTP outlet pipe and a remote site close to a drinking water
pump were evaluated for the prevalence of MRB. Selected isolates were identiﬁed (16S
rRNA gene fragment sequencing) and characterized with regards to further resistances,
resistance genes, and plasmids. Mostly, studies investigating this issue have relied on
cultivation-based approaches. However, the limitations of these tools are well known,
in particular for environmental microbial communities, and cultivation-independent mol-
ecular tools should be applied in parallel in order to take non-culturable organisms into
account. Here we directly quantiﬁed the sulfonamide resistance genes sul1 and sul2 from
environmental DNA extracts using TaqMan real-time quantitative PCR. Hospital sewage
contained the highest load of MRB and antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs). Wastewater
treatment reduced the total bacterial load up to 78% but evidence for selection of extremely
multiresistant strains and accumulation of resistance genes was observed. Our data clearly
indicated pollution of sediments with ARGs in the vicinity of the WTP outlet. The potential
of lakes as reservoirs of MRB and potential risks are discussed.

Keywords: aquatic, environment, sewage, pollution, sediment, qPCR, antibiotics

INTRODUCTION
Antibiotic resistance has been the focus of research primarily in
clinical settings (human and veterinary medicine), whereas the
impact of environmental microbes as reservoirs of resistance fac-
tors and the impact of releasing antibiotic resistant bacteria (ARB)
into the environment was not considered until quite recently.
However, it is now known, that ARB and antibiotic resistance
genes (ARGs) are ubiquitous in nature (Alonso et al., 2001; Mar-
tinez, 2008; Aminov, 2009) and can occur in high concentrations
in clinical, industrial, and communal wastewater (Schwartz et al.,
2003; Kümmerer, 2004; Volkmann et al., 2004) as well as in ani-
mal husbandry (Lanz et al., 2003; Perreten and Boerlin, 2003;
Heuer et al., 2008). These environments frequently also contain
elevated levels of antibiotics and other pharmaceuticals. Conse-
quently they are considered to select for antibiotic resistance and
to be important hot spots for horizontal gene transfer (HGT) of
resistance genes, and thus sites of resistance evolution (Baquero
et al., 2008; Kemper, 2008; Kümmerer, 2008). In addition, liq-
uid and solids discharged from these environments have been
described as major sources of ARB in surface waters (Young, 1993;
Kümmerer, 2004; Blasco et al., 2009; Martinez, 2009) and soils

(Sengelov et al., 2003; Heuer and Smalla, 2007; Heuer et al., 2008).
There are two key concerns related to this continuous introduc-
tion of ARB and their resistance genes into the environment. The
possible persistence and further dissemination of ARB in natural
aquatic environments may contribute to the increase in infections
with resistant pathogens. Secondly the dissemination of ARB and
ARG may lead to an increase of the ARG pool in environmental
bacteria – thus facilitating transfer of resistance into current and
emerging pathogens.

Multiresistant bacteria (MRB) are assumed to emerge primar-
ily from hospitals and other environments where high amounts
of antibiotics are frequently used. Thus, an elevated occurrence of
MRB in the environment is assumed to be a more appropriate inci-
dence for anthropogenic pollution compared to strains carrying
only a single resistance. In the culture-based part of the present
study we directly selected for multiresistant strains by applying
combinations of clinically relevant antibiotics representing seven
different antibiotic classes. The antibiotics incorporated in our
approach were chosen in order to include representatives of dif-
ferent modes of action (e.g., inhibition of folic acid synthesis as
for sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim, protein biosynthesis as

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 1

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

for clarithromycin, tetracycline, and streptomycin, cell wall syn-
thesis as for ceftazidime, and DNA replication as for norﬂoxacin),
different time spans of clinical deployment (e.g., sulfamethox-
azole representing an “old” and norﬂoxacin, ceftazidime repre-
senting “newer” antibiotic classes) and different origins (either
natural, e.g., streptomycin, semi- or fully synthetic, e.g., clar-
ithromycin and norﬂoxacin, respectively). Further criteria were
the global but also local clinical relevance of the substances as
well as their recent detection as micropollutants at our study sites
(Blanc, 2010; Bonvin et al., 2011). Preference was given to broad-
spectrum antibiotics. The three antibiotic combinations applied
in the present study represent “old” (sulfamethoxazole, trimetho-
prim, and streptomycin), “mixed-old and new” (clarithromycin,
tetracycline), and “new” (norﬂoxacin, ceftazidime) classes. Fur-
thermore, sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim are mostly applied
together in clinics, which led us to apply them in combination also
in our study.

Switzerland is a country with comparatively low antibiotic con-
sumption (lowest deﬁned daily dose per 1000 inhabitants among
European countries; Filippini et al., 2006). Monitoring programs
for antibiotic resistance in clinical settings have been established
only recently (NRP49, 2007). Several studies on the release of
antibiotics and other micropollutants and their occurrence in
sewage and natural environments have been conducted in Switzer-
land (Alder et al., 2001; Giger et al., 2003; McArdell et al., 2003;
Escher et al., 2011). However, the exposure of Swiss lakes to ARB
and ARG has so far not received much attention, which is also the
case for lakes in general. Most of the studies conducted on antibi-
otic resistance in surface waters focused on rivers (Iwane et al.,
2001; Pei et al., 2006; Li et al., 2009). However, the signiﬁcance of
lakes as environments providing drinking water, food, and recre-
ational activities marks them as highly relevant study objects. Lakes
might not only be exposed to pollution with ARB and ARG but
might also function as natural resistance reservoirs: Jones et al.
(1986) found elevated levels of ARB in Lake Windermere and
even higher resistance prevalence in two upland tarns. Picao et al.
(2008) detected plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance genes in
Aeromonas species isolated from Lake Lugano, Switzerland. How-
ever, Auerbach et al. (2007) found only 1 out of 10 tetracycline
resistance genes in lake samples. The low number of studies and
somewhat conﬂicting information they provide shows that there
is still a considerable knowledge gap on the function of lakes as
resistance reservoirs, which needs to be addressed.

Lake Geneva is the largest fresh water reservoir of Western
Europe but at the same time receives wastewaters from the sur-
rounding cities. The largest wastewater treatment plant (WTP)
belongs to the city of Lausanne. The discharge of sewage from this
plant has led to heavy pollution of its receiving water, the Vidy Bay,
which is considered the most contaminated part of the lake. Sev-
eral studies have reported on pollution of the sediment in the bay
with heavy metals (Loizeau et al., 2004), micropollutants (Bon-
vin et al., 2011), and fecal indicator bacteria (Haller et al., 2009b;
Poté et al., 2009a) as well as changes to the sediment conditions
such as increased organic matter content (Poté et al., 2008; Bravo
et al., 2011). To the best of our knowledge no previous studies have
been conducted on the input of ARB and ARG into Vidy Bay/Lake
Geneva.

In the present study, we aimed to evaluate the occurrence of
ARB and ARGs in the wastewater stream of Lausanne and the role
of Lausanne’s WTP. In particular, we wanted to evaluate whether
the WTP acts as a barrier for MRB in the wastewater stream, or
conversely, provides an environment for selection of MRB and hor-
izontal transfer of resistance factors. Finally, the role of the lake as
a potential reservoir of ARB and ARG is discussed. We combined
application of culture-based and culture-independent methods to
allow both: the identiﬁcation of important key species that might
carry and further disseminate antibiotic resistance into the aquatic
environment, as well as a culture-independent description of the
dynamics of ARGs in the various compartments of the Lausanne
wastewater system and Lake Geneva.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
SAMPLING CAMPAIGNS AND STUDY SITE
Lake Geneva is located in the South Western part of Switzer-
land (Figure 1) and has a volume of 89 km3, a surface area of
580 km2 and a maximum depth of 310 m. The Vidy Bay, which
accounts for 0.3% of the lake’s total volume (Chèvre et al., 2011),
is located at the northern shore of the lake, next to the city of Lau-
sanne. Lausanne’s WTP treats sewage from 214000 inhabitants,
including wastewater from several health care centers. The largest
one is the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV). The
most important building in terms of capacity and antibiotic con-
sumption is the main building which accounts for 71% of the
−1 of raw sewage
CHUV sewage output. On average 410 m³ day
are released from this building to the Lausanne municipal sewer
system (Blanc, 2010). There is no pharmaceutical industry located
in Lausanne, and intensive animal production is not prevalent
in the vicinity. Hence it is assumed that the healthcare facilities
are likely the main source of ARB. The WTP receives on average
−1 of
107734 m³ day
−1) directly into
treated sewage (usually 1–3 m³ s
Vidy Bay (Vioget et al., 2011). The discharge point is situated 700 m
offshore at 30 m depth. During heavy rain events the capacity of the
WTP is exceeded and untreated wastewaters are then discharged
into the Bay. This has led to heavy pollution (Loizeau et al., 2004;
Poté et al., 2009b). Only 3.2 km southwest from the WTP dis-
charge point, Lausanne pumps lake water for its drinking water
supply (St. Sulpice). Situated 1 km offshore and at 50 m depth the
pump withdraws 100000 m³ of fresh water per day and drinking
water is prepared via sand ﬁltration and chlorination.

−1 of wastewater and discharges 86631 m³ day

−1 up to 5–6 m³ s

Three sampling campaigns were conducted between February
and April 2010 in order to sample all of the following sites once. (a)
Wastewater samples were taken from the sewage pipe exiting the
main building of the CHUV (March 8, ∼09:00 a.m., sample code:
HOS) and (b) at the in- and outlet of the WTP of Lausanne (Feb
22, ∼12:00 a.m.,WTPin/WTPout). Additionally, (c) lake water and
sediment cores were sampled at two points in the Vidy Bay: directly
at the outlet of the wastewater discharge pipe (April 7, 12:00 a.m.,
sample code: STEP, “Station d’épuration”) and close to the end of
the pipe supplying the drinking water pump (April 7, 04:15 p.m.,
DP) of St. Sulpice (Figure 1). All water samples were ﬁlled into
ethanol-washed canisters after rinsing twice with sample water.
One liter of wastewater was sampled using a repeatedly rinsed
scoop and ﬁlled into the canisters. Lake water (5 l) and sediment

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 2

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

N

 Atlas der Schweiz 2.0

 Atlas der Schweiz 2.0

Bundesamt für Landestopografie swisstopo, Swiss Map

FIGURE 1 | Map of the study area and sampling sites. Efﬂuents of
Lausanne’s wastewater treatment plant (WTP) are discharged via pipe 700 m
off shore at 30 m depth (STEP, Station d’épuration, Swiss coordinates:

534672/ 151540). 3.2 km to the southwest, lake water is withdrawn for
Lausanne’s drinking water supply (DP, Swiss coordinates: 531748/150195).
Water was sampled at all points, sediment was sampled at STEP and DP.

were sampled from the R/V La Licorne (Institute Forel, Geneva),
equipped with a crane to which either a sediment corer (Uwitec,
Austria) or a rosette sampling device (1018 Rosette Sampling Sys-
tem, General Oceanics Inc., FL, USA), consisting of eleven 1.7-l
Niskin bottles, were attached. The rosette was coupled to a CTD
device (OCEAN SEVEN 316 Plus CTD, IDRONAUT S.r.l., General
Oceanics), which allowed for online monitoring of dissolved oxy-
gen, temperature, pH, and conductivity. Lake water was sampled
at 20 m depth (below the thermocline) subsequent to recording a
CTD proﬁle (Figure A1 in Appendix). The maximum water depth
at STEP and DP is 30 and 56 m, respectively.

Immediately after sampling, 45 ml aliquots of sample water
were transferred to 50-ml polypropylene centrifuge tubes (Bec-
ton, Dickinson and Company, Sparks, NJ, USA) containing 5 ml
of a 20% paraformaldehyde solution (ﬁnal concentration 2%) in
order to preserve cells for ﬂow-cytometric counts of total bacteria
(Troussellier et al., 1995). Samples were transported to the labora-
tory and stored at 4˚C in the dark. Plating and ﬁltration of water
samples was carried out within 3–6 h of sampling. Sediment cores
were stored for up to 1 week at 4˚C in the dark before processing.
Fixed samples for ﬂow-cytometric counts were stored at −80˚C
and ﬂow-cytometric analysis was carried out within 2–7 days.

ISOLATION AND QUANTIFICATION OF MULTIPLE ANTIBIOTIC
RESISTANT BACTERIA
For total and resistant viable cell counts (colony forming units –
CFU), samples were processed as follows: (a) Lake water close
to the DP: 4 l were ﬁltered through sterile 0.2-μm-pore-sized
polycarbonate Isopore™membrane ﬁlters (147 mm in diameter,
Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Filters were cut into small pieces
and placed into 5–10 ml of sterile 0.05 M pyrophosphate (pp) solu-
tion (pH 8.5). Cells were suspended in pp by vigorous vortexing
and saline solution was added to give a ﬁnal volume of 40 ml and

a 100-fold concentrated microbial suspension relative to the raw
sample. (b) Sediment cores: In order to detach bacteria from parti-
cles of the sediment surface layer (0–3 cm depth) 3 g sediment were
added to 30 ml pp and vortexed for 2 h (Lindahl, 1996; Amalﬁtano
and Fazi, 2008). Particles were then allowed to settle for 18 min.

The concentrated DP microbial suspension from procedure
(a) was applied directly as well as diluted 1–10. The suspen-
sions of procedure (b) as well as raw HOS, WTPin, WTPout,
and STEP samples were diluted from 1:10 up to 1:105 in ster-
ile 0.9% saline solution. Hundred microliters of each dilution
were plated in triplicate on the following agar media cast in 9 cm
diameter Petri dishes: nutrient agar (NAg) for copiotrophic bac-
terial counts, R2A for heterotrophs, phenylethyl alcohol (PEA)
agar to select for Gram-positive bacteria, Pseudomonas isola-
tion (PIA) agar to select for pseudomonads, and eosin meth-
ylene blue (EMB) agar to select for Gram-negative enterobac-
teria. All media (Difco™, Becton, Dickinson and Company,
Sparks, NJ, USA) were supplemented with three combinations
of antibiotics (Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) at inhibitory concen-
trations: (a) “old” Sul/Trm/Str: sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim
−1),
(Sul/Trm, 64 μg ml
−1)/ceftazidime
(b) “new” Nor/Cef: norﬂoxacin (Nor, 2 μg ml
−1), and (c) “mixed” Cla/Tet : clarithromycin (Cla,
(Cef, 32 μg ml
−1). Combination (c) was not
4 μg ml
tested with EMB and PIA media that enrich for Gram-negative
organisms, as clarithromycin mainly selects against Gram-positive
bacteria. The concentration of each substance was applied accord-
ing to DIN norms [German Institute for Standardization (DIN)
which develops ofﬁcial standards for susceptibility testing of
antimicrobials in Germany and Europe in close collaboration
with European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing
(EUCAST) similar to CLSI guidelines in the US; Deutsches Insti-
tut für Normung e. V. [DIN], 2004]. Three plates of each medium

−1, 8:1) and streptomycin (Str, 32 μg ml

−1)/tetracycline (Tet, 8 μg ml

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 3

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

without antibiotics served as positive controls and for determin-
ing total viable counts and one plate of each medium not receiving
sample was incubated as a sterile control. In order to favor growth
of bacteria which are adapted to lower temperatures, NAg and
R2A plates were incubated at 25˚C and evaluated for formation
of colonies after 24, 48, and 72 h. PEA, PIA, and EMB plates were
incubated at 37˚C and evaluated after 24 and 48 h. All plates were
incubated under aerobic conditions.

TOTAL BACTERIAL COUNTS FROM LAKE AND WASTEWATER SAMPLES
Total bacterial counts of all water samples were determined once
per sample by ﬂow-cytometry (FC) as follows: 1 ml of the ﬁxed
sample was diluted 100–1000 times (to give 1000–10000 events
per second) and stained with 10 μl of diluted SYBR® Green I solu-
tion (Invitrogen, Basel, Switzerland, 1:100 dilution in anhydrous
dimethyl sulfoxide). After 15 min of incubation at 20˚C in the
dark, samples were analyzed on an PARTEC-PAS-III CyFlow Space
ﬂow cytometer (Partec GmbH, Münster, Germany) according to
Berney et al. (2008).

IDENTIFICATION OF MULTIPLE RESISTANT BACTERIAL ISOLATES FROM
WASTEWATER BY 16S rDNA GENE FRAGMENT SEQUENCING
From R2A and EMB plates supplemented with Sul/Trm/Str
approximately 25 colonies were picked from each of the following
environments: HOS, WTPin, and WTPout. Antibiotic R2A and
EMB plates inoculated with lake samples contained less than 25

colonies. For this reason, colonies from all media supplemented
with Sul/Trm/Str were picked. For identiﬁcation, we performed
colony PCR ampliﬁcation of bacterial 16S rDNA gene fragments.
The ﬁnal reaction volume of 100 μl contained 20 μl of 5× Col-
orless GoTaq® Flexi buffer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), 3 mM
MgCl2, 0.2 μM of each of the general bacterial primers 27f and
−1 bovine serum albu-
1492r (Table 1), 0.2 μM dNTPs, 1 mg ml
−1 of GoTaq® Flexi DNA polymerase (Promega)
min, 0.025 u μl
and material from a single colony picked with sterile inoculation
needles. 10 ng of DNA from E. coli served as a positive control and
1 μl of nuclease-free water (Qiagen, Germany) served as negative
control in all PCRs carried out in this study. PCR reactions were
run on a Touchgene Gradient Thermal Cycler (Techne, Cambridge,
UK) with the following temperature program: initial denaturation
for 5 min at 94˚C followed by 35 cycles consisting of 30 s at 94˚C,
1 min at 55˚C and 1.5 min at 72˚C, ﬁnal extension for 5 min at 72˚C.
PCR products were digested overnight at 37˚C with HhaI
(Promega) for analysis of restriction fragment length polymor-
phism (RFLP) typing. The ﬁnal reaction volume of 20 μl contained
2 μl of 10× multicore buffer, 0.2 μl of enzyme (2 u), 7.8 μl water
and 10 μl of PCR product. Lambda phage DNA (Promega) served
as positive control. RFLP digests were visualized by gel elec-
trophoresis on 3% NuSieve Agarose gels (Cambrex Bio Science
Rockland, Inc., ME, USA) and stained with GelRed™(Biotium,
Inc., Hayward, CA, USA). Isolates were grouped into ribo-types
according to identical restriction patterns and one representative

Table 1 | Primers and probes used in the present study.
Target name Primer/probe name Primer/probe sequence (5(cid:2)–3(cid:2))

Size (bp) T (˚C) Reference

Sul1

Sul2

Sul3

Sul1

Sul2

16S rRNA

16S rRNA

IncP1α,β

IncP7

InqQ

IncW

IncN

SulF1
SulR1
SulF2
SulR2
SulF3
SulR3
qSUL653f
qSUL719r
tpSUL1
qSUL2_595f
qSUL2_654r
tpSUL2_614
27f
1492r
1369F
1492R
TM1389F
trfA2 1
trfA2 2
rep1
rep2
oriT1
oriT2
IncW_f
IncW_r
IncN-f
incN_r

CTGAACGATATCCAAGGATTYCC
AAAAATCCCATCCCCGGRTC
CTCAATGATATTCGCGGTTTYCC
AAAAACCCCATGCCGGGRTC
ATTAATGATATTCAAGGTTTYCC
AAGAAGCCCATACCCGGRTC
CCGTTGGCCTTCCTGTAAAG
TTGCCGATCGCGTGAAGT
FAM-CAGCGAGCCTTGCGGCGG-TAMRA
CGGCTGCGCTTCGATT
CGCGCGCAGAAAGGATT
FAM-CGGTGCTTCTGTCTGTTTCGCGC-TAMRA
AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG
GGCTACCTTGTTACGACTT
CGGTGAATACGTTCYCGG
GGWTACCTTGTTACGACT
CTTGTACACACCGCCCGTC
CGAAATTCRTRTGGGAGAAGTA
CGYTTGCAATGCACCAGGTC
CCCTATCTCACGATGCTGTA
GCACAAACGGTCGTCAG
TTCGCGCTCGTTGTTCTTCGAGC
GCCGTTAGGCCAGTTTCTCG
CCTAAGAACAACAAAGCCCCCG
GGTGCGCGGCATAGAACCGT
GTCTAACGAGCTTACCGAAG
GTTTCAACTCTGCCAAGTTC

245
245
245
245
245
245

67

60

1465

50
50
50
50
50
50

60

60

55

Heuer and Smalla (2007)

Modiﬁed from Heuer et al. (2008)

Lane (1991)

124

56/60 Suzuki et al. (2000), Newcombe et al. (2005)

Gotz et al. (1996)

Levchuk et al. (2006)

Gotz et al. (1996)

Carattoli et al. (2005)

241

524

191

242

559

57

52

57

64

55

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 4

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

of each group was selected for sequencing. The respective PCR
products were cleaned using the Wizard® SV Gel and PCR Clean-
Up System (Promega) and quantiﬁed using a NanoDrop 1000
Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc., Wilmington,
USA). Unidirectional sequencing was carried out by Microsynth
AG (Balgach, Switzerland) using the 27f primer. Sequences were
analyzed via the BLASTn program (Altschul et al., 1990) and the
Ribosomal Database Project (release 10) Classiﬁer tool (Wang
et al., 2007). All identiﬁed bacterial isolates from the waste-
water compartments underwent analysis of minimal inhibition
concentrations (MICs; provided subculturing succeeded).

DETERMINATION OF MINIMAL INHIBITION CONCENTRATIONS
Identiﬁed wastewater bacteria (HOS, WTPin, WTPout) isolated
on R2A and EMB plates in the presence of Sul/Trm/Str were
investigated for the MICs of various antibiotics using the Sen-
sititre® broth dilution technique. As for the lake samples less than
25 colonies had formed on antibiotic supplemented plates, these
were not included neither in MIC testing nor in plasmid and resis-
tance gene detection (see below). Strains were grown on R2A and
EMB agar plates. However, for several bacterial isolates subcul-
turing on these media resulted in poor or even no growth for
which reason also other media, including NAg, EMB, Colum-
bia Agar with 5% sheep blood (LaboLife Sàrl, Pully, Switzerland)
or Tryptic Soy Agar (Difco™) plates were used, according to the
growth requirements of the different identiﬁed genera. All agar
media were supplemented with Sul/Trm/Str as described above
and strains were allowed to grow for 72 h at the temperatures
which were used during isolation (25 or 37˚C), and at 30˚C for
identiﬁed pseudomonads. One to four colonies per strain were
picked (dependent on quantity of biomass formed) and trans-
ferred to 1 ml of sterile millipore water. After vortexing, 10 μl of
the suspension were transferred to 11 ml of a liquid medium based
on the agar medium used for growth [R2A broth, Mueller Hin-
ton broth (MHB), nutrient broth (NB), brain heart infusion broth
(BHB), tryptic soy broth (TSB); replacing solid media listed above
in this order]. All media were purchased from Dicfo™, except R2A
broth which was prepared according to Reasoner and Geldreich
(1985).

Subsequently, Sensititre® 96 well susceptibility plates (TREK
Diagnostic Systems, West Sussex, UK; plate formats applied in
this study: EUMVS for Gram-negatives and NLM4 for Gram-
positives) were inoculated with 50 μl culture medium per slot.
A negative control was inoculated with sterile medium and a slot
without antibiotic served as positive control. Plates were incu-
bated at the appropriate temperature for each strain and evalu-
ated for bacterial growth after 24 and 48 h. Plates were checked
for biomass formation in each slot by measuring absorption at
570 nm using an Synergy™HT Multi Detection Microplate Reader
(BioTek, Winooski, VT, USA) and by eye. Strains were classiﬁed
as resistant to the tested substances based on the observed min-
imum inhibitory concentration according to Deutsches Institut
für Normung e. V. [DIN] (2004) norms and European Com-
mittee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing [EUCAST] (2011).
As for ﬂorfenicol no resistance breakpoints are available, strains
were classiﬁed as resistant according to breakpoints for the closely
related chloramphenicol (CHL).

EXTRACTION AND REPLICON TYPING OF PLASMIDS FROM ISOLATED
STRAINS
All Gram-negative wastewater bacteria referred to in the previ-
ous paragraphs were grown in 5 ml R2A broth, nutrient bouillon,
−1 Sul/Trm (8:1)
LB, TSB, or BHB supplemented with 64 μg ml
−1 Str. The liquid cultures were shaken in 15-ml
and 32 μg ml
polypropylene tubes at 180 rpm and 25, 30, or 37˚C for 24–48 h,
depending on growth-preferences and growth rates of strains.
Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5000 rpm for 10 min
at room temperature using an Eppendorf 5804R centrifuge with
a swinging bucket rotor for 15-ml centrifuge tubes (Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany). The supernatant was discarded and the
pellets frozen at −20˚C until plasmid extraction. Plasmid DNA
was puriﬁed from frozen cell pellets using the PureYield™Plasmid
Miniprep System (Promega) for Gram-negative bacteria accord-
ing to the manufacturers’ protocol. As positive controls we used
E. coli J53 harboring the 33-kb-sized plasmid R388, which inher-
its the sul1 gene for sulfonamide resistance. Liquid cultures of
−1 trimethoprim.
this strain were prepared in LB with 20 μg ml
For Gram-positive strains we applied the PureYield™Plasmid
Midiprep System (Promega) adapted according to Wegmüller and
Schmid (2009) with a few modiﬁcations: in brief, cells were grown
in 50 ml BHB for 20 h at 37˚C and 180 rpm. Bacillus subtilis ssp.
subtilis BD170 (DSMZ, Germany) carrying the 4.5-kb-sized plas-
mid pUB110 served as a positive control during extraction. Cell
pellets were resuspended in 3 ml of the cell suspension solution
supplied with the kit and incubated for 10 min at 37˚C with
−1 lysozyme added (B. subtilis cells), or for 30 min at
1 mg ml
−1 of lysozyme and 1 ml of a 75% (w/v) sac-
37˚C and 10 mg ml
charose solution (environmental isolates). Subsequently, cell lysis
and neutralization was carried out according to the manufacturers
guidelines, taking into account the recommended time to allow the
formation of white ﬂocculent before centrifugation of the lysate
(Wegmüller and Schmid, 2009). Plasmid DNA was further puri-
ﬁed following the Promega protocol and ﬁnally eluted in 400 μl of
nuclease-free water.

Visualization of plasmid DNA was done by gel electrophoresis
in 0.8% agarose gels at 50 V. Plasmid extracts showing several sharp
bands were screened for the following Inc groups: IncP1α,β, IncP7,
IncN, IncW, and IncQ, using the primers and PCR conditions as
described previously (Table 1). PCR products were screened by
gel electrophoresis. Plasmid extracts were evaluated as positive for
the tested Inc groups if the PCR product exhibited a band of the
correct size.

DETECTION OF SULFONAMIDE RESISTANCE GENES IN SELECTED
ISOLATES
All plasmid extracts were screened for the presence of the three
sulfonamide resistance genes sul1, sul2, and sul3 using a multiplex
PCR assay as described previously (Table 1). The presence of sul
genes was determined from detection of a PCR amplicon band of
the expected size following agarose gel electrophoresis. A post-PCR
identiﬁcation of which sul type was present was not performed.
As positive controls for sul1, sul2, and sul3 served plasmids R388
(E. coli J53), RSF1010 (E. coli DH5α), and pVP440 (E. coli K12),
respectively. The formation of PCR products of the correct size
was evaluated via gel electrophoresis in 2% agarose gels.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 5

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

DNA EXTRACTION FROM WATER FILTERS AND SEDIMENTS
Water samples were ﬁltered using 5- and 0.2-μm pore-size poly-
carbonate membrane ﬁlters (Isopore™, Ø 147-mm, Millipore).
Filters were cut into quarters, folded, packed into clean self-seal
bags, and shock-frozen in liquid nitrogen for subsequent stor-
age at −80˚C until DNA extraction (3–5 months). One quarter
of the ﬁlter from each sampled location was extracted as follows:
lysis of bacterial cells was carried out by a two-step procedure:
(a) bead-beating in GOS buffer (Hönerlage et al., 1995) for 40 s
−1 with a FastPrep®-24 Instrument (Biomedicals Europe,
at 4 ms
Illkirch, France). For this step we used 0.2 g of a 1:1 mixture of
106 μm and 150–212 μm glass beads (Sigma-Aldrich). (b) Freez-
ing in liquid nitrogen for 1 min and thawing at room temperature
(rt). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation for 30 min at max-
imum speed (13000 rpm, Eppendorf Centrifuge 5415R) at rt. The
−1 RNase
supernatant was treated for 30 min at 37˚C with 10 mg ml
A. DNA was extracted with 1/2 volume of phenol (pH 8, Sigma-
Aldrich) and 1/2 volume of chloroform/isoamyl alcohol (24:1,
CIA, both Sigma-Aldrich) followed by a second extraction with
1 volume of CIA. DNA was precipitated with 1 volume of iso-
propanol. After centrifugation at 4˚C and maximum speed for
30 min the DNA pellet was rinsed with 70% cold ethanol and
dissolved in 20–30 μl of sterile Tris–EDTA buffer.
Out of each sediment core, 0.5 g of surface layer material were
transferred to sterile 2 ml screw-cap tubes (BRAND GmbH+ Co
KG, Wertheim, Germany) and stored at −80˚C in 1.5 ml GOS
buffer until DNA extraction. For cell lysis, a bead mixture as
described above was added and after vortexing two times for 40 s
each at 3000 rpm (maximum vortex velocity, Vortex Genie 2, Sci-
entiﬁc Industries, Inc., NY, USA) the supernatant was extracted
with 500 μl phenol (pH 8, Sigma-Aldrich), followed by extraction
with 200 μl CIA and ﬁnally with 400 μl chloroform. Precipita-
tion of DNA and subsequent steps were as described for the DNA
extraction from ﬁlters. For both water ﬁlters and sediments one
blank extract was prepared, containing only beads and chemicals,
respectively one quarter of a clean ﬁlter.

QUANTIFICATION OF SULFONAMIDE RESISTANCE GENES AND
BACTERIAL 16S rRNA GENE FRAGMENTS IN ENVIRONMENTAL DNA
EXTRACTS
The sulfonamide resistance genes sul1 and sul2 and bacterial 16S
rRNA gene fragments were quantiﬁed from environmental DNA
extracts using quantitative real-time Taqman®-PCR. Reactions
were run in volumes of 20 μl (sul1 and sul2) and 30 μl (16S rRNA),
containing 1× TaqMan® Fast Universal PCR-Master Mix (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and 5 μl of DNA (dilutions of
quantiﬁcation standards or diluted (1:10 to 1:105) DNA extracts
of samples). Extraction blanks (see above) as well as PCR blanks
containing 5 μl of nuclease-free water were run as negative con-
trols. To check for the presence of PCR inhibitors, standard PCR
ampliﬁcation of bacterial 16S rRNA gene fragments was carried
out as described above, using 1 μl of template at various dilutions.
Dilutions revealing successful ampliﬁcation according to agarose
gel electrophoresis were then used for real-time PCR. Primers and
probes for sul1 and sul2 genes (Table 1), as well as their corre-
sponding concentrations for PCR were as previously described
(Heuer and Smalla, 2007; Heuer et al., 2008). PCR conditions

for sul1 and sul2 were as follows: 2 min activation at 50˚C, initial
denaturation for 10 min at 94˚C and 40 cycles of denaturation
at 95˚C for 15 s and annealing at 60˚C for 3 min. For quantiﬁ-
cation of 16S rRNA genes we used universal primers and probes
described by Suzuki et al. (2000). Primer and probe concentrations
as well as PCR conditions were applied according to Newcombe
et al. (2005). All samples and standards were run in triplicate in
96 well plates on a 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied
Biosystems) and analyzed using the automated settings of the
7500 Fast System SDS Software (Applied Biosystems). Standard
curves were prepared from serial dilutions of the plasmids serv-
ing as positive controls for sul1 (R388) and sul2 (RSF1010) and a
pGEM®-T Easy plasmid containing the target fragment of the 16S
rRNA gene of E. coli. (position 1369–1492 of the E. coli reference
genome, 123 bp). Dilution series were prepared as recommended
by the Applied Biosystems Tutorial “Creating Standard Curves
with Genomic DNA or Plasmid DNA Templates for Use in Quan-
titative PCR.” Efﬁciency (E) of each qPCR run was calculated
from the slope of the standard curves according to the formula
E = 10(−1/slope) − 1. The limit of quantiﬁcation (LOQ) was deter-
mined by the most diluted standard in the standard curve that
exhibited a standard deviation of Ct values of the triplicates smaller
than 0.5 (Life Technologies Corporation, 2012).

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
In order to determine signiﬁcant differences of measurements in
excess of the error of measurement, we performed pairwise t -tests
in R, based on the triplicate measurements of either qPCR or plate
counts. Correlation analyses for comparison of the outcome of
different methods were performed using the data analysis tool in
Microsoft Excel.

RESULTS
TOTAL BACTERIAL LOAD ALONG THE WASTEWATER FLOW LINE
We determined the total bacterial load in samples along the waste-
water ﬂow of Lausanne into the Vidy Bay, Lake Geneva using a
culture-based (plate counts) and two culture-independent meth-
ods (total cell counts by FC and direct quantiﬁcation of 16s rRNA
gene fragments using quantitative real-time PCR). For 16S rRNA
genes the PCR efﬁciency was calculated to be 109.94% and the
LOQ was determined at 300 copies of the target per 5 μl.

All three methods show a decrease in total bacteria along
the wastewater ﬂow path from the urban catchment to the lake
(Figures 2 and 3A). The two culture-independent methods, agreed
very well in all analyzed water samples (correlation coefﬁcient
r 2 = 0.94, Figure 3A). On all of the ﬁve tested media, and for
all tested samples, viable bacterial numbers determined by plate
counts were at least two orders of magnitude lower than the bacter-
ial numbers determined with the culture-independent approaches.
The highest numbers were detected on the two general media R2A
and NAg.
The highest bacterial load was determined in the HOS sam-
ple based on FC and 16S rRNA gene copy numbers (p ≤ 0.01).
Plate counts on the three selective media PIA (p ≤ 0.001), PEA
(p ≤ 0.01), and EMB also revealed highest viable bacterial num-
bers in the HOS sample, although for EMB the difference was
within the error of measurement. Both the general media R2A

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 6

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

and NAg revealed slightly higher viable bacterial concentrations
in the WTPin compared to the HOS sample but the difference was
not signiﬁcant (p ≥ 0.05).

The discrepancy between untreated and treated wastewater
samples (WTPin and WTPout, respectively) was about 0.5–1
orders of magnitude for all three methods but for 16S rRNA gene
copy numbers the difference was not signiﬁcant. According to this
data wastewater treatment reduced the total bacterial load is by
73% based on total viable counts (averaged over all ﬁve media),
78% according to FC and 42% according to 16S rRNA gene copy
numbers, respectively.

Total viable counts in STEP lake water ranged from 101 to
−1 but they were considerably lower (by 1–3 orders of
104 CFU ml
magnitude) at the DP site (Figure 2). The trend of CFU-Total and
FC counts along the ﬂow path was mostly coherent, irrespective
of the fact that the latter were generally 2–3 orders of magnitude
higher. However, we observed an increasing divergence of the two
methods in the lake samples: in contrast to the drop of bacter-
ial plate counts from STEP to DP (p ≤ 0.05 for all media, except
for PEA), FC counts revealed a similar bacterial load in both lake
−1 (compare Figures 2 and 3A).
water samples of 106 events ml
16S rRNA gene copy numbers were even 1 order of magnitude

FIGURE 2 | Total viable counts, normalized to sample volume or mass,
on agar media without antibiotics. An asterisk (∗) indicates less than
10 CFU ml−1. n.d., no colonies detected. Error bars indicate standard
deviation of triplicate platings of the same sample.

lower for the STEP water sample compared to the DP sample by
p ≤ 0.01.

In sediment samples taken close to STEP total viable counts
were approximately 10 times higher compared to DP sediments
(Figure 2). Note that sediment viable counts per gram dry weight
were at least 10 times higher compared to plate counts per milli-
liter of the overlying water columns at both lake sites. No qPCR
quantiﬁcation results for 16S rRNA genes are presented for sedi-
ments as we observed considerable inhibition for the method with
these samples.

MULTIRESISTANT BACTERIA AND RESISTANCE GENES ALONG THE
WASTEWATER FLOW LINE
As for the total bacterial
load we also detected a decreas-
ing trend for MRB determined by plate counts along the
wastewater ﬂow path from the urban catchment to the lake
(HOS > WTPin > WTPout > STEP > DP, Figures 4A–C). Plate
counts for “new” antibiotics (Nor/Cef) were comparatively low
along the whole wastewater ﬂow line on four out of ﬁve of the
tested media. Solely on PEA plates which select for Gram-positive
bacteria, Nor/Cef resistance occurred in the same range as the
numbers determined for the remaining antibiotics at the respective
sampling sites (Figure 4C).

The highest concentration of viable potentially MRB along the
ﬂow path was found in the HOS sample, regardless of the antibi-
otic combination or growth medium (Figures 4A–C). However,
in case of Nag plates supplemented with Sul/Trm/Str and Cla/Tet
counts on PEA plates the differences between HOS and WTPin
samples were within the error of measurement (p = 0.08 for both,
respectively).

Relative abundances of potentially MRB (i.e., MRB plate counts
normalized to the total viable bacterial counts on the same
medium) were mostly, but not exclusively, observed to be high-
est in HOS as well, ranging from 0.01 to 66% (Figures 4D–F).
Besides the high values in HOS we also observed high relative
abundance of Cla/Tet resistance on PEA plates in the WTPin sam-
ple (40%) and NAg plates showed high relative abundances for this
antibiotic combination in the WTPout sample (21%). Both values
were in the same range as the relative abundances determined
for the HOS sample (36 and 21% for PEA and Nag, respec-
tively; Figure 4E). For Nor/Cef resistance slightly elevated relative

FIGURE 3 | (A) Total gene copy numbers and ﬂow-cytometric cell counts, normalized to sample volume. (B) Relative abundance of sulfonamide resistance
gene copy numbers normalized to 16S rRNA gene copies. Error bars indicate standard deviation from triplicate real-time PCR ampliﬁcation of the same sample.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 7

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

FIGURE 4 | (A–C) Total viable counts, normalized to sample volume or mass,
in the presence of (A) Sul/Trm/Str, (B) Cla/Tet, and (C) Nor/Cef. (D–F)
Abundance, relative to total viable counts without antibiotics, in the presence
of (D) Sul/Trm/Str, (E) Cla/Tet, and (F) Nor/Cef. The insert in (F) shows

abundance of selected samples at an adjusted scale. An asterisk (∗) indicates
less than 10 CFU ml−1 in (A–C) and less than 1% relative abundance in (D–F).
n.d., no colonies detected. Error bars indicate standard deviation of triplicate
platings of the same sample.

abundances were observed in WTPin and WTPout, but only for
Gram-positives (PEA medium, 2.8 and 3.1%, respectively) whereas
their abundance was low for the remaining media (less than 1%).
Abundances of Sul/Trm/Str MRB were quite homogenous for all
media and ranged from 0.01 to 5.6%.

Viable counts of potentially MRB were 0.5–1 orders of magni-
tude higher in the untreated versus the treated wastewater sample
(WTPin and WTPout) which is similar to the trend observed for
total viable counts. Calculated removal of MRB during wastewater
treatment (averaged over all ﬁve media) was 62± 26, 78± 6, and
84± 6% for Cla/Tet, Nor/Cef (disregarding the much lower PIA
counts), and Sul/Trm/Str MRB, respectively.

To some extent we noticed variations in removal efﬁ-
ciency among the different media and antibiotics. For instance,
Cla/Tet resistant Gram-positives (PEA medium) seem to be

more drastically reduced during wastewater treatment compared
to other Cla/Tet resistant bacteria growing on R2A and NAg
(Figure 4B). Nor/Cef resistant Gram-positives (PEA medium)
were found at 10-fold higher number compared to viable bac-
teria on the remaining media, and appeared to retain this elevated
number even after passing the WTP (Figure 4C). Although relative
abundances of potentially MRB usually decreased from WTPin
to WTPout, we also observed similar proportions in both sam-
ples, e.g., for Nor/Cef resistant Gram-positives (2.8 and 3.1%) and
even increasing numbers, e.g., from 7.5 to 22% on NAg plates
supplemented with Cla/Tet, respectively (Figure 4E).

The lake water generally exhibited low amounts of resistant
bacteria. From STEP lake water samples we were able to isolate
−1)
bacteria in the presence of Sul/Trm/Str (100 to 102 CFU ml
−1) but not in the presence of
and Cla/Tet (101 to 102 CFU ml

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 8

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

Nor/Cef. At the DP site, hardly any bacteria were cultured from
lake water in the presence of antibiotics, despite the additional
sample concentration step (Figures 4A–C).

In sediment samples Nor/Cef resistant colonies were formed
solely on PEA plates from STEP, while none were obtained from
DP sediments. Generally, STEP sediments contained higher num-
bers of MRB than DP sediments (Figure 4C). Compared to the
overlying water column, the concentration of MRB in sediment
were 1–3 orders of magnitude higher. Relative abundances of MRB
in both sediment and lake samples were mostly below 1% except
for Sul/Trm/Str plates which, on different selected media, reached
up to 5% of the respective total viable counts (Figure 4D).

Real-time PCR quantiﬁcation of sulfonamide resistance genes
sul1 and sul2 in wastewater and lake water DNA-extracts revealed
the highest load of both traits in the HOS sample and a general
decrease along the ﬂow path (Figure 3A). This trend is in good
agreement with the outcome of the culture-based approach. sul1
gene copy numbers correlated with Sul/Trm/Str plate counts on
R2A and NAg plates (r 2 = 0.91, for both media), and the correla-
tion was even closer for sul2 (r 2 = 0.99, for both media). However,
copy numbers per milliliter of water or gram sediment (dwt) of
both ARGs were higher by 1–4 orders of magnitude compared
to the respective viable counts in all analyzed samples (compare
Figures 3A and 4A).
In contrast to the culture-based results, qPCR results revealed
a twofold increased level of sul1 (p ≤ 0.001) and only a 15% lower
level of sul2 (p = 0.3) in the WTPout sample compared to the
WTPin sample.

Normalized to the 16S rRNA gene, the sul genes occurred at
abundances of 0.28 to 7.7 and 0.02 to 2.1% for sul1 and sul2, respec-
tively. The highest sul1 abundance was observed in the WTPout
sample followed by HOS (Figure 3B).

The abundance of sul1 was found to be higher than sul2 in all
samples with increasing discrepancy from wastewater to the lake
samples. In lake water, the relative abundance of the two resistance
genes was considerably lower (<1%) than in wastewater samples.
qPCR efﬁciencies derived by the slopes of the standard curves
for both sul genes were 93% for sul1 and 102% for sul2. The LOQ
for both standards was at 300 copies per 5 μl. All diluted samples
ampliﬁed within the range of the standard curve, above the LOQ.

IMPORTANT GENERA IDENTIFIED IN WASTEWATER AND LAKE
SAMPLES
In total, 163 isolates from HOS, WTPin, and WTPout obtained on
Sul/Trm/Str supplemented R2A and EMB plates were identiﬁed
to the genus level by RFLP typing and sequencing of the rRNA
gene. Sequences that passed quality control and the chimera check
(using Bellerophon, version 3; DeSantis et al., 2006) were sub-
mitted to GenBank and are available under accession numbers:
JQ595461–JQ595555 (the FASTA ﬁle provided as supplementary
material also includes the lower quality sequences). We identi-
ﬁed 27 different genera (Table 2), 16 in HOS, 14 in WTPin,
and 13 in WTPout. The majority were Gram-negative bacteria,
but we also identiﬁed a few Gram-positives in HOS (n = 6) and
WTPin (n = 5), mostly Enterococci. Pseudomonads were found to
be most abundant among isolates from all three sites. Enterococci
and Brevundimonas were quite common in HOS, but the latter

was also detected in WTPout. Escherichia/Shigella and Acidovorax
species dominated the WTPin isolates. Escherichia/Shigella was
also isolated frequently from WTPout, as were Sphingobacteria
(accounting for ∼25% of the WTPout isolates). Furthermore, 17
genera were identiﬁed among the lake water bacteria (both STEP
and DP) grown in the presence of Sul/Trm/Str (Table 2). In sed-
iment from STEP and DP, Bacillus and Solibacillus, respectively,
were the most frequently isolated strains. A further dominant
genus in STEP sediment was again Brevundimonas.

PREVALENCE OF HIGHLY AND EXTREMELY MULTIRESISTANT BACTERIA
ALONG THE WASTEWATER FLOW PATH
Resistance of identiﬁed multiresistant wastewater isolates obtained
from Sul/Trm/Str plates was conﬁrmed by determining the MICs
of 14 antibiotics. The results of this experiment are summarized in
Figure 5. Resistance toward the antibiotics applied in the isolation
plates (Sul/Trm/Str) was conﬁrmed. This resistance pattern usually
coincided with a high tolerance or resistance to ampicillin, which
was present in 76 and 77% of HOS and WTPin isolates (n = 42 and
22, respectively) and 87% of WTPout isolates (n = 45). Resistance
patterns toward the 11 remaining substances tested varied among
the different wastewater environments: the number of antibiotics
to which more than 50% of the tested strains were resistant was
8 for the HOS sample. Among WTPin isolates only resistances
against CHL and nalidixic acid (NAL) were detected frequently
(in 55 and 67% of the isolates, respectively). When comparing
the proportions of bacteria resistant against speciﬁc antibiotics
in untreated (WTPin) and treated (WTPout) wastewater, similar
or higher proportions were found in WTPout for 9 out of the
11 antibiotics not used in isolation. In the cases of gentamicin
(GEN) and colistin (COL) the ratio was more than twice as high
for WTPout. Only the resistances to ﬂuoroquinolones (NAL and
ciproﬂoxacin, CIP) occurred more frequently in WTPin isolates.
We have furthermore evaluated the number of resistances per
strain. Strains with resistance against more than six or eight antibi-
otics were labeled as highly and extremely multiresistant, respec-
tively. When comparing the occurrence of highly and extremely
MRB at the three sites (Figure 6), highest proportions were again
detected in the HOS sample (86 and 77%, respectively) and
an increased level in WTPout (82 and 60%, respectively) com-
pared to the WTPin sample (71 and 33%, respectively). Thus, we
observed an 11 and 27% higher abundance of highly and extremely
multiresistant strains, respectively, in the WTPout sample com-
pared to WTPin. The most frequently isolated genera of highly
multiresistant species were Pseudomonas and Escherichia/Shigella
which were present at all three locations. Enterococcus and Bre-
vundimonas were present in HOS. While the former was otherwise
only detected in WTPin, the latter was only found in WTPout.
Acinetobacter was prevalent in both WTPin and WTPout and a
very dominant and highly multiresistant genus in the WTPout
sample was Sphingobacterium.

PREVALENCE OF PLASMIDS AND OF sul GENES IN SELECTED
WASTEWATER ISOLATES
The extraction of plasmid DNA from 129 of the 169 selected waste-
water isolates showed that 58, 77, and 46% of the strains isolated
from HOS, WTPin, and WTPout were harboring plasmids. For

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 9

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

Table 2 | Genera of Sul/Trm/Str resistant bacteria isolated from HOS, WTPin, and WTPout according to partial 16S rRNA gene sequences and
their numerical distribution in the different wastewater compartments.

Genus

HOS

WTPin

WTPout

STEP water

STEP sed

DP water

DP sed

Total

Achromobacter
Acidovorax
Acinetobacter
Aeromonas
Arthrobacter
Azospira
Bacillus
Bosea
Brevundimonas
Brochothrix
Chryseobacterium
Comamonas
Delftia
Enterococcus
Escherichia/Shigella
Flavobacterium
Lysinibacillus
Microbacterium
Phyllobacterium
Pigmentiphaga
Pseudomonas
Pseudorhodoferax
Rheinheimera
Rhizobium
Solibacillus
Sphingobacterium
Sphingobium
Sphingomonas
Sporosarcina
Stenotrophomonas
Tatumella
Thermohalobacter
Thermomonas
Tolumonas
Uruburella
Variovorax
Xanthobacter
Unidentiﬁed
n

2

1

8

2
2
5
1
1

2
15
1

1
1

1
1

3
5
52

8
5
1

2

2

3
7
2

11

3

1

4

1
1

1
2
54

4
1

1

4

2

12

7

1

14

4

1

1

1
4
57

6

3

1

5
15

1

1

14

9

1

1
1

5

1
1

10
45

2

3

3

5

1
14

1

7

3

15

2

9
37

2
9
10
11
1
1
21
3
21
2
2
4
2
9
20
3
1
1
3
2
33
1
3
4
23
15
1
1
3
9
1
1
1
2
2
5
5
36
274

many of the tested strains agarose gel electrophoresis of the plas-
mid DNA extract revealed multiple bands in the low kilobit size
range, indicating multiple plasmids per strain. Replicon typing of
78 plasmid positive extracts revealed only a low number of speciﬁc
ampliﬁcations for IncP1α,β (n = 3), IncP7 (n = 8), IncQ (n = 17),
IncW (n = 2), and no amplicons were detected for IncN. Though
the yield of positives for the tested Inc groups was quite low, the
results nevertheless gave further indications for the presence of
multiple plasmids (of replicon types IncQ and IncP7) in three of
the tested strains. All plasmid extracts, independent of their band
pattern, were screened for presence or absence of sulfonamide

resistance genes sul1, sul2, and sul3. Sul genes were ampliﬁed in
76 out of 129 plasmid extracts, accounting for 77, 40, and 52% of
the investigated bacterial isolates from HOS, WTPin, and WTPout,
respectively.

DISCUSSION
Our study focuses on a wastewater ﬂow path in Lausanne, Switzer-
land. Switzerland is a country with comparatively low antibiotic
consumption (Filippini et al., 2006). However, the impact of hos-
pital efﬂuents and wastewater treatment on the dissemination of
resistant bacteria and resistance genes in the receiving (aquatic)

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 10

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

i

s
n
a
r
t
s
 
t

n
a

i

t
s
s
e
r
 

%

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Sul Trm Str Amp Fot Taz Gen Kan Nal Cip Tet Col Chl Ffn

HOS n=22 WTPin n=42 WTPout n=45

FIGURE 5 | Percentage of bacterial isolates from HOS, WTPin, and
WTPout that were classiﬁed as resistant to the listed antibiotics.

FIGURE 6 | Comparison of percentages of bacteria inheriting more
than six (“highly multiresistant”) and more than eight resistances
(“extremely multiresistant”) at the three sampling sites HOS, WTPin,
and WTPout.

environments is of global relevance. Several studies have doc-
umented high incidence of antibiotic resistance in such waste-
waters all over the world (Reinthaler et al., 2003; Kümmerer, 2004;
Baquero et al., 2008; Martinez, 2009). Our results conﬁrmed our
expectation that compared to the other tested water sources hospi-
tal efﬂuents are most strongly contaminated with MRB and ARG.
These ﬁndings are in agreement with the assumption that MRB
are mainly selected in clinical environments (Kümmerer, 2009).
Nevertheless, the overall impact of discharging untreated hospital
efﬂuents into the sewer system is still under debate. On the one
hand, it has been demonstrated that signiﬁcantly higher propor-
tions of resistant bacteria were isolated from inﬂuents of WTPs
receiving hospital wastewaters than from inﬂuents only treating
municipal wastewater (Reinthaler et al., 2003; Garcia et al., 2007).
On the other hand, Guardabassi et al. (2002) could not detect
signiﬁcantly elevated levels of resistant Acinetobacter species in

wastewater downstream of a hospital. Taking into account that,
typically, hospital efﬂuent accounts for less than 1% of the total
sewage arriving at the WTP (Kümmerer, 2008), its impact on
the receiving environment remains open. In Lausanne, hospital
wastewater contributes to approximately 0.4% of the total sewage
volume processed at the WTP (calculated from release data of the
main building, which accounts for 71% of the “CHUV” (Blanc,
2010). The reduced level of resistance at the WTPin site com-
pared to HOS, is therefore expected. However the high levels of
MRB and ARGs observed in the WTP inﬂow in this study were
still high, indicating that municipal wastewater is probably the
bigger net source of resistances entering the WTP. Nonetheless, a
separate treatment of hospital sewage with the goal of removing
MRB (as well as the pharmaceutical load, see below) to prevent
their mixing with communal efﬂuents and the environment is
desirable.

Our observations indicate that the WTP of Lausanne strongly
reduces the total number of MRB. This could, however, be pri-
marily an effect of the reduction of the total bacterial load in the
WTP efﬂuent as we did not universally observe a strong reduc-
tion of the relative abundance of MRB according to the plate
count analysis. In one case (Cla/Tet) we even observed an increase.
The culture-independent approach also indicated a less efﬁcient
removal, respectively increase, of sul resistance genes during pas-
sage of the WTP. This data would suggest that there may be some
selection for resistance factors during passage of the WTP. Finally,
our results showed increased proportions of highly and extremely
MRB among the isolated Sul/Trm/Str resistant strains in the sam-
ple of treated wastewater compared to the WTP inlet sample. As
the respective bacterial genera of these strains were partly also
detected in raw sewage but partly belong to genera only found at
the outlet, we assume that there is both a poor removal of certain
extremely multiresistant strains (pseudomonads and E. coli) dur-
ing treatment, as well as a positive selection on multiresistance in
other taxa, e.g., Brevundimonas (only detected in hospital sewage
and WTPout).

As Sphingobacteria were quite abundant among the iso-
lated highly MRB in the WTP it would be interesting to
further investigate their potential as key players in the accu-
mulation and subsequent
transfer of highly multiresistant
genotypes into the lake. Sphingobacteria are members of the
Cytophaga/Flavobacteria/Bacteroidetes (CFB) group which are
well known as regular members of freshwater aquatic micro-
bial communities (Zwart et al., 2002). Close relatives of Sphin-
gobacteria have been found in freshwater lakes (Grossart et al.,
2008). The high degree of resistance to antimicrobial agents of
the group is well known (Holmes, 2006). Another important
genus we identiﬁed that carried multiple resistance to the lake
is Brevundimonas which is infrequently isolated from clinical
settings (Han and Andrade, 2005) but is typically established
in fresh water communities (Zwart et al., 2002) and drinking
water (World Health Organization, 2003), which would indicate
a potential of these MRB to become established in the receiv-
ing water. These organisms might thus play a role in preserving
and disseminating clinical multiresistant determinants in lakes
and even promote their return to clinical settings via drinking
water.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 11

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

The ambivalent role of WTPs has been discussed in several
reviews (Kim and Aga, 2007; Jury et al., 2010, 2011) and previous
studies. The evidence presented so far is however in the major-
ity based on using culture-dependent approaches. Some of these
studies observed a general decrease in the prevalence of resistance
against antimicrobial agents (Iwane et al., 2001; Guardabassi et al.,
2002; Vilanova et al., 2002; Garcia et al., 2007) but still stated
that the removal efﬁciency was unsatisfactory (Reinthaler et al.,
2003; Duong et al., 2008; Prado et al., 2008) which is in line
with our own ﬁndings. Auerbach et al. (2007) quantiﬁed vari-
ous tetracycline resistance genes in inﬂuent and efﬂuent of several
WTPs and observed a general decrease in tet gene prevalence after
sewage treatment. However, others observed a signiﬁcant increase
in antibiotic resistance prevalence, and concluded a selective effect
for resistance genes during wastewater treatment (Da Silva et al.,
2006; Silva et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2009). In summary, the picture
that emerges is that at least some WTPs select for certain resistance
genes and certain multiresistant species, whereas for other species,
or under different conditions, a signiﬁcant removal may be possi-
ble. The factors governing the efﬁciency of removal remain to be
determined.

An important factor fostering the selective effect of WTPs
is the occurrence of HGT, which can be mediated via mobile
genetic elements such as plasmids (conjugation), bacteriophages
(transduction), or by uptake of free DNA from the surrounding
environment (transformation). In the extreme case these processes
might transfer resistance factors from multiresistant pathogens to
bacteria which are further disseminated into the receiving aquatic
environment. If these organisms subsequently become established
in this environment, they will increase the resistance pool in the
environment in the long term, which may allow other pathogens
to recruit new resistances more easily. It has often been suggested
that WTPs might be hot spots for HGT due to the favorable con-
ditions which prevail in this environment, such as high bacterial
densities, high oxygen, and high nutrient concentrations (Kim and
Aga, 2007). We found a high prevalence of plasmids, partly iden-
tiﬁed as broad-host range plasmids such as IncP, IncQ, and IncW,
in the studied multiresistant wastewater isolates. Detection of sul
genes in the plasmid fraction indicated that plasmids carried trans-
ferrable antibiotic resistance determinants. This provides some
evidence that the occurrence of HGT events and associated spread
of ARGs is likely in the WTP environment.

Resistance to important new antibiotic classes such as ﬂuoro-
quinolones and new generation cephalosporins were in general less
prevalent at all our test sites compared to resistances against older
antibiotics, such as sulfonamides. A similar outcome of a screening
we conducted in 2009 (data not shown) supports this conclusion.
Only Gram-positive bacteria showed some degree of tolerance
against these substances. However, it remains unclear whether this
is due to intrinsic resistance or whether Gram-positives have devel-
oped resistance to ﬂuoroquinolones and cephalosporins more
successfully. Moreover, whereas for most of the tested substances
we found an increased tolerance among selected bacterial isolates
at the outlet of the WTP, we could not conﬁrm this pattern for
ﬂuoroquinolones. Fluoroquinolone resistance can be mediated
by chromosomal mutations that are thought to be transferred
vertically and the plasmid-borne qnr genes, which have been

described to occur in Gram-negative bacteria (Martínez-Martínez
et al., 1998; Cattoir et al., 2007, 2008). We assume that plasmid-
mediated resistance is still a less prevalent mechanism at our
site compared to chromosomal mutations. Hence, resistance to
ﬂuoroquinolones might not be as easily transferable to other bac-
teria, even in presence of high CIP concentrations in the efﬂuents
(Table 3). For instance, among the extremely multiresistant and
highly prevalent strains of Sphingobactaria isolated at the out-
let, none showed elevated tolerance to ﬂuoroquinolones. It will
be interesting to observe whether these resistances become more
prevalent in wastewater and environmental communities over the
next decades.

The role of lakes as potential reservoirs of antibiotic resistance
has been addressed only infrequently (Jones et al., 1986; Auerbach
et al., 2007). Most comparable studies have focused on rivers (Cas-
tiglioni et al., 2008; Cummings et al., 2010). One goal of our study
was to gain ﬁrst insights on the impact of discharged wastewaters
on the prevalence of MRB and ARGs in the receiving water body,
the Vidy Bay of Lake Geneva. In this study we evaluated two sites,
one directly at the WTP discharge point and a second site a few
kilometers away, close to the drinking water pump of Lausanne.
Our data indicate pollution of water and sediments with ARB and
resistance genes close to the outlet of the WTP compared to the
remote site. Both sites have been analyzed in preliminary experi-
ments in 2009 (data not shown) which revealed a similar outcome
as for the data presented here.

However, at both sites the sediments exhibited higher numbers
of MRB, than the overlying water column. In the extreme case
no MRB were isolated from the water column but isolates were
always obtained from the sediments, as, e.g., for Nor/Cef resistant
bacteria. As expected, the total bacterial counts were also higher in
sediments. Thus, lake sediments appeared as sites where resistance
traits persisted and accumulated. The potential of the heavily pol-
luted (e.g., with heavy metals) sediments in Vidy Bay to preserve
fecal indicator bacteria has been demonstrated in previous studies
(Haller et al., 2009a,b; Poté et al., 2009b) and the impact of the WTP
on contamination of the Vidy Bay and its bacterial community is
a well-established fact (Pardos et al., 2004; Poté et al., 2008; Bravo
et al., 2011; Haller et al., 2011; Thevenon et al., 2011). It is likely that
selection and persistence of elevated levels of ARB and resistance
genes in close proximity to the WTP outlet are favored, e.g., due
to co-selection of antibiotic and heavy metal resistance (Wireman
et al., 1997; Stepanauskas et al., 2006). The spatial distribution of

Table 3 | Concentrations of ciproﬂoxacin and sulfamethoxazole
determined in raw hospital sewage released from the main building
of the CHUV (HOS), at sampling points WTPin and WTPout of
Lausanne’s WTP (Blanc, 2010) as well as lake water above the outlet
of the WTP discharge pipe (STEP) and a reference point (Bonvin et al.,
2011 ), which is located southwest of STEP, 1.5 km from the DP (Swiss
coordinates: 533048/150920).

HOS
(ng/l)

1116
18281

WTPin
(ng/l)

WTPout
(ng/l)

STEP
(ng/l)

Ref point
(ng/l)

248
3259

61
807

4
6

0.4
0.9

Sulfamethoxazole
Ciproﬂoxacin

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 12

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

resistances in the sediment is studied in more detail in ongoing
research.

The question remains open whether the level of ARGs at the
point close to the drinking water pump is also inﬂuenced by
anthropogenic pollution (discharge of wastewaters) or represents
typical natural levels of these genes in fresh water environments.
Compared to rivers (Iwane et al., 2001; Vilanova et al., 2002; Li
et al., 2009), addressing this question in lakes is not an easy task as
transport of contaminated water masses and progress of dilution
depends on constantly changing wind and temperature regimes,
as well as bathymetric characteristics that determine currents and
mixing. Tracer experiments releasing bacteriophages from the
WTP outlet revealed their transport to within 1.5 km of the drink-
ing water pump within 5–6 h during holomixing in winter time
(Goldscheider et al., 2007). A similar tracer study carried out in
1997 even revealed bacteriophages released from the STEP in lake
water in the immediate vicinity of the drinking water pump (Wildi
and Rossi, 1997) within 48 h. Studies on the transport and fate
of antibiotics and other pharmaceuticals in Vidy Bay, which can
be ascribed to the WTP discharge with some certainty, were also
detected at 1.5 km distance from the DP (reference point, compare
Table 3) in direction of the drinking water pump at concentrations
in the low nanogram per liter range (Bonvin et al., 2011). Thus, it
cannot be ruled out that MRB and ARG released from the WTP
might reach the DP and that the detected resistance levels in the
present study might result or at least partly result from the impact
of anthropogenic pollution and/or selection of resistance due to
the presence of low antibiotic concentrations (Gullberg et al.,
2011). In addition to direct contamination there is the question
whether the chronic release of elevated levels of resistant bacteria,
and transfer of resistance vectors into natural microbial popula-
tions can alter the natural resistance background in the long term.
Studies in soil have indicated that such long-term trends may exist
(Knapp et al., 2009). Currently however, we lack data on the natural
resistance background and an understanding of the impact of ele-
vated antibiotic resistance in natural environments, which leaves
us unable to assess the risks associated with the levels observed
here. This is clearly an important goal for research in the future.

In the present study we have analyzed a sample set of differ-
ent aquatic compartments along a wastewater ﬂow using different
methodologies, which can be mainly differentiated into culture-
based and culture-independent tools. The culture-based approach
nicely allowed us to link antibiotic resistance to active (viable) bac-
terial cells present in the different environments and identify the
bacterial taxa carrying resistances. Further, we were able to char-
acterize detected strains with respect to multiple resistances and
mobile genetic elements, such as plasmids and the genetic base
for the observed resistance. The great limitation of this method is
that only a small proportion of the natural bacterial community is
accessible to culturing. It is well known that natural aquatic envi-
ronments contain large proportions of non-culturable but viable
bacteria (Oliver, 2005). Less than 1% of environmental bacteria
are culturable, and large parts of the bacterial diversity have so far
not been cultured at all (Amann et al., 1995). Even lab strains fail
to be cultured when living under harsh conditions such as in fresh
water environments (Arana et al., 1997). Large differences (2–4 log
units) between numbers obtained from heterotrophic plate counts

and FC have been described, e.g., for raw water samples by Hoefel
et al. (2003).

The advantages of culture-independent approaches are evident
particularly when dealing with oligotrophic environments such
as fresh water and other natural ecosystems. Clearly, comparing
plate counts to bacterial 16S rRNA gene copy numbers and ﬂow-
cytometric cell counts, results obtained from plate counts alone
would have underestimated the actual prevalence of antibiotic
resistance in the wastewater and especially at the two investigated
sites in Lake Geneva. Of course biases for these methods exist
as well, e.g., with respect to the method used for DNA extraction,
PCR efﬁciencies, presence of PCR inhibitors or the gating parame-
ters in the ﬂow cytometer. Application of the culture-independent
methods, FC, and qPCR, alone would have given no information
on biological activity of the quantiﬁed bacterial traits (though
for FC there exist procedures for-live-dead staining of cells) and
no linkage of resistance genes and bacterial taxonomic identity.
Determination of multiresistances and detection of the presence
of mobile genetic elements within intact cells would likewise not
have been possible. As such it has to be taken into account that
for the high numbers (compared to the plate counts) of resis-
tance genes and 16S RNA gene copy numbers or ﬂow-cytometric
counts, a certain fraction might result from disrupted or dead cells.
The presence of multicopy plasmids carrying resistance genes,
or the presence of abundant but non-culturable environmental
strains may further contribute to the observed disparity between
the two approaches. Taking the advantages and short-comings of
the discussed methods into account it is perhaps surprising that,
studies applying both culture-based and molecular tools in parallel
are still limited in number although they can provide substantial
information on the actual situation and related processes of antibi-
otic resistance in different compartments. Most previous studies
discussing, e.g., the role of hospital efﬂuents on potential contami-
nation of nearby water sheds, focused on culture-based approaches
(Esiobu et al., 2002; Novais et al., 2005; Schwartz et al., 2006; Duong
et al., 2008; Manaia et al., 2010). Volkmann et al. (2004) could,
e.g., conﬁrm the contamination of different wastewater samples
with genes conferring resistance to β-lactam antibiotics and van-
comycin, whereas the staphylococci-speciﬁc methicillin resistance
gene was found in signiﬁcantly lower amounts. The result sup-
ported previous culture-based approaches in which methicillin
resistant staphylococci were only isolated from clinical wastewaters
(Schwartz et al., 2003).

Due to logistical constraints, particularly the high workload
associated with culturing, it was not feasible to replicate the sam-
pling, nor to sample all water sources at the same time, which of
course implies that one should be careful in generalizing from the
results presented here. Similar limitations are frequently encoun-
tered in comparable studies (Schwartz et al., 2006; Auerbach et al.,
2007; Szczepanowski et al., 2009). Care was taken to sample under
comparable circumstances (i.e., avoiding rainfall) and time of day,
particularly in the actual sewage system, to obtain comparable
samples. Temporal variation in total bacterial load and resistance
counts might of course inﬂuence the general trends observed in
our study. However, in two comparable studies where temporal
variations were taken into account this seemed not to be the case.
Da Silva et al. (2006) sampled a WTP in Chile during four separate

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 13

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

sampling campaigns, representing spring, summer, autumn, and
winter. They found higher fractions of resistant organisms in the
warmer periods compared to the winter months, but the num-
bers usually varied within the same order of magnitude for all
sampling events. The effect of treatment was consistent over time,
i.e., treated efﬂuents always exhibited higher resistance fractions
compared to raw sewage. In contrast, Zhang et al. (2009) reported
higher levels of resistance among Acinetobacter isolates from a
WTP and its receiving river in the US during a cold and low ﬂow
sampling event compared to a warm and high ﬂow sampling event.
Still the trend of increased resistance from inﬂuent to efﬂuent
was observed during both campaigns. Finally, another study by
Li et al. (2009) determined total cell counts (DAPI staining) and
culturable bacteria (on TSA) of 3.3± 1.9× 107 cells ml
−1 and of
4.5± 2.1× 104 CFU ml
−1, respectively (averaged over three sam-
pling campaigns carried out in December, April, and August) in
the efﬂuent of a WTP treating wastewater from an oxytetracycline
production facility in China, indicating a seasonal variability of
around 50%. We have carried out a similar campaign to that com-
pared in the present study in 2009 which resulted in comparable
trends, further supporting the validity of the data presented here
(Nadine Czekalski, unpublished data).

The molecular methods proved valuable and generally the
trends observed were in good agreement with the cultivation-
based data. Therefore, a more thorough time-resolved and repli-
cated study based on this methodology would be a good approach
to overcome the noted limitations.

For future studies aiming to provide deeper insights into resis-
tance background of natural aquatic environments as well as their

pollution with resistant bacteria from anthropogenic sources, the
use of advanced culture-independent tools, such as metagenomics
and high throughput sequencing will be of great value. With
respect to linking activity, mobility, and functional traits to bacter-
ial taxa single cell sequencing approaches might probably become
a helpful tool too, potentially replacing and even improving on
current culture-based approaches.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Francisco Vazquez for substantial support
of our lab work, Holger Heuer for kindly providing E. coli strains
carrying sul resistance genes, Frederik Hammes for the opportu-
nity to conduct and his support during ﬂow-cytometric measure-
ments, Janine Halder for providing CTD proﬁles, Alois Zwyssig,
Michael Schurter, Philippe Arpagaus for assistance during ﬁeld
campaigns, and Luca Rossi and Nathalie Chèvre for organizing
access to the CHUV and WTP sampling sites and providing back-
ground data. We would like to thank all members of the ProDoc
project for helpful discussions. Laetitia Stoykowski, Pascal Kistler,
and Sandro Brunner for assisting with the plate count experiment.
Funding was provided by the Swiss National Science Foundation
grant PFMP2-123048 for research module 4 of the ProDoc project
“Scientiﬁc Concepts for the Sustainable Management of Mid-sized
Lakes in the 21st Century.”

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at
http://www.frontiersin.org/Antimicrobials,_Resistance_and_
Chemotherapy/10.3389/fmicb.2012.00106/abstract

REFERENCES
Alder, A. C., McArdell, C. S., Golet,
E. M., Ibric, S., Molnar, E., Nipales
Norriel, S., and Giger, W. (2001).
“Occurrence and fate of ﬂuoro-
quinolone, macrolide, and sulfon-
amide antibiotics during wastewater
treatment and in ambient waters
in Switzerland,” in Pharmaceuticals
and Care Products in the Environ-
ment: Scientiﬁc and Regulatory Issues,
ACS Symposium Series, Vol. 791, C.
G. Daughton and T. L. Jones-Lepp
(Washington, DC: American Chem-
ical Society), 56–69.

Alonso, A., Sánchez, P., and Martínez,
J. L. (2001). Environmental selec-
tion of antibiotic resistance genes.
Environ. Microbiol. 3, 1–9.

Altschul, S., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers,
E., and Lipman, D. (1990). Basic
local alignment search tool. J. Mol.
Biol. 215, 403–410.

Amalﬁtano, S., and Fazi, S. (2008).
Recovery and quantiﬁcation of bac-
terial cells associated with streambed
sediments. J. Microbiol. Methods 75,
237–243.

Amann, R. I., Ludwig, W., and Schleifer,
K. H. (1995). Phylogenetic identiﬁ-
cation and in-situ detection of indi-
vidual microbial-cells without culti-
vation. Microbiol. Rev. 59, 143–169.

Aminov, R.

I. (2009). The role of
antibiotics and antibiotic resistance
in nature. Environ. Microbiol. 11,
2970–2988.

Arana,

I., Pocino, M., Muela, A.,
Fernandez-Astorga, A., and Barcina,
I. (1997). Detection and enumer-
ation of viable but non-culturable
transconjugants of Escherichia coli
during the survival of recipient cells
in river water. J. Appl. Microbiol. 83,
340–346.

Auerbach, E. A., Seyfried, E. E., and
Mcmahon, K. D. (2007). Tetracy-
cline resistance genes in activated
sludge wastewater treatment plants.
Water Res. 41, 1143–1151.

Baquero, F., Martínez, J.-L., and Cantón,
R. (2008). Antibiotics and antibiotic
resistance in water environments.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 19, 260–265.
Berney, M., Vital, M., Hülshoff,
I., Weilenmann, H.-U., Egli, T.,
and Hammes, F. (2008). Rapid,
cultivation-independent assessment
of microbial viability in drinking
water. Water Res. 42, 4010–4018.

Blanc, L. (2010). Characterisation of
Hospital Wastewater: The Case of the
CHUV. MSc thesis, Cranﬁeld Uni-
versity, Cranﬁeld.

Blasco, M. D., Esteve, C., and Alcaide,
E. (2009). Multiresistant waterborne

pathogens isolated from water reser-
voirs and cooling systems. J. Appl.
Microbiol. 105, 469–475.

Bonvin, F., Rutler, R., Che‘Vre, N.,
Halder, J., and Kohn, T. (2011).
Spatial and temporal presence of a
wastewater-derived micropollutant
plume in Lake Geneva. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 45, 4702–4709.

Bravo, A. G., Bouchet, S., Amouroux,
D., Pote, J., and Dominik, J. (2011).
Distribution of mercury and organic
matter in particle-size classes in sed-
iments contaminated by a waste
water treatment plant: Vidy Bay,
Lake Geneva, Switzerland. J. Envi-
ron. Monit. 13, 974–982.

Carattoli, A., Bertini, A., Villa, L., Falbo,
V., Hopkins, K. L., and Threlfall,
E. J. (2005). Identiﬁcation of plas-
mids by PCR-based replicon typing.
J. Microbiol. Methods 63, 219–228.

Castiglioni, S., Pomati, F., Miller, K.,
Burns, B. P., Zuccato, E., Calamari,
D., and Neilan, B. A. (2008). Novel
homologs of
the multiple resis-
tance regulator marA in antibiotic-
contaminated environments. Water
Res. 42, 4271–4280.

and Nordmann, P.

Cattoir, V., Poirel, L., Aubert, C., C.-J.,
S.,
(2008).
Unexpected occurrence of plasmid-
mediated
resistance

quinolone

in

determinants
environmental
Aeromonas spp. Emerg. Infect. Dis.
14, 231–237.

Cattoir, V., Poirel, L., Rotimi, V.,
Soussy, C.-J., and Nordmann, P.
(2007). Multiplex PCR for detection
quinolone
of
plasmid-mediated
in ESBL-
resistance qnr genes
producing enterobacterial
isolates.
J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
60,
394–397.

Chèvre, N., Guignard, C., Rossi, L., Pfeif-
fer, H.-R., Bader, H.-P., and Schei-
degger, R. (2011). Substance ﬂow
analysis as a tool for urban water
management. Water Sci. Technol.
63, 8.

Cummings, D. E., Archer, K. F., Arriola,
D. J., Baker, P. A., Faucett, K. G.,
Laroya, J. B., Pfeil, K. L., Ryan, C.
R., Ryan, K. R. U., and Zuill, D.
E. (2010). Broad dissemination of
plasmid-mediated quinolone resis-
tance genes in sediments of two
urban coastal wetlands. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 45, 447–454.

Da Silva, M. F., Tiago, I., Veríssimo,
A., Boaventura, R. A., Nunes, O. C.,
and Manaia, C. M. (2006). Antibi-
otic resistance of enterococci and
related bacteria in an urban waste-
water treatment plant. FEMS Micro-
biol. Ecol. 55, 322–329.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 14

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

DeSantis, T. Z., Hugenholtz, P., Larsen,
N., Rojas, M., Brodie, E. L.,
Keller, K., Huber, T., Dalevi, D.,
Hu, P.,
and Andersen, G. L.
(2006). Greengenes, a chimera-
checked 16S rRNA gene database
and workbench compatible with
ARB. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72,
5069–5072.

von

(DIN).

Deutsches Institut Für Normung e.
(2004). Medizinische

V.
Mikrobiologie-Empﬁndlichkeit-
sprüfung von Mikrobiellen Kran-
kheitserregern gegen Chemothera-
peutika-Teil 4: Bewertungsstufen für
die minimale Hemmkonzentration;
MHK-Grenzwerte
antibak-
teriellen Wirkstoffen; DIN 58940-4,
Bbl, 1:2004-2. Berlin: Beuth Verlag.
Duong, H. A., Pham, N. H., Nguyen,
H. T., Hoang, T. T., Pham, H. V.,
Pham, V. C., Berg, M., Giger, W.,
and Alder, A. C. (2008). Occur-
rence,
fate and antibiotic resis-
tance of ﬂuoroquinolone antibac-
terials in hospital wastewaters in
Hanoi, Vietnam. Chemosphere 72,
968–973.

Escher, B. I., Baumgartner, R., Koller, M.,
Treyer, K., Lienert, J., and McArdell,
C. S. (2011). Environmental toxicol-
ogy and risk assessment of pharma-
ceuticals from hospital wastewater.
Water Res. 45, 75–92.

(2002). Antibiotic

Esiobu, N., Armenta, L., and Ike,
J.
resistance
in soil and water environments.
Int.
J. Environ. Health Res. 12,
133–144.

Susceptibility

European Committee on Antimi-
crobial
Testing
(EUCAST). (2011). Data from the
EUCAST MIC and zone diameter
distribution website. Available at:
http://www.eucast.org
[accessed
January 20, 2011].

Filippini, M., Masiero, G.,

and
(2006). Socioeco-
Moschetti, K.
regional
nomic determinants of
in outpatient antibi-
differences
otic consumption: evidence from
Switzerland. Health Policy (New
York) 78, 77–92.

Garcia, S., Wade, B., Bauer, C., Craig,
C., Nakaoka, K., and Lorowitz, W.
(2007). The effect of wastewater
treatment on antibiotic resistance
in Escherichia coli and Enterococ-
cus
sp. Water Environ. Res. 79,
2387–2395.

Giger, W., Alder, A. C., Golet, E. M.,
Kohler, H. P. E., McArdell, C. S.,
Molnar, E., Siegrist, H., and Suter,
M. J. F. (2003). Occurrence and fate
of antibiotics as trace contaminants
in wastewaters, sewage sludges, and
surface waters. Chimia (Aarau) 57,
485–491.

Goldscheider, N., Haller, L., Pote, J.,
Wildi, W., and Zopﬁ, J. (2007). Char-
acterizing water circulation and con-
taminant transport in Lake Geneva
using bacteriophage tracer exper-
iments
and limnological meth-
ods. Environ. Sci. Technol. 41,
5252–5258.

Gotz, A., Pukall, R., Smit, E., Tietze,
E., Prager, R., Tschape, H., Van
Elsas, J., and Smalla, K. (1996).
Detection and characterization of
broad-host-range plasmids in envi-
ronmental bacteria by PCR. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 62, 2621–2628.

Grossart, H.-P., Jezbera, J., Hornák,
K., Hutalle, K. M. L., Buck,
U., and Šimek, K. (2008). Top-
down and bottom-up induced shifts
in bacterial abundance, produc-
tion and community
composi-
tion in an experimentally divided
humic lake. Environ. Microbiol. 10,
635–652.

Guardabassi, L., Lo Fo Wong, D. M.
A., and Dalsgaard, A. (2002). The
effects of tertiary wastewater treat-
ment on the prevalence of antimi-
crobial resistant bacteria. Water Res.
36, 1955–1964.

Gullberg, E., Cao, S., Berg, O. G.,
Ilbäck, C., Sandegren, L., Hughes,
D., and Andersson, D. I. (2011).
Selection of resistant bacteria at
very
concentra-
tions. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002158.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002158

low antibiotic

Haller, L., Amedegnato, E., Poté, J.,
and Wildi, W. (2009a). Inﬂuence
of freshwater sediment characteris-
tics on persistence of fecal indicator
bacteria. Water Air Soil Pollut. 203,
217–227.

Haller, L., Pote, J., Loizeau, J. L., and
Wildi, W. (2009b). Distribution and
survival of faecal indicator bacte-
ria in the sediments of the Bay of
Vidy, Lake Geneva, Switzerland. Ecol.
Indic. 9, 540–547.

Haller, L., Tonolla, M., Zopﬁ,

J.,
Peduzzi, R., Wildi, W., and Poté,
J.
(2011). Composition of bac-
terial and archaeal communities
in freshwater sediments with dif-
ferent contamination levels (Lake
Geneva, Switzerland). Water Res. 45,
1213–1228.

Han, X. Y., and Andrade, R. A.
(2005). Brevundimonas diminuta
infections and its
resistance to
J. Antimicrob.
ﬂuoroquinolones.
Chemother. 55, 853–859.

Heuer, H., Focks, A., Lamshöft, M.,
Smalla, K., Matthies, M.,
and
Spiteller, M. (2008). Fate of sulfa-
diazine administered to pigs and its
quantitative effect on the dynam-
ics of bacterial resistance genes in

manure and manured soil. Soil Biol.
Biochem. 40, 1892–1900.

Heuer, H., and Smalla, K. (2007).
Manure and sulfadiazine synergis-
tically increased bacterial antibi-
otic resistance in soil over at least
two months. Environ. Microbiol. 9,
657–666.

Hoefel, D., Grooby, W. L., Monis, P.
T., Andrews, S., and Saint, C. P.
(2003). Enumeration of water-borne
bacteria using viability assays and
ﬂow cytometry: a comparison to
culture-based techniques. J. Micro-
biol. Methods 55, 585–597.
“The

Holmes, B.

genera
Flavobacterium,
Sphingobacterium
and Weeksella,” in The Prokaryotes,
3rd Edn, eds. M. Dworkin, S. Falkow,
E. Rosenberg, K.-H. Schleifer, and E.
Stackebrandt (New York: Springer),
539–548.

(2006).

Hönerlage, W., Hahn, D., and Zeyer,
J. (1995). Detection of mRNA of
nRPM in Bacillus megaterium ATTC
14581 grown in soil by whole-cell
hybridization. Arch. Microbiol. 163,
235–241.

Iwane, T., Urase, T., and Yamamoto, K.
(2001). Possible impact of treated
wastewater discharge on incidence
of antibiotic resistant bacteria in
river water. Water Sci. Technol. 43,
91–99.

Jones, J. G., Gardener, S., Simon, B. M.,
and Pickup, R. W. (1986). Antibi-
otic resistant bacteria in Winder-
mere and two remote upland tarns
in the English Lake District. J. Appl.
Microbiol. 60, 443–453.

Jury, K. L., Khan, S. J., Vancov, T., Stuetz,
R. M., and Ashbolt, N. J. (2011).
Are sewage treatment plants pro-
moting antibiotic resistance? Crit.
Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 41,
243–270.

Jury, K. L., Vancov, T., Stuetz, R.
M., Khan, S.
J. (2010). “Antibi-
otic resistance dissemination and
sewage treatment plants,” in Cur-
rent Research, Technology and Edu-
cation Topics
in Applied Micro-
biology and Microbial Biotechnol-
ogy, ed. A. Mendez-Vilas (Bada-
joz: Formatex Research Center),
509–519.

Kemper, N. (2008). Veterinary antibi-
otics in the aquatic and terrestrial
environment. Ecol. Indic. 8, 1–13.

Kim, S., and Aga, D. S.

(2007).
Potential ecological and human
health impacts of antibiotics and
antibiotic-resistant bacteria from
wastewater treatment plants. J. Tox-
icol. Environ. Health B Crit. Rev. 10,
559–573.

Knapp, C. W., Dolﬁng, J., Ehlert, P. A. I.,
and Graham, D. W. (2009). Evidence

of
increasing antibiotic resistance
gene abundances in archived soils
since 1940. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44,
580–587.

Kümmerer, K. (2004). Resistance in
J. Antimicrob.

environment.

the
Chemother. 54, 311–320.

Kümmerer, K. (2008). Pharmaceuti-
cals
in the Environment. Sources,
Effects and Risk. Berlin/Heidelberg:
Springer.

Kümmerer, K. (2009). Antibiotics in the
aquatic environment – a review –
part II. Chemosphere 75, 435–441.

Lane, D.

J. (1991). “16S/23S rRNA
sequencing,” in Nucleic Acid Tech-
niques in Bacterial Systematics, eds
E. Stackebrandt and M. Goodfel-
low (New York, NY: John Wiley and
Sons), 115–175.

Lanz, R., Kuhnert, P., and Boer-
lin, P. (2003). Antimicrobial resis-
tance and resistance gene deter-
minants in clinical Escherichia coli
from different animal species in
Switzerland. Vet. Microbiol. 91,
73–84.

I., Kosheleva,

Levchuk, A., Bulyga, I., Izmalkova, T.,
I.,
Sevast’ianovich,
Thomas, C., and Titok, M. (2006).
Nah-plasmids of IncP-9 group from
natural strains of Pseudomonas. Mol.
Biol. 40, 835–843.

Li, D., Yu, T., Zhang, Y., Yang, M.,
Li, Z., Liu, M., and Qi, R. (2009).
Antibiotic resistance characteristics
of environmental bacteria from an
oxytetracycline production waste-
water treatment plant and the receiv-
ing river. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
76, 3444–3451.

Life Technologies Corporation. (2012).
Available at: http://www.invitrogen.
com/site/us/en/home/Products-and
-Services/Applications/PCR/real-
time-pcr/qpcr-education/real-time-
pcr-troubleshooting-tool/gene-exp
ression-quantitation-troubleshoot
ing/poor-pcr-efﬁciency.html
[accessed January 30, 2012].

Lindahl, V.

for

(1996).

Improved soil
total
dispersion procedures
bacterial
extraction of
indigenous bacteria and cell sur-
vival.
J. Microbiol. Methods 25,
279–286.

counts,

Loizeau, J.-L., Pardos, M., Monna, F.,
Peytremann, C., Haller, L., and
Dominik, J. (2004). The impact of
a sewage treatment plant’s efﬂuent
on sediment quality in a small bay in
Lake Geneva (Switzerland–France).
Part 2: Temporal evolution of heavy
metals. Lakes Reserv. Res. Manag. 9,
53–63.

Manaia, C., Novo, A., Coelho, B., and
Nunes, O.
(2010). Ciproﬂoxacin
resistance in domestic wastewater

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 15

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

treatment plants. Water Air Soil Pol-
lut. 208, 335–343.

Martinez, J. L. (2008). Antibiotics and
antibiotic resistance genes in natural
environments. Science 321, 365–367.
Martinez, J. L. (2009). Environmen-
tal pollution by antibiotics and by
antibiotic resistance determinants.
Environ. Pollut. 157, 2893–2902.

Martínez-Martínez, L., Pascual, A., and
Jacoby, G. A. (1998). Quinolone
resistance from a transferable plas-
mid. Lancet 351, 797–799.

McArdell, C. S., Molnar, E., Suter,
M.
J. F., and Giger, W. (2003).
Occurrence and fate of macrolide
antibiotics in wastewater treatment
plants and in the Glatt Valley water-
shed, Switzerland. Environ. Sci. Tech-
nol. 37, 5479–5486.

Newcombe, D., Stuecker, T., La Duc, M.,
and Venkateswaran, K. (2005). “Q-
PCR based bioburden assessment
of drinking water throughout treat-
ment and delivery to the Interna-
tional Space Station,” in 35th Inter-
national Conference on Environmen-
tal Systems (ICES); 8th European
Symposium on Space Environmental
Control Systems (ESSECS) (Rome,
Italy/Pasadena, CA: Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration).

Novais, C., Coque, T. M., Ferreira,
J. C., and Peixe, L.
H., Sousa,
(2005). Environmental
contami-
nation with vancomycin-resistant
enterococci from hospital sewage in
Portugal. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
71, 3364–3368.

NRP49. (2007). National Research Pro-
gramme NRP 49. Antibiotic Resis-
tance. Final Report, eds F. Baggi,
J. C. Piffaretti, F. Lurati, (Bern:
Schweizerischer Nationalfonds zur
Förderung der wissenschaftlichen
Forschung. Abteilung IV, Orientierte
Forschung, Nationale Forschung-
sprogramme).

Oliver, J. D. (2005). The viable but
nonculturable state in bacteria. J.
Microbiol. 43, 93–100.

Pardos, M., Benninghoff, C., De Alen-
castro, L. F., and Wildi, W. (2004).
The impact of a sewage treatment
plant’s efﬂuent on sediment qual-
ity in a small bay in Lake Geneva
(Switzerland–France). Part 1: Spatial
distribution of contaminants and
the potential for biological impacts.
Lakes Reserv. Res. Manag. 9, 41–52.

Pei, R., Kim, S.-C., Carlson, K. H.,
and Pruden, A.
(2006). Effect
of river landscape on the sedi-
ment concentrations of antibiotics
and corresponding antibiotic resis-
tance genes (ARG). Water Res. 40,
2427–2435.

Perreten, V., and Boerlin, P. (2003).
A new sulfonamide resistance gene
(sul3) in Escherichia coli
is wide-
spread in the pig population
of Switzerland. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 47, 1169–1172.

Picao, R. C., Poirel, L., Demarta,
A., Silva, C. S. F., Corvaglia,
A. R., Petrini, O., and Nord-
mann, P. (2008). Plasmid-mediated
quinolone resistance in Aeromonas
allosaccharophila recovered from a
Swiss lake. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
62, 948–950.

Poté, J., Goldscheider, N., Haller, L.,
J., Khajehnouri, F., and
Zopﬁ,
Wildi, W.
(2009a). Origin and
spatial–temporal distribution of fae-
cal bacteria in a bay of Lake Geneva,
Switzerland. Environ. Monit. Assess.
154, 337–348.

Poté, J., Haller, L., Kottelat, R., Sas-
tre, V., Arpagaus, P., and Wildi, W.
(2009b). Persistence and growth of
faecal culturable bacterial
indica-
tors in water column and sediments
of Vidy Bay, Lake Geneva, Switzer-
land. J. Environ. Sci. (China) 21,
62–69.

Poté, J., Haller, L., Loizeau, J.-L., Gar-
cia Bravo, A., Sastre, V., and Wildi,
W. (2008). Effects of a sewage treat-
ment plant outlet pipe extension on
the distribution of contaminants in
the sediments of the Bay of Vidy,
Lake Geneva, Switzerland. Bioresour.
Technol. 99, 7122–7131.

Prado, T., Pereira, W. C., Silva, D. M.,
Seki, L. M., Carvalho, A. P. D. A.,
and Asensi, M. D. (2008). Detection
of extended-spectrum β-lactamase-
producing Klebsiella pneumoniae in
efﬂuents and sludge of a hospital
sewage treatment plant. Lett. Appl.
Microbiol. 46, 136–141.

Reasoner, D. J., and Geldreich, E. E.
(1985). A new medium for the enu-
meration and subculture of bacteria
from potable water. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 49, 1–7.

Reinthaler, F. F., Posch, J., Feierl, G.,
Wüst, G., Haas, D., Ruckenbauer, G.,
Mascher, F., and Marth, E. (2003).
Antibiotic resistance of E. coli
in
sewage and sludge. Water Res. 37,
1685–1690.

Schwartz, T., Kohnen, W., Jansen, B.,
and Obst, U.
(2003). Detection
of antibiotic-resistant bacteria and
their resistance genes in wastewater,
surface water, and drinking water
bioﬁlms. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 43,
325–335.

Schwartz, T., Volkmann, H., Kirchen, S.,
Kohnen, W., Schon-Holz, K., Jansen,
B., and Obst, U. (2006). Real-time
PCR detection of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa in clinical and municipal

and genotyping

ciproﬂoxacin-resistant

of
wastewater
the
iso-
lates. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 57,
158–167.

J. S.,

Sengelov, G., Agerso, Y., Halling-
Sorensen, B., Baloda, S. B., Ander-
sen,
and Jensen, L. B.
(2003). Bacterial antibiotic resis-
tance levels in Danish farmland
as a result of treatment with pig
manure slurry. Environ.
Int. 28,
587–595.

Silva,

J., Castillo, G., Callejas, L.,
López, H., and Olmos, J. (2006).
Frequency of
transferable multi-
ple antibiotic resistance amongst
coliform bacteria isolated from a
treated sewage efﬂuent in Antofa-
gasta, Chile. Electron. J. Biotechnol. 9,
533–540.

Stepanauskas, R., Glenn, T. C., Jagoe,
C. H., Tuckﬁeld, R. C., Lindell, A.
H., King, C. J., and Mcarthur, J.
V. (2006). Coselection for microbial
resistance to metals and antibiotics
in freshwater microcosms. Environ.
Microbiol. 8, 1510–1514.

analysis of

Suzuki, M. T., Taylor, L. T., and
(2000). Quanti-
Delong, E. F.
small-subunit
tative
in mixed micro-
rRNA genes
-nuclease
bial populations via 5
assays. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66,
4605–4614.

(cid:5)

Szczepanowski, R., Linke, B., Krahn,
I., Gartemann, K.-H., Gützkow, T.,
Eichler, W., Pühler, A., and Schlüter,
A. (2009). Detection of 140 clin-
ically relevant antibiotic-resistance
genes in the plasmid metagenome
of wastewater treatment plant bac-
teria showing reduced susceptibility
to selected antibiotics. Microbiology
155, 2306–2319.

distribution

Thevenon, F., Graham, N. D., Herbez,
A., Wildi, W., and Poté, J. (2011).
Spatio-temporal
of
organic and inorganic pollutants
from Lake Geneva (Switzerland)
reveals
strong interacting effects
sewage treatment plant and
of
microbial
eutrophication
abundance.
84,
609–617.

Chemosphere

on

Troussellier, M., Courties, C., and
Zettelmaier, S. (1995). Flow cyto-
metric analysis of coastal
lagoon
bacterioplankton
picophy-
toplankton: ﬁxation and storage
effects. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci. 40,
621–633.

and

Vilanova, X., Manero, A., Cerdà-Cuéllar,
M., and Blanch, A. R.
(2002).
The effect of a sewage treatment
plant efﬂuent on the faecal col-
iforms and enterococci populations
of the reception river waters. J. Appl.
Microbiol. 92, 210–214.

Vioget, P., Jaquerod, C.-A., Ruegg, E.,
and Poget, E. (2011). Bilans 2010 de
l’épuration vaudoise. Orbe, Savigny,
Switzerland: Service des eaux, sols et
assainissement, Canton de Vaud.

Volkmann, H., Schwartz, T., Bischoff,
P., Kirchen, S.,
and Obst, U.
(2004). Detection of clinically rel-
evant antibiotic-resistance genes in
municipal wastewater using real-
time PCR (TaqMan). J. Microbiol.
Methods 56, 277–286.

J. R.

Wang, Q., Garrity, G. M., Tiedje,
J. M., and Cole,
(2007).
Naive Bayesian classiﬁer for rapid
rRNA sequences
assignment of
into the new bacterial
taxon-
omy. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73,
5261–5267.

Wegmüller, S., and Schmid, S. (2009).
Plasmid DNA isolation from the
Gram-positive
Bacterium Pedio-
coccus damnosus Using a Modiﬁed
PureYield™Plasmid Midiprep Sys-
tem Protocol Promega. Available at:
http://www.promega.com/resources/
articles/pubhub/enotes/plasmid-
dna-isolation-from-the-gram-
positive-bacterium-pediococcus-
damnosus/ (retrieved April 7, 2012).
(1997).
Assainissement de la baie de Vidy:
tarcage par bactériophages 19-25
février 1997 6-11 mai 1997 (Lau-
sanne: Ville de Lausanne, Direction
de la sécurité cociale et de lénviron-
nement, Service d’assainissement,
Station d’épuration de Vidy, Univer-
sité de Genève, Institut F.A. Forel,
Section des sciences de la terre,
Université Neuchâtel, Laboratoire de
Microbiologie).

and Rossi, P.

Wildi, W.,

Wireman, J., Liebert, C., Smith, T.,
and Summers, A. (1997). Associ-
ation of mercury resistance with
antibiotic resistance in the Gram-
negative
fecal bacteria of pri-
mates. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63,
4494–4503.

World Health Organization. (2003).
“Relationships between common
water bacteria and pathogens in
drinking-water,” in Heterotrophic
Plate Counts and Drinking-water
Safety, eds. J. Bertram, J. Cotruvo,
M. Exner, C. Fricker, and A. Glas-
macher (London: IWA Publishing),
80–118.

Young, H.-K.

(1993). Antimicrobial
resistance spread in aquatic environ-
ments. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 31,
627–635.

Zhang, Y., Marrs, C. F., Simon, C., and
Xi, C. (2009). Wastewater treatment
contributes to selective increase of
antibiotic resistance among Acineto-
bacter spp. Sci. Total Environ. 407,
3702–3706.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 16

Czekalski et al.

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

Zwart, G., Crump, B. C., Agterveld, M.
P. K.-V., Hagen, F., and Han, S.-K.
(2002). Typical freshwater bacteria:
an analysis of available 16S rRNA
gene sequences from plankton of
lakes and rivers. Aquat. Microb. Ecol.
28, 141–155.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was

conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 07 November 2011; accepted: 02
March 2012; published online: 22 March
2012.
Citation: Czekalski N, Berthold T,
Caucci S, Egli A and Bürgmann H

into

treatment

(2012) Increased levels of multiresistant
genes after
bacteria and resistance
wastewater
and
their
dissemination
Lake Geneva,
Switzerland. Front. Microbio. 3:106. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00106
This article was
submitted to Fron-
tiers in Antimicrobials, Resistance and
Chemotherapy, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.

Copyright  2012 Czekalski, Berthold,
Caucci, Egli
and Bürgmann. This
is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Com-
mons Attribution Non Commercial
License, which permits non-commercial
reproduc-
use,
tion
provided
the original authors and source are
credited.

distribution,
in

and
forums,

other

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 17

Czekalski et al.

APPENDIX

Multiresistant bacteria in Lake Geneva

FIGURE A1 | CTD-proﬁle from the Vidy Bay, Lake Geneva above the
STEPoutlet, recorded on April 7, 2011.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 106 | 18

