MINI REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 05 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00133

Dysregulation of ion homeostasis by antifungal agents

Yongqiang Zhang, Sabina Muend and Rajini Rao*

Department of Physiology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA

Edited by:
Bruce C. Campbell, Western Regional
Research Centre, USA
Reviewed by:
Bruce C. Campbell, Western Regional
Research Centre, USA
Jong H. Kim, United States
Department of Agriculture-Agricultural
Research Service, USA
*Correspondence:
Rajini Rao, Department of Physiology,
The Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, 725 North Wolfe Street,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
e-mail: rrao@jhmi.edu

Ion-signaling and transduction networks are central to fungal development and virulence
because they regulate gene expression, ﬁlamentation, host association, and invasion,
pathogen stress response and survival. Dysregulation of ion homeostasis rapidly medi-
ates cell death, forming the mechanistic basis by which a growing number of amphipathic
but structurally unrelated compounds elicit antifungal activity. Included in this group is
carvacrol, a terpenoid phenol that is a prominent component of oregano and other plant
essential oils. Carvacrol triggers an early dose-dependent Ca2+ burst and long lasting pH
changes in the model yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The distinct phases of ionic tran-
sients and a robust transcriptional response that overlaps with Ca2+ stress and nutrient
starvation point to speciﬁc signaling events elicited by plant terpenoid phenols, rather than
a non-speciﬁc lesion of the membrane, as was previously considered. We discuss the
potential use of plant essential oils and other agents that disrupt ion-signaling pathways as
chemosensitizers to augment conventional antifungal therapy, and to convert fungistatic
drugs with strong safety proﬁles into fungicides.

Keywords: Candida albicans, plant essential oils, terpenoid phenol, carvacrol, amiodarone, calcium burst, pH,
vacuole

URGENCY IN THE NEED FOR ANTIFUNGAL INTERVENTION
Invasive fungal infections are on the rise worldwide, in parallel
with increasing populations of immune-compromised individu-
als, common use of catheters and medical implants, and over-
prescription of antifungals and steroid therapy (Gudlaugsson et al.,
2003; Francois et al., 2005; Ashley et al., 2006; Pappas et al., 2009;
Morace and Borghi, 2010). As eukaryotes, fungi share essential
metabolic pathways and core cellular machineries with humans
so that pathogen-selective targets are scarce. At present, antifun-
gal therapy is limited to a few classes of chemically distinct drugs
that are handicapped by emergence of resistant phenotypes, con-
comitant toxicity, and substantial inter-patient variations in serum
drug levels and efﬁcacy (Francois et al., 2005). This highlights
the pressing need for alternative treatments by exploring uncon-
ventional classes of antifungal agents and deﬁning novel drug
targets.

ION-SIGNALING PATHWAYS IN FUNGAL PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
AND VIRULENCE
One cellular pathway that has received less attention than it
deserves is that of ion homeostasis. Ionic signal transduction net-
works are central to the regulation of fungal development and
pathogenicity (Davis, 2009; Lew, 2011). Prominent among these
are Ca2+
cascades that originate from plasma membrane channels
and receptors and link to Ca2+
sensors and transcription factors
that regulate gene expression, ﬁlamentation, host association, and
invasion (Kraus and Heitman, 2003; Blankenship and Heitman,
2005; Wang et al., 2011). Key cytoplasmic players include the Ca2+
binding protein calmodulin, Ser/Thr phosphatase calcineurin, and
the transcription factor Crz1. Membrane-embedded Ca2+
inﬂux
channels and efﬂux pumps make excellent targets for drugs that

+

+

+

partition into the bilayer. Similarly, H
homeostatic pathways are
also key regulators in pathogenesis. We recently identiﬁed the V-
type H
-ATPase as a major downstream target of widely used
+
azole drugs (Zhang et al., 2010). Fluxes of K
modu-
late membrane potentials and pH gradients that profoundly affect
downstream signaling pathways, metabolic activity, and vesicle
trafﬁcking (Soong et al., 2000; Brett et al., 2005). Compartment-
speciﬁc ionic signaling separates critical events in mitochondria,
vacuoles, and secretory pathway from the cytoplasm. Because dys-
regulation of ion homeostasis rapidly mediates cell death, we have
been exploring how ion-signaling pathways may serve as targets
for antifungal drugs.

and Na

PLANT ESSENTIAL OILS, PAST AND FUTURE
Herbal remedies have been recognized since ancient times, but
in the last decade, increasingly sophisticated analytical tools have
been brought to bear on their mechanism of action. Plant essen-
tial oils demonstrate microbicidal activity against a wide range
of fungal and bacterial pathogens, including Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa, Candida albicans, and Staphylococcus aureus (Ben Arfa et al.,
2006; Pozzatti et al., 2008; De Martino et al., 2009; Pinto et al.,
2009). A survey of the literature revealed that essential oils derived
from the genus Oreganum were among the most effective of herbal
extracts tested, with minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of
500 parts per million against C. albicans (Tampieri et al., 2005). A
major component of plant essential oils, including Oregano extract
is the terpenoid phenol class of compounds that include carvacrol,
eugenol, and thymol. Each of these has been demonstrated to
exhibit potent antifungal activity on its own, not only against
planktonic fungi but also bioﬁlms and drug resistant mutants
(Dalleau et al., 2008).

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 133 | 1

Zhang et al.

Ionic dysregulation by antifungals

PHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF ESSENTIAL
OIL COMPOUNDS CORRELATE WITH ANTIFUNGAL
EFFICACY
Many membrane-active antifungal agents are cationic amphiphilic
compounds that share common physicochemical properties of a
hydrophobic ring structure and a hydrophilic side chain with a
charged cationic group, such as an amine. The hydrophobic por-
tion ensures a high partition coefﬁcient into lipid membranes.
Whereas, their hydrophilic and charged moieties retain them in the
bilayer where they induce membrane changes that have important
consequences for ion homeostasis and signaling. This amphiphilic
property is illustrated by the chemical structures of terpenoid phe-
nols (Figure 1). Another such compound is the antiarrhythmic
agent, amiodarone that also exhibits antimycotic activity through
similar cellular effects on ion homeostasis (Gupta et al., 2003;
Muend and Rao, 2008).

An evaluation of the relative antifungal efﬁcacy of these ter-
penoid phenols and their related compounds revealed an order-
ing of carvacrol≥ thymol(cid:3) eugenol(cid:3) γ-terpinene, with vanillin
and guaiacol being ineffective. Similar results were reported in
other studies (Voda et al., 2004). Carvacrol exhibited a MIC of
0.008% (or 79.8 μg/ml) against Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which
was 1,500 times more effective than Oregano oil. The lowered
efﬁcacy of eugenol appears to be linked to the methylation of its
hydroxyl group. Similarly, hydroxymethyl derivatives of carvacrol,
thymol, and eugenol had signiﬁcantly lower antifungal activity
relative to the parent compounds (Mastelic et al., 2008). However,
hydrophobicity alone does not ensure toxicity since p-cymene, a
precursor of carvacrol, has a higher partition coefﬁcient for lipid
membranes than carvacrol but is non-toxic. The presence of the
hydroxyl group is critical for toxicity, as seen by lack of microbi-
cidal effects of p-cymene and carvacrol methylesters (Bagshaw,
1983; Ultee et al., 2002). This suggests that antifungal activity
depends on the structure and make-up of the terpenoid phe-
nols, speciﬁcally the presence of a free hydroxyl group and an
aromatic ring.

+

+

+

BILAYER POLARIZATION AND EFFECTS ON MEMBRANE
POTENTIAL
A ﬁrst step in their mechanism of action is the preferential
partitioning of the compound into the lipid membrane: thus,
carvacrol has a log P value of 3.26 for partition into phos-
phatidylethanolamine membranes relative to the buffer (Ultee
et al., 2002). It has been proposed that the delocalized electron
system in carvacrol facilitates the dissociation of H
from the –
OH group. This, in turn, would allow carvacrol to shuttle H
and
+
monovalent cations such as K
across membranes, dissipating
pH and K
gradients across cell membranes (Ultee et al., 2002).
Consistent with this mechanism, carvacrol was also shown to
depolarize bacterial cell membranes and decrease accumulation of
the ﬂuorescent dye 5(6)-carboxyﬂuorescein diacetate, suggestive
of an increase in membrane permeability (Xu et al., 2008). Using
the potential sensitive ﬂuorescence probe diS-C3(3) to monitor
membrane potential changes in exponentially growing yeast cells,
we showed that the amphiphilic drug amiodarone caused a dose-
dependent hyperpolarization of the plasma membrane, consistent
with increased activity of the plasma membrane H
-ATPase and
outwardly rectifying K
channels (Maresova et al., 2009). Above
a drug threshold of 4 μM, however, amiodarone depolarized the
membrane potential and this correlated with loss in viability. Loss
+
of function mutations in PMA1 (plasma membrane H
-ATPase)
and deletion of the TOK1 (outward-rectiﬁer potassium channel
of the plasma membrane) gene reduced the initial hyperpolariza-
tion and also protected against amiodarone mediated cell death.
Thus membrane potential increases were linked to and essential
for drug toxicity, conﬁrmed by the depolarizing and protective
effects of salts, such as KCl (Maresova et al., 2009).

+

+

Cationic amphiphiles also alter membrane ﬂuidity, which in
turn could tune the activity of membrane proteins, including
ion channels and transporters. Amiodarone was found to have
an ordering effect on the lipid bilayer, as seen by changes in
ﬂuorescence polarization of 1,6-diphenyl-1,3,5-hexatriene (DPH;
Antunes-Madeira et al., 1995). Braga and Ricci (2011) used atomic

FIGURE 1 | Structures of terpenoid phenols found in plant essential oils,
with closely related precursors. A subset of these compounds elicit Ca2+
and pH transients and are active as antifungals. Compounds with MIC greater

than 0.5 mg/ml are grouped as inactive. Amiodarone, a cationic amphipathic
drug used to treat cardiac arrhythmia that moonlights as an antifungal agent,
also elicits ion dysregulation.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 133 | 2

Zhang et al.

Ionic dysregulation by antifungals

force microscopy to document membrane deformities, including
ﬂattening and ghost-like appearance in C. albicans yeast treated
with thymol at the MIC or lower concentrations.

Table 1 | Genome-wide screen of S. cerevisae collection of haploid
deletion mutants for amiodarone-tolerant strains.

Functional categories

Mutants

CALCIUM BURSTS CORRELATE WITH ANTIFUNGAL EFFICACY
Membrane-active antifungal agents such as amiodarone and car-
vacrol elicit dose-dependent bursts of cytosolic Ca2+
and down-
stream calcium-dependent stress response that appear to be
directly in the pathway of fungal toxicity and cell death. We used
the genetically encoded reporter, aequorin, reconstituted with its
cofactor coelenterazine, to measure calcium ﬂuxes in real time.
Upon binding to Ca2+
, the aequorin–coelenterazine complex
emits light and luminescence intensity quantitatively correlates
to free Ca2+
concentration. Addition of amiodarone or carvacrol
resulted in characteristic spiking of free Ca2+
followed by a return
to baseline. Removal of extracellular Ca2+
revealed that the pri-
mary source was from the medium, followed by a slower release
from internal stores, likely to be the vacuole. The amplitude and
duration of the Ca2+
burst correlated with drug toxicity. Thus,
while similar bursts were observed with the structural isomers
carvacrol and thymol, signiﬁcantly lower bursts resulted from
addition of the same concentration of eugenol. The remaining
compounds tested (vanillin, guaiacol, γ-terpinene, and p-cymene)
failed to elicit any luminescence change, consistent with their lack
of toxicity (Rao et al., 2010).

In order to determine whether elevations of Ca2+

pumping activity, Ca2+
/Ca2+

were a mere
bystander effect or critical to mediating antifungal activity, we
examined carvacrol toxicity in yeast mutants that were defective
in calcium homeostasis. Thus, in vma2Δ mutants that lack vacuo-
+
lar H
cannot be effectively sequestered
in vacuolar stores by H
antiport mechanisms resulting in
prolonged Ca2+
bursts in response to carvacrol. Sensitivity to car-
vacrol was concomitantly increased in vma2Δ mutants, consistent
with a mechanistic role for Ca2+
toxicity in the antifungal activ-
ity. A more thorough investigation of the link to Ca2+
bursts was
made using the amphiphilic agent amiodarone. Low concentra-
tion of Ca2+
in the medium blocked cytosolic Ca2+
bursts and
rescued growth inhibition by amiodarone (Muend and Rao, 2008).
Chemical–genetic screening of the S. cerevisiae single-gene dele-
tion library for hypersensitivity to amiodarone toxicity revealed
novel pathways in which Ca2+
dysregulation was exacerbated,
including pmr1Δ mutants lacking the Ca2+
pumping ATPase
of Golgi, and ergosterol biogenesis mutants (Gupta et al., 2003;
Yadav et al., 2007). Conversely, in drug tolerant mutants defective
in ceramide/sphingolipid biosynthesis, amiodarone-induced Ca2+
transients were suppressed (Table 1; Figure 2). Additional novel
categories inﬂuencing drug toxicity included isoprenoid biosyn-
thesis, fatty acid, and lipid transport, chromatin remodeling and
vesicular trafﬁcking (Gupta et al., 2003).

Other lines of evidence pointed to a critical role for Ca2+

bursts:
dose-dependent loss of metabolic activity in amiodarone, mea-
sured using the vital dye FUN-1, was largely abrogated by removal
of extracellular Ca2+
using the chelating agent BAPTA. We found
antifungal efﬁcacy to be dependent upon metabolic status, with
stationary phase cells exhibiting low levels of Ca2+
inﬂux and
being more resistant to the drug. Addition of glucose was neces-
sary for recovery of Ca2+
inﬂux and regaining sensitivity to the

+

Sphingolipid
metabolism
Nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay pathway
Transcriptional
regulation
Programmed cell death
pathway
Miscellaneous

ipt1, yor170w (overlapping lcb4), lcb4, sur1,
csg2, ynl105w (overlapping inp52)
nmd2, upf3, nam7

sip3, hap3

ysp1, ysp2

sac6, ccs1, irc21, ymr102c, yor309c, orm2,
mfa1, yor364w, ylr407w

Methods were as described by Gupta et al. (2003) in the screen for hypersen-
sitive strains, except that 18 μM amiodarone was used. Wild type control failed
to grow at this dose. Surviving strains are listed below. Note the enrichment of
genes in lipid metabolism pathways, consistent with membrane effects of this
drug.

FIGURE 2 | Membrane-active antifungal drugs elicit Ca2+ bursts.
Amiodarone (AMD, added at the arrow) elicits cytosolic Ca2+ transients in S.
cerevisiae, detected by luminescence of aequorin–coelenterazine complex.
Relative to the wild type control, four deletion mutants in the sphingolipid
pathway, selected for amiodarone tolerance (Table 1), showed reduced or
delayed Ca2+ bursts, consistent with the important role of ionic transients in
mediating antifungal drug toxicity.

These observations illustrate the dual role of Ca2+

drug; this was prevented by treatment with cycloheximide, sug-
gesting that new protein synthesis was required for replenishment
of Ca2+
inﬂux channels (Muend and Rao, 2008).
in the
response to cell stress. On the one hand, Ca2+
inﬂux occurs in
response to a variety of environmental insults (osmotic stress, ER
stress, cell wall damage, or prolonged exposure to mating factor).
Elevation of baseline Ca2+
is sensed by effector proteins such as
calmodulin and the Ca2+
/calmodulin dependent phosphatase cal-
cineurin, that trigger a cellular response which includes cell wall

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 133 | 3

Zhang et al.

Ionic dysregulation by antifungals

synthesis, cell cycle arrest, and upregulation of ion transporters.
However Ca2+
is a double-edged sword such that excessive ele-
vation of Ca2+
is unequivocally toxic, triggering mitochondrial
fragmentation, reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, and cell
death, in a way that can be exploited by antifungal agents.

pH DYSREGULATION ELICITED BY CARVACROL AND
MEMBRANE-ACTIVE COMPOUNDS
+
Carvacrol hypersensitivity of vma2Δ mutants, defective in H
homeostasis mechanisms, prompted us to examine the effect of
essential oil components on cellular pH. We used compartment-
speciﬁc ﬂuorescent probes to monitor pH changes in situ. Ace-
toxymethyl ester of
the pH-sensitive ﬂuorescent compound,
BCECF, is readily taken up by yeast cells, and becomes trapped by
the action of esterases in the vacuole where it reports on changes
in pH. pHluorin is a genetically encoded pH-sensitive version of
GFP that can be used to monitor cytoplasmic pH. We found that
carvacrol elicited an immediate dose-dependent alkalinization of
vacuolar pH, accompanied by acidiﬁcation of the cytosol indicat-
ing leakage of protons from the vacuole. A second, concentration
dependent phase in these pH dependent changes was more precip-
itous, and occurred well downstream of the Ca2+
burst. Similar pH
changes were observed with amiodarone: toxic levels of the drug
elicited up to 0.4 pH units of acidiﬁcation in the cytoplasm that
correlated with loss of viability. Interestingly, drug toxicity was sig-
niﬁcantly greater in actively metabolizing cells that had generated
robust pH gradients across the plasma membrane. Amiodarone
reversed these gradients, resulting in alkalinization of the medium
and acidiﬁcation of the cytoplasm. Stationary phase cells or cells
starved of glucose failed to generate pH gradients and exhibited
drug resistance (Muend and Rao, 2008).

These observations lead us to propose that membrane hyperpo-
larization triggers the opening of ion channels that bring in excess
calcium leading to subsequent depolarization and Ca2+
stress.
Indeed, early studies have demonstrated that Ca2+
inﬂux is driven
by ΔΨ. Glucose addition to depolarized cells triggered membrane
polarization, Ca2+
inﬂux and transient cytoplasmic acidiﬁcation.
Although the molecular identity of these Ca2+
inﬂux channels
is not known, there is precedence for hyperpolarization-gated
and low pH dependent cation channels in plant cells (Hedrich
et al., 1995; Bruggemann et al., 1999). Unlike conventional drugs,
membrane-active compounds do not target speciﬁc proteins and
may be less likely to be circumvented by development of fungal
resistance. A genome-wide screen of amiodarone toxicity in the S.
cerevisiae single-gene knockout collection revealed only a handful
of yeast mutants that shifted MIC to higher drug concentrations by
a modest amount (Table 1; Figure 2). It is worth noting that many
of these fell in pathways that altered membrane lipid composition.

TRANSCRIPTIONAL RESPONSES TO CARVACROL
To gain further insight into cellular mechanisms involved in the
antifungal activity of plant essential oils, we evaluated changes in
mRNA transcripts in response to carvacrol concentrations that
caused half-maximal (0.005%) and maximal inhibition (0.01%)
of growth rates in S. cerevisiae. Transcripts were monitored in
exponentially growing cells within 15 min of exposure to car-
vacrol, immediately following the bulk of the ionic ﬂuxes that

were observed. Among the most prominent categories signiﬁcantly
upregulated relative to control, were transcripts for alternative
metabolic and energy handling pathways (glycogen and trehalose
biosynthesis, polyamine degradation, and fatty acid transport and
oxidation). As expected, many stress response and signaling path-
ways were induced, such as sporulation, oxygen and free radical
detoxiﬁcation, heat shock proteins and chaperones, autophagy,
and vacuolar degradation mechanisms. Members of the ABC
transporter family involved in drug efﬂux were also induced
(SNQ2, YOR1, PDR5, PDR10, and PDR15). Fewer genes were
downregulated and they were predominantly in the pathways of
nucleic acid metabolism, showing that carvacrol rapidly shut down
pathways of gene transcription, RNA processing, and modiﬁca-
tion, consistent with cessation of growth. The isomeric phenol
thymol elicited a similar response, as reported by Bi et al. (2010)
although there were some differences such as the repression of
thymine biosynthesis and sulfur metabolism. Although these dif-
ferences could be due to unique responses to structural isomers,
we suggest that they are likely due to differences arising from late
(90 min in the case of thymol) versus early (15 min, carvacrol)
transcriptional response.
Overall, the transcriptional response overlapped with Ca2+
stress and amiodarone toxicity, independently conﬁrming the
mechanistic importance of ionic ﬂuxes in mediating the antifungal
activity of carvacrol. Notably, the transcriptional proﬁle differed
from those of conventional antifungal drugs belonging to the
classes of polyenes, azoles, allylamines, and morpholines. We also
noted that the response to carvacrol resembled inhibition of the
TOR pathway that controls growth in response to nutrient avail-
ability, although the speciﬁc link between the two pathways is not
clear. Phenotype proﬁling of drug sensitivity/tolerance revealed
cellular pathways upstream of transcriptional response, and did
not show signiﬁcant coincidence of identiﬁed genes. Together,
these two genome-wide approaches provided complementary
and non-overlapping mechanistic insight on genes and pathways
involved in fungal death mediated by cationic amphiphiles.

EXTENDING FROM MODEL TO PATHOGENIC FUNGI
Studies in pathogenic yeast are hampered by inherent technical
challenges, limited genetic resources and unavailability of molecu-
lar tools that delay advances in knowledge relating to pathogenesis.
Therefore, we expanded our repertoire of Ca2+
, pH, and mem-
brane potential reporters at the plasma membrane, mitochondria,
cytosol, and vacuole to pathogenic Candida species, including C.
albicans and C. glabrata. Genetically encoded reporters aequorin
(Ca2+
) were codon optimized, tagged with
compartment-speciﬁc localization signals (e.g., to mitochondria),
expressed and validated in S. cerevisiae and Candida species as
exempliﬁed in Figures 3A–C. Similarly, we have optimized and
validated uptake of compartment-speciﬁc reporter dyes (e.g.,
Figure 3D). These tools should be useful for future studies on the
role of ion transients in mediating virulence or antifungal activity
in both model and pathogenic yeasts.

+
) and pHluorin (H

FUTURE PERSPECTIVES FOR ANTIFUNGAL THERAPY
Azole compounds that target ergosterol biogenesis are among the
most widely used antifungal drugs. Recent studies have shown

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 133 | 4

Zhang et al.

Ionic dysregulation by antifungals

FIGURE 3 | Generation and validation of novel tools to monitor
compartment-speciﬁc changes in Ca2+ and pH. (A) Aequorin was
targeted to cytoplasm or mitochondria in S. cerevisiae, by the addition
of N-terminal signal sequence for the latter. Dose-dependent elevations
of mitochondrial Ca2+ are seen to follow cytoplasmic Ca2+ ﬂuxes upon
amiodarone (AMD) addition (described previously, Gupta et al., 2003).
(B) pH-sensitive version of GFP, pHluorin, was targeted to mitochondria
where it colocalized with MitoTracker Red as seen in the inset. Addition
of amiodarone acidiﬁed mitochondrial matrix, relative to control,

followed by slow recovery. (C) Cytosolic pH was monitored by
expressing pHluorin in C. albicans, as seen in the inset. Addition of
amiodarone elicits dose-dependent acidiﬁcation as was previously
reported in S. cerevisiae. (D) C. albicans vacuolar pH is monitored using
the acetoxymethyl precursor of the pH-sensitive ﬂuorescent reporter
BCECF, which can stably accumulate in vacuoles (inset) through the
action of esterases. The reporter was validated by showing
alkalinization of vacuolar pH in vma7 −/ − mutants, lacking a functional
V-ATPase. DIC, differential interference contrast.

+

that ergosterol depletion inhibits the activity of the V-type H
-
ATPase, without altering trafﬁcking or assembly of the ATPase
complex (Zhang et al., 2010). An important consequence of this
inhibition is that azole drugs alkalinize the vacuole and exac-
erbate Ca2+
transients elicited by amiodarone, consistent with
synergistic effects of these drugs (Gamarra et al., 2010; Zhang
et al., 2010). Given that the V-ATPase is essential for virulence,
these observations exemplify the importance of ionic gradients
in pathophysiology of fungi (Zhang et al., 2010). Future studies
could examine potential interactions between active components

of plant essential oils and azoles or other classes of antifungals. In
addition, carvacrol and other terpenoid phenols could be tested
for chemosensitization in conjunction with calcineurin inhibitors
(cyclosporine A, FK506) that enhance Ca2+
dysregulation, and
rapamycin analogs that block TOR signaling, against pathogenic
fungi.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by a grant from the National Institutes
of Health R01AI065983.

REFERENCES
Antunes-Madeira, M. C., Videira, R.
A., Kluppel, M. L., and Madeira, V.
V. (1995). Amiodarone effects on
membrane organization evaluated
by ﬂuorescence polarization. Int. J.
Cardiol. 48, 211–218.

Ashley, E. S. D., Lewis, R., Lewis, J. S.,
Martin, C., and Andes, D. (2006).
Pharmacology of systemic antifun-
gal agents. Clin. Infect. Dis. 43, S28–
S39.

Bagshaw, R.

(1983). Hypoten-
sion may have profound effect

J.

on the liver. Anesthesiology 59,
168–169.

Appl.

Lett.
149–154.

Microbiol.

43,

L., Gontard, N.,

Ben Arfa, A., Combes, S., Preziosi-
and
Belloy,
Antimi-
Chalier,
crobial
carvacrol
related to its chemical structure.

P.
activity

(2006).
of

Bi, X., Guo, N., Jin, J., Liu, J., Feng, H.,
Shi, J., Xiang, H., Wu, X., Dong, J.,
Hu, H., Yan, S., Yu, C., Wang, X.,
Deng, X., and Yu, L. (2010). The
global gene expression proﬁle of the

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 133 | 5

Zhang et al.

Ionic dysregulation by antifungals

fungus

model
cerevisiae induced by thymol.
Appl. Microbiol. 108, 712–722.

Saccharomyces
J.

Blankenship, J. R., and Heitman, J.
(2005). Calcineurin is required for
Candida albicans to survive calcium
stress in serum. Infect. Immun. 73,
5767–5774.

Braga, P. C., and Ricci, D. (2011).
Thymol-induced alterations in Can-
dida albicans imaged by atomic force
microscopy. Methods Mol. Biol. 736,
401–410.

Brett, C. L., Tukaye, D. N., Mukherjee,
S., and Rao, R. (2005). The yeast
endosomal Na+K+/H+ exchanger
Nhx1 regulates cellular pH to con-
trol vesicle trafﬁcking. Mol. Biol. Cell
16, 1396–1405.

Bruggemann, L., Dietrich, P., Becker, D.,
Dreyer, I., Palme, K., and Hedrich,
R. (1999). Channel-mediated high-
afﬁnity K+ uptake into guard cells
from Arabidopsis. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 96, 3298–3302.

Dalleau, S., Cateau, E., Berges, T.,
Berjeaud, J. M., and Imbert, C.
(2008). In vitro activity of terpenes
Int.
against Candida bioﬁlms.
J.
Antimicrob. Agents 31, 572–576.

Davis, D. A. (2009). How human path-
ogenic fungi sense and adapt to pH:
the link to virulence. Curr. Opin.
Microbiol. 12, 365–370.

De Martino, L., De Feo, V., Fratianni,
F., and Nazzaro, F. (2009). Chem-
istry, antioxidant, antibacterial and
antifungal activities of volatile oils
and their components. Nat. Prod.
Commun. 4, 1741–1750.

Francois, I. E., Aerts, A. M., Cammue,
B. P., and Thevissen, K. (2005). Cur-
rently used antimycotics: spectrum,
mode of action and resistance occur-
rence. Curr. Drug Targets 6, 895–907.
Gamarra, S., Rocha, E. M., Zhang,
Y. Q., Park, S., Rao, R., and Per-
lin, D. S. (2010). Mechanism of
the synergistic effect of amiodarone
and ﬂuconazole in Candida albicans.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54,
1753–1761.

Gudlaugsson, O., Gillespie, S., Lee,
K., Vande Berg, J., Hu, J., Messer,

S., Herwaldt, L., Pfaller, M., and
Diekema, D. (2003). Attributable
mortality
can-
didemia, revisited. Clin. Infect. Dis.
37, 1172–1177.

nosocomial

of

Gupta, S. S., Ton,V. K., Beaudry,V., Rulli,
S., Cunningham, K., and Rao, R.
(2003). Antifungal activity of amio-
darone is mediated by disruption of
calcium homeostasis. J. Biol. Chem.
278, 28831–28839.

Hedrich, R., Moran, O., Conti, F., Busch,
H., Becker, D., Gambale, F., Dreyer,
I., Kuch, A., Neuwinger, K., and
Palme, K. (1995). Inward rectiﬁer
potassium channels in plants dif-
fer from their animal counterparts
in response to voltage and chan-
nel modulators. Eur. Biophys. J. 24,
107–115.

Kraus, P. R., and Heitman, J. (2003).
Coping with stress: calmodulin and
calcineurin in model and patho-
genic fungi. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 311, 1151–1157.

Lew, R. R. (2011). How does a hypha
grow? The biophysics of pressurized
growth in fungi. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
9, 509–518.

Maresova, L., Muend, S., Zhang, Y. Q.,
Sychrova, H., and Rao, R. (2009).
Membrane hyperpolarization drives
cation inﬂux and fungicidal activity
of amiodarone. J. Biol. Chem. 284,
2795–2802.

Mastelic, J., Jerkovic, I., Blazevic, I.,
Poljak-Blazi, M., Borovic, S., Ivancic-
Bace, I., Smrecki, V., Zarkovic, N.,
Brcic-Kostic, K., Vikic-Topic, D.,
and Muller, N. (2008). Comparative
study on the antioxidant and biolog-
ical activities of carvacrol, thymol,
and eugenol derivatives. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 56, 3989–3996.

Morace, G., and Borghi, E. (2010). Fun-
gal infections in ICU patients: epi-
demiology and the role of diagnos-
tics. Minerva Anestesiol. 76, 950–956.
Muend, S., and Rao, R. (2008). Fungici-
dal activity of amiodarone is tightly
coupled to calcium inﬂux. FEMS
Yeast Res. 8, 425–431.

Pappas, P. G., Kauffman, C. A., Andes,
D., Benjamin, D. K. Jr., Calandra,

T. F., Edwards, J. E. Jr., Filler, S. G.,
Fisher, J. F., Kullberg, B. J., Ostrosky-
Zeichner, L., Reboli, A. C., Rex, J.
H., Walsh, T. J., and Sobel, J. D.
(2009). Clinical practice guidelines
for the management of candidiasis:
2009 update by the Infectious Dis-
eases Society of America. Clin. Infect.
Dis. 48, 503–535.

Pinto, E., Vale-Silva, L., Cavaleiro, C.,
and Salgueiro, L. (2009). Antifun-
gal activity of the clove essential
oil from Syzygium aromaticum on
Candida, Aspergillus and dermato-
phyte species. J. Med. Microbiol. 58,
1454–1462.

Pozzatti, P., Scheid, L. A., Spader,
T. B., Atayde, M. L., Santurio,
J. M., and Alves, S. H. (2008).
In vitro activity of essential oils
extracted from plants used as
spices against ﬂuconazole-resistant
and ﬂuconazole-susceptible Can-
dida spp. Can.
J. Microbiol. 54,
950–956.

Rao, A., Zhang, Y., Muend, S., and Rao,
R. (2010). Mechanism of antifungal
activity of terpenoid phenols resem-
bles calcium stress and inhibition of
the TOR pathway. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 54, 5062–5069.

Soong, T. W., Yong, T. F., Ramanan, N.,
and Wang, Y. (2000). The Candida
albicans antiporter gene CNH1 has
a role in Na+ and H+ transport,
salt tolerance, and morphogenesis.
Microbiology 146, 1035–1044.

Tampieri, M. P., Galuppi, R., Mac-
chioni, F., Carelle, M. S., Falcioni, L.,
Cioni, P. L., and Morelli, I. (2005).
The inhibition of Candida albicans
by selected essential oils and their
major components. Mycopathologia
159, 339–345.

Ultee, A., Bennik, M. H., and Moezelaar,
R. (2002). The phenolic hydroxyl
group of
essential
for action against the food-borne
pathogen Bacillus cereus. Appl. Envi-
ron. Microbiol. 68, 1561–1568.

carvacrol

is

Voda, K., Boh, B., and Vrtacnik, M.
(2004). A quantitative structure-
relationship
antifungal
study
of
aromatic

activity
oxygenated

essential oil compounds using data
structuring
and PLS regression
analysis. J. Mol. Model. 10, 76–84.

Wang, H., Liang, Y., Zhang, B., Zheng,
W., Xing, L., and Li, M. (2011).
Alkaline stress triggers an immedi-
ate calcium ﬂuctuation in Candida
albicans mediated by Rim101p and
Crz1p transcription factors. FEMS
Yeast Res. 11, 430–439.

Xu, J., Zhou, F., Ji, B. P., Pei, R. S.,
and Xu, N. (2008). The antibacterial
mechanism of carvacrol and thymol
against Escherichia coli. Lett. Appl.
Microbiol. 47, 174–179.

Yadav, J., Muend, S., Zhang, Y., and Rao,
R. (2007). A phenomics approach
in yeast links proton and calcium
pump function in the golgi. Mol.
Biol. Cell 18, 1480–1489.

Zhang, Y. Q., Gamarra, S., Garcia-
Effron, G., Park, S., Perlin, D. S.,
and Rao, R. (2010). Requirement
for ergosterol in V-ATPase function
underlies antifungal activity of azole
drugs. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000939.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000939

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 15 February 2012; paper
pending published: 23 February 2012;
accepted: 20 March 2012; published
online: 05 April 2012.
Citation: Zhang Y, Muend S and Rao
R (2012) Dysregulation of ion homeosta-
sis by antifungal agents. Front. Microbio.
3:133. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00133
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Fungi and Their Interactions, a specialty
of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Zhang , Muend and
Rao. This is an open-access article dis-
tributed under the terms of the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution Non Com-
mercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 133 | 6

