REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 22 June 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00227

Role of host-encoded proteins in restriction of
retroviral integration

Yasutsugu Suzuki1,2, Mun Lok Chew1 and Youichi Suzuki1*
1 Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2 Department of Mammalian Regulatory Network, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Japan

Edited by:
Atsushi Koito, Kumamoto University,
Japan
Reviewed by:
Akihide Ryo, Yokohama City
University, Japan
Takao Masuda, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Japan
Yuntao Wu, George Mason University,
USA
*Correspondence:
Youichi Suzuki, Department of
Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Center for Translational
Research, 14 Medical Drive,
#15-02, Singapore 117599.
e-mail: micys@nus.edu.sg

In retroviral infections, a copy of the viral DNA is ﬁrst synthesized from genomic RNA
by reverse transcription and subsequently integrated into host chromatin. This integration
step, executed by the viral enzyme integrase (IN), is one of the hallmarks of retroviral
infection. Although an obligate role for IN in retroviral integration has been clearly deﬁned
by numerous biochemical analysis of its recombinant protein and genetic analysis of the viral
IN gene, several host cellular proteins have also been implicated as key factors involved in
the integration step during viral replication. Although studies on integration cofactors have
mostly emphasized factors that aid the integration process either through direct or indirect
association with IN, it has become apparent that host cells may also harbor proteins that act
as inhibitors of retroviral integration. Intriguingly, some of these inhibitory proteins appear to
hamper the integration process via posttranslational modiﬁcations of the components of the
preintegration complex including IN. A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms
leading to the inhibition of integration will provide us with clues for the development of
new strategies for treating retroviral infections. In this review, we draw attention to recent
insights regarding potential host cellular factors that restrict integration, and illustrate how
these inhibitory effects are achieved.

Keywords: retrovirus, integration, host factors, RAD51, KAP1, VRK, posttranslational modiﬁcations

INTRODUCTION
After entry into a target host cell, retroviruses carry out reverse
transcription for the synthesis of double-stranded DNA from
their RNA genome in a complex derived from the viral core.
Subsequently, the newly synthesized viral DNA remains associ-
ated with viral and cellular proteins and forms a high-ordered
nucleoprotein complex called the preintegration complex (PIC).
The PIC guides nuclear entry and the subsequent integration
process of the viral DNA genome (Suzuki and Craigie, 2007).
The viral DNA that is integrated into chromosomal DNA,
termed the provirus, acts as a template for the efﬁcient tran-
scription of viral RNA and ensures the equal segregation of
genetic material to daughter cells upon division. Once estab-
lished, proviruses cannot be distinguished or excised from the
cellular genomic DNA of infected cells. Therefore, integration
occupies an important place not only in viral replication but also in
the treatment of retroviral
infectious diseases (Lewinski and
Bushman, 2005).

The viral enzyme catalyzing the integration is integrase (IN).
As shall be shown, the chemical mechanism of the integration
reaction has been elucidated by biochemical studies using oligonu-
cleotide DNA substrates and puriﬁed IN protein produced by the
Escherichia coli system (Bushman et al., 1990; Craigie et al., 1990;
Katz et al., 1990; Sherman and Fyfe, 1990). These studies indicate
that IN alone can carry out the DNA breakage and joining reac-
tions during integration (Engelman, 2003; Turlure et al., 2004).
However, the reaction by recombinant IN lacks the full ﬁdelity of
DNA integration observed in virus-infected cells. In contrast, PICs

extracted from infected cells efﬁciently insert both viral DNA ends
into a target DNA in a concerted manner in vitro, a hallmark of
the integration reaction in vivo, indicating that the PIC harbors
additional factors essential for the authentic integration in cells
(Fujiwara and Mizuuchi, 1988; Bowerman et al., 1989; Brown et al.,
1989; Farnet and Haseltine, 1990; Turlure et al., 2004). Indeed, a
number of cellular proteins have since been identiﬁed as co-factors
of retroviral IN and PICs (Turlure et al., 2004; Al-Mawsawi and
Neamati, 2007).

As seen with the integration step, retroviruses need to hijack
host biological processes to execute their efﬁcient replication in
the cell (Goff, 2007). Under the selection pressure of such viral
virulence mechanisms, the host organism has itself evolved cel-
lular antiviral defense strategies called intrinsic immunity, which
block virus replication at the post-entry, post-integration, and
virion release steps (Wolf and Goff, 2008), and in addition
to well-studied antiviral cellular proteins such as APOBEC and
TRIM family proteins, intense efforts have been dedicating to
identify novel inhibitory factors against retroviruses (Liu et al.,
2011; Tyagi and Kashanchi, 2012). Intriguingly, new cellular
inhibitory factors for retroviral integration are also beginning to
attract attention. Although viruses may be still capable of sur-
mounting the host defense system, further understanding of the
host’s inhibitory machineries could potentially translate into new
treatments for retroviral infectious diseases. Here, we focus on
the recent ﬁndings that illustrate the involvement and molec-
ular mechanisms of potential restriction factors for retroviral
integration.

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 1

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 1 — #1

Suzuki et al.

Cellular inhibition of retroviral integration

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES OF THE INTEGRATION REACTION
Retroviral IN is expressed and incorporated into virions as the
C-terminal part of the Gag-Pol polyprotein precursor during the
late phase of retroviral infection. IN comprises three structurally
and functionally distinct domains, termed the N-terminal domain
(NTD), the catalytic core domain (CCD), and the C-terminal
domain (CTD; Figure 1A; Lewinski and Bushman, 2005). The
NTD of IN is relatively well conserved amongst retroviruses espe-
cially with the respect to a motif consisting of two histidines and
two cysteines (HHCC motif). This HHCC motif makes up the
zinc-binding site with an overall helix-turn-helix fold commonly
found in IN of all retroviruses and retrotransposons (Craigie,
2001). Further studies utilizing mutants containing amino acid
mutations in the HHCC motif also elucidated the importance of
the NTD in the key steps of integration as well as its involvement
in the multimerization of IN (Zheng et al., 1996; Lee et al., 1997;
Craigie, 2001). The CCD is composed of a mixture of α-helices and
β-sheets folds that bring a triad of critical acidic residues called the
DDE motif into close proximity (Lewinski and Bushman, 2005).
Crystal structure studies of HIV-1 and avian sarcoma virus (ASV)
IN have shown this motif to be important for the binding of diva-
lent metal cations such as Mg2+
(Craigie, 2001). Additionally, the
CCD was also shown to possess viral DNA recognition and binding
ability (Lewinski and Bushman, 2005). Compared to the NTD and
CCD of IN, the CTD displays the greatest degree of variation across
the retrovirus family. Despite this, studies on the CTD region
of HIV-1 have revealed that it has strong DNA-binding activity
and also potentially has multimerization capabilities (Woerner
et al., 1992; Engelman et al., 1994; Lutzke and Plasterk, 1998;
Gao et al., 2001).

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

and 3

The retrovirus-mediated integration reaction consists of three
biochemically distinct steps (Figure 1B; Craigie, 2001). In the ﬁrst
step, IN speciﬁcally recognizes the viral attachment (att) sites on
the 5
long terminal repeats (LTRs) of newly synthesized
viral DNA ends. This interaction between IN and DNA allows
for the 3
processing of viral DNA, where water serves as the
nucleophile for the cleavage of viral DNA. In this 3
processing
step, most retroviral IN such as HIV-1 IN catalyze the removal of
two nucleotides adjacent to the highly conserved CA dinucleotide
from the 3
end of LTR regions. This chemically activates the viral
DNA through the formation of 3
hydroxyl radicals at the ter-
minal ends of viral DNA, allowing it to participate in the next
reaction.

(cid:2)
The second step of integration involves the insertion of 3

pro-
cessed, activated viral DNA strand into the target DNA through
a single transesteriﬁcation reaction, which is called the strand
transfer step (Engelman et al., 1991). IN brings the viral DNA
ends into close proximity with the target DNA allowing a nucle-
ophilic attack by the 3
hydroxyl radical on the target DNA.
Subsequently, IN ligates both the 3
hydroxyl radical terminal
(cid:2)
of the viral DNA to the 5
phosphoryl ends of the target DNA
and establishes new phosphodiester bond between them. This
forms intermediate DNA products with unrepaired gaps between
(cid:2)
the non-ligated 5
ends
of target DNA. Additionally, the unrepaired gaps result in the
short duplication of target DNA sequences ﬂanking both strand
ends, followed by the formation of imperfect inverted repeats

(cid:2)
ends of viral DNA as well as the 3

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

FIGURE 1 | Retroviral DNA integration. (A) As an example of retroviral
INs, domain organization of HIV-1 IN is illustrated. IN is composed of three
domains: N-terminal domain (NTD), catalytic core domain (CCD), and
C-terminal domain (CTD). A triad of aspartic (D) and glutamic acid (E)
residues termed the DDE motif is found in the CCD, which is highly
conserved amongst retroviral INs. Binding of divalent ions such as Mg2+ to
the DDE motif domain plays a key role in integration reaction. The NTD
contains a well-conserved motif comprising of two histidine (H) and two
cysteine (C) residues (HHCC motif) that coordinates Zn2+ binding. In
contrast to the NTD and CCD, the CTD is the least conserved domain,
although tryptophan (W) is conserved among the retroviral INs. This domain
exhibits non-speciﬁc DNA-binding activity in vitro. (B) Retroviral integration
is initiated by IN’s recognition of both ends of viral DNA and subsequent
removal of two (or three) nucleotides from each of the 3(cid:2) ends (3(cid:2)
processing). The target DNA (i.e., chromosomal DNA) captured by IN is
cleaved in a staggered fashion via the exposed hydroxy (OH) groups on the
viral DNA ends, and the 3(cid:2) end of the viral DNA and the 5(cid:2) end of the target
DNA is simultaneously linked (strand transfer). The 3(cid:2) processing and
strand transfer steps are reproducible in vitro using recombinant IN,
indicating that IN alone sufﬁces to catalyze these steps. However, in
infected cells, excision of the mispaired 5(cid:2) viral DNA ends and ﬁlling
in the single-strand gaps are carried out by yet-to-be identiﬁed cellular
enzymes.

upon the sealing of the nick. The length of this inverted repeat
sequences can vary from 4 to 6 base pairs (bp) and is highly char-
acteristic of the retrovirus species from which the IN protein is
(cid:2)
derived. It should be noted that the 3
processing and strand
transfer steps have been shown to be catalyzed by IN proteins

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 2

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 2 — #2

Suzuki et al.

Cellular inhibition of retroviral integration

through various in vitro studies conducted with E. coli-expressed
IN and DNA substrates harboring viral LTR sequence (Turlure
et al., 2004).

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)
end of viral DNA and the 3

Lastly, after the ligation reaction, the gaps in the intermedi-
ate DNA products are repaired to yield fully functional integrated
proviruses (gag repair step). The previous step generates an inter-
mediate product in which viral DNA is joined to the target DNA
solely by the 3
ends of both strands. As such, DNA repair is needed
to seal the nick between the 5
end
of the target DNA to complete the provirus formation. Unlike
the earlier steps which are catalyzed by IN, this step is proba-
bly mediated by some cellular enzymes involved in a variety of
DNA repair pathways including the non-homologous end join-
ing (NHEJ) repair pathway. However, whether or not the NHEJ
machinery is involved is controversial, and identiﬁcation of the
speciﬁc enzymes conducting this gap repair step is anticipated
in future studies (Turlure et al., 2004; Smith and Daniel, 2006;
Yoder et al., 2006).

HOST PROTEINS ASSOCIATED WITH THE RETROVIRAL
INTEGRATION COMPLEX
The PIC, the key nucleoprotein complex responsible for the
integration,
is formed in the cytoplasm following the reverse
transcription of viral DNA from the RNA genome (Figure 2).
Although the full composition of this nucleoprotein complex has
yet to be determined, most of the viral protein components of
the PIC are thought to be derived from the core of the infecting
virion, which includes not only IN but also reverse transcrip-
tase (RT), matrix (MA), capsid (CA), and some HIV-1 accessory
proteins (Suzuki and Craigie, 2007). With respect to the cellular
components of the PIC, signiﬁcant efforts have been made to iden-
tify them through surveys of IN-interacting proteins using yeast
two-hybrid screenings and/or co-immunoprecipitation analysis
(Figure 2; Turlure et al., 2004).

Integrase interactor 1 (INI1), also known as hSNF5, was the
ﬁrst binding partner of HIV-1 IN identiﬁed by yeast two-hybrid
assay (Kalpana et al., 1994). This nuclear protein is the human
homolog of the yeast SNF5 protein, a transcription activator and
part of the SWI/SNF complex in mammalian systems (Wang et al.,
1996). Interaction with the HIV-1 IN requires a direct imperfect
repeat region of INI1 termed Rpt1 (Yung et al., 2001). The func-
tion of INI1 in HIV-1 integration was demonstrated in an in vitro
integration assay where it stimulated the strand transfer activity of
recombinant IN (Kalpana et al., 1994). However, the role of INI1
during virus replication is still a matter of debate. Co-transfection
of the minimal IN-binding domain of INI1, including the Rpt1
region, with HIV-1 proviral DNA in HEK293 cells resulted in a
nearly 10,000-fold reduction in virus production from the trans-
fected cells (Yung et al., 2001). Furthermore, subsequent studies
showed that INI1 is speciﬁcally incorporated into HIV-1 virions
during virus production (Yung et al., 2004), suggesting a pos-
sible role of INI1 in the late stage of HIV-1 replication rather
than in the integration step. Interestingly, it was revealed that IN
and INI1 selectively recruit the components of the Sin3a–HDAC1
complex into HIV-1 virions, whereafter it is required for the
reverse transcription step following the infection of subsequent
target cells (Sorin et al., 2009). Thus, INI1 does not seem to

be involved in the integration step in spite of its interaction
with IN.

Lens epithelium-derived growth factor (LEDGF) is the ﬁrst
cellular protein to have been demonstrated as a bona ﬁde cofac-
tor for HIV-1 integration (Engelman and Cherepanov, 2008).
LEDGF is a transcriptional regulatory protein with a molecu-
lar mass of 76 kDa from the hepatoma-derived growth factor
(HDGF)-related protein (HRP) family, and was found to be
strongly associated with chromatin throughout the cell cycle.
This protein was identiﬁed as an interaction partner of HIV-1
IN through a co-immunoprecipitation study in human cells
(Cherepanov et al., 2003) and has been shown to stimulate in vitro
integration activity of IN (Cherepanov et al., 2004). LEDGF com-
prises several functional domains that have been implicated in
the integration process. The N-terminal of LEDGF contains the
PWWP (proline–tryptophan–tryptophan–proline) domain that
is highly conserved amongst the members of the HRP family
and was revealed to be crucial for protein–protein interaction
and/or DNA-binding. Furthermore, the N-terminal also contains
a putative nuclear localization signal (NLS) and dual copies of
the AT-hook DNA-binding motif (Engelman and Cherepanov,
2008). In addition, a limited proteolysis analysis of recombinant
LEDGF has shown that an evolutionally conserved domain,
termed the integrase-binding domain (IBD), is included in its
C-terminal and as its name suggests, this domain was found to
be crucial for the speciﬁcity of the interaction with HIV-1 IN
(Engelman and Cherepanov, 2008).

+

LEDGF is likely to play a critical but not strictly essential role
in HIV-1 integration and replication. A study performed using
intensiﬁed RNA interference demonstrated a signiﬁcant reduction
of HIV-1 replication in human CD4
T cells in which there was a
complete knockdown of endogenous LEDGF (Llano et al., 2006).
Moreover, a knockout study done in mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts
(MEFs) cell lines reported a reduction of 90% in HIV-1 infec-
tivity upon the depletion of LEDGF/p75 and that this reduction
was ablated upon re-expression of LEDGF (Shun et al., 2007). In
these studies, it was found that the block in HIV-1 infection occurs
speciﬁcally at the integration step, and that both the PWWP and
IBD domains are of critical importance for HIV-1 integration and
replication (Llano et al., 2006; Shun et al., 2007). Based on these
observations, a simple mechanism model is proposed for LEDGF’s
function in HIV-1 integration: LEDGF serves as a molecular adap-
tor that tethers HIV-1 IN to the target DNA (i.e., chromatin).
Since LEDGF is a transcriptional coactivator, this tethering activ-
ity is thought to be responsible for targeting the integration site
of HIV-1 into transcriptionally active regions (Engelman and
Cherepanov, 2008).

After the PIC is formed in cytoplasm, it needs to be shuttled
into the nucleus to allow the integration process to take place.
One of the striking features of HIV-1 is its ability to get across the
intact nuclear envelope easily even in non-dividing cells. This phe-
nomenon is believed to be strongly associated with the karyophilic
properties of the HIV-1 PIC (Suzuki and Craigie, 2007). Although
the main component causing the PICs to be actively imported into
the nucleus remains undetermined, some host-encoded proteins
that interact with IN have been reported to facilitate the nuclear
import of HIV-1 PICs. To date, importin 7 and TNPO3, have been

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 3

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 3 — #3

Suzuki et al.

Cellular inhibition of retroviral integration

FIGURE 2 | Possible roles of IN- and PIC-associated cellular proteins in
retrovirus replication. After penetrating the cell membrane, the viral
nucleoprotein core containing genomic RNA is released into the cytoplasm,
after which reverse transcription of the viral RNA takes place. The synthesis of
full-length viral DNA produces the PIC, in which cellular as well as viral
proteins including IN are associated. 3(cid:2) processing of the viral DNA by IN
occurs in the cytoplasmic PIC. Once the PIC reaches the nuclear periphery it
must gain entry into the nucleus for integration. Some retroviruses seem to
take advantage of nuclear-envelope disassembly during cell division to access
chromosomal DNA, whereas the PICs of lentiviruses, including HIV-1, are
believed to be capable of crossing the intact nuclear-envelope during

interphase. In the nucleus, the PIC gains access to chromosomal DNA
and mediates viral DNA integration to produce a provirus, which is acted
upon by viral and/or cellular transcription factors to express viral RNAs. To
date, a number of host proteins have been reported to interact with the
retroviral IN and PIC (representative proteins are listed on the right).
Many of them are likely to assist in the integration step, and some other
cofactors appear to have functional roles in other steps including reverse
transcription, nuclear entry, gene expression, and virion production during
virus infection. In addition, recent studies demonstrate that several cellular
interactors of IN may negatively regulate retrovirus replication (highlighted
in red).

reported as IN-interacting importins that direct the HIV-1 PICs
to the nucleus (Fassati et al., 2003; Ao et al., 2007; Christ et al.,
2008). Both proteins are members of the importin β family, which
act as import receptors for cargo molecules through association
with nucleoporin (NUP) of the nuclear pore complex (Suzuki and
Craigie, 2007). While a confocal microscopy analysis of digitonin-
permeabilized human cells showed the involvement of importin
7 in the nuclear accumulation of HIV-1 integration complexes,
the functional role of this protein in virus replication is still unre-
solved (Fassati et al., 2003; Zaitseva et al., 2009). TNPO3, an HIV-1
IN-binding protein identiﬁed by yeast two-hybrid screening, was
found to promote viral nuclear import as well (Christ et al., 2008).

Although subsequent studies have conﬁrmed the requirement of
TNPO3 for efﬁcient replication of HIV-1, the TNPO3–CA interac-
tion, rather than the TNPO3–IN interaction, is likely to be required
for the nuclear import of PIC in infected cells (Krishnan et al.,
2010; De Iaco and Luban, 2011). By the same token, another cel-
lular protein regulating nucleocytoplasmic trafﬁcking, NUP153,
was also shown to interact with HIV-1 IN by a pull-down assay
(Woodward et al., 2009), but again, viral CA appears to be the viral
determinant for the NUP153-mediated nuclear entry of the PIC
(Matreyek and Engelman, 2011).

Intriguingly, a certain host protein called Gemin2 may be of
importance to the reverse transcription process of HIV-1 via

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 4

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 4 — #4

Suzuki et al.

Cellular inhibition of retroviral integration

its physical association with IN. Gemin2 is a component of the
survival of motor neurons (SMN) complex that is essential for
the biogenesis of spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins
(snRNPs) and was identiﬁed as a novel interactor of HIV-1
IN by a yeast two-hybrid screening (Hamamoto et al., 2006).
Although this cellular protein is found in the HIV-1 PIC, deple-
tion of endogenous Gemin2 by siRNA in HIV-1-infected primary
monocyte-derived macrophages resulted in impairment of the
early reverse transcription step rather than the integration step
(Hamamoto et al., 2006). Furthermore, a recent study showed
that viral DNA synthesis by HIV-1 RT in vitro is enhanced by
the concerted action of Gemin2 and IN (Nishitsuji et al., 2009).
This augmentation of RT activity by an IN interaction appears
to be reasonable because functional interaction between HIV-1
RT and IN has been revealed (Wilkinson et al., 2009). Hence, it
would be assumed that Gemin2 serves as cofactor that stimulates
and/or stabilizes the formation of the reverse transcription com-
plex to initiate DNA synthesis through its interaction with IN
(Masuda, 2011).

Several cellular proteins have been also identiﬁed as compo-
nents of HIV-1 and Moloney murine leukemia virus (MoMLV)
PIC by the in vitro reconstitution analysis and immunoprecipita-
tion assays of PICs isolated from virus-infected cells. These include
HMG proteins, barrier-to-autointegration factor (BAF, discussed
below), Ku, and LEM proteins (Figure 2). Although there are some
controversies as to whether these PIC-associated factors are indis-
pensable to retrovirus infection, they may be indirectly involved in
the integration process by stabilizing the nucleoprotein complex,
promoting the nuclear retention of the PIC, or protecting host
cells from viral DNA termini-induced apoptosis (Turlure et al.,
2004; Van Maele et al., 2006; Suzuki and Craigie, 2007). Besides
the host proteins listed above, more extensive discussions about
the other cellular factors interacting with the IN/PIC and their
roles in retrovirus replication are presented in previous compre-
hensive reviews (Turlure et al., 2004; Al-Mawsawi and Neamati,
2007; Goff, 2007; Studamire and Goff, 2010).

POTENTIAL CELLULAR INHIBITORS AGAINST INTEGRATION
In addition to the cellular enhancers for retroviral integration, the
existence of potential antiviral proteins controlling the integra-
tion activity of IN and PIC has been revealed by several recent
studies. Understanding the molecular details by which these fac-
tors hamper the integration reaction may potentially lead to
future therapeutic inventions against retroviral infectious diseases.
Recent ﬁndings on the potential restriction factors for integra-
tion process are summarized in this section, and their molecular
inhibitory mechanisms are discussed.

RAD51
Although retroviral integration is completed by the gap repair
step, which is believed to be mediated by the cellular DNA repair
enzymes (Daniel et al., 1999; Lewinski and Bushman, 2005), one of
the homologous recombination (HR) proteins, RAD51, has been
shown to suppress HIV-1 integration (Desfarges et al., 2006; Cos-
nefroy et al., 2012). The downregulation of integration by RAD51
was ﬁrst observed in a unique integration assay using a budding
yeast strain in which DNA substrates containing zeocin-resistance

gene ﬂanked by HIV-1 U3 and U5 LTR ends can be integrated
into genomic DNA by HIV-1 IN expressed by the yeast (Desfarges
et al., 2006). When a haploid yeast strain deﬁcient for the RAD51
encoding gene was examined using the integration assay, higher
numbers of zeocin-resistant clones were obtained, indicating an
increase in integration events in the yeast cells lacking RAD51.
This result suggests that RAD51 negatively regulates the HIV-1
IN-catalyzed integration reaction in yeast. In accordance with the
yeast integration assay, additional in vitro analyses using puri-
ﬁed recombinant proteins showed that human RAD51 (hRAD51)
inhibited integration by IN. Interestingly, HIV-1 IN binds hRAD51
in vitro, suggesting that the inhibition of the integration reaction
may be mediated through the physical interaction between IN and
RAD51 (Desfarges et al., 2006).

Human RAD51 belongs to the RAD52 epistasis group, and
members of the RAD52 epistasis group are highly conserved in
yeast and humans, which mediate mitotic HR events as well as
chromosome segregation during meiosis (San Filippo et al., 2008).
RAD51 is also an ortholog of the E. coli RecA (Figure 3A). The
RecA family proteins possess a conserved, ∼230 amino acid core
domain that is involved in the binding and hydrolysis of ATP
through Walker A and B motifs, with the human RAD51 also bear-
ing a long N-terminal and a short CTDs (Figure 3A; Lin et al., 2006;
Wang et al., 2008). The RAD51 protein exists as a homo-oligomer
in solution, and binds to single-stranded (or double-stranded)
DNA to form a right-handed helical presynaptic nucleoprotein.
In the presence of ATP, RAD51 can polymerize on the DNA to
form a nucleoﬁlament that expands for thousands of bases (or
base pairs, Figure 3B). This nucleoprotein ﬁlament serves as the
catalytic center for DNA strand-exchange reactions during HR
(San Filippo et al., 2008).

The formation of the nucleoﬁlament is also likely to be impor-
tant for the downregulation of HIV-1 IN activity by RAD51. In
a recent report, Cosnefroy et al. (2012) set up an in vitro inte-
gration assay for IN in which active nucleoﬁlament formation
of RAD51 on substrate DNA was allowed to take place. They
revealed that strong inhibition of HIV-1 IN activity was only
observed with wild-type hRAD51 in the presence of ATP, but
not in the reactions without ATP or with an hRAD51 mutant
containing a single amino acid substitution in the Walker A
motif (K133A) that ablated hRAD51–ATP-binding and therefore
prevented hRAD51 polymerization (Cosnefroy et al., 2012). An
additional in vitro experiment using a substrate DNA containing
LTR sequences complexed with HIV-1 IN showed that even after
the IN–viral DNA complexes were formed, subsequent incuba-
tion with hRAD51-induced dissociation of IN from its substrate
viral DNA. The dissociation effect was not observed with hRAD51
in the absence of ATP or with the K133A mutant (Cosnefroy
et al., 2012). Given that RAD51 can polymerize on DNA in an
ATP-dependent manner, these observations suggest that the for-
mation of the nucleoﬁlament on viral DNA is responsible for
the RAD51-induced restriction of HIV-1 integration via displace-
ment of IN (Figure 3C). Furthermore, when an allosteric effector
of RAD51, RS-1 (RAD51-stimulatory compound 1), which pro-
motes formation of the active RAD51 nucleoﬁlament, was used,
HIV-1 integration and replication was signiﬁcantly impaired in
CD4
cells. This was accompanied in an increase in 2-LTR circles,

+

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 5

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 5 — #5

Suzuki et al.

Cellular inhibition of retroviral integration

FIGURE 3 | RAD51-mediated inhibition of HIV-1 integration. (A) Domain
structure of human RAD51. RAD51 and its bacterial counterpart, RecA,
share a highly conserved ∼ 230 amino acid domain that contains two
putative ATP-binding domains, Walker A and Walker B motifs. DNA-binding
activity of hRAD51 is attributed to its N-terminal domain, which includes a
modiﬁed HhH motif, while RecA binds to DNA through its long C-terminal
domain. (B) Nucleoﬁlament formation of RAD51. Upon assembly on DNA,
RAD51 forms a right-handed helical polymer on the DNA in presence

of ATP, and the RAD51-DNA nucleoprotein ﬁlament expands to
thousands of bases. (C) Disruption of HIV-1 integration complex
by the hRAD51 nucleoﬁlament. It is suggested that formation of an
active nuclear ﬁlament following polymerization of hRAD51 on viral
DNA eventually displaces IN, thereby inducing dysfunction of the HIV-1
integration complex prior to the integration reaction. Recruitment
of hRAD51 onto viral DNA may be facilitated by its interaction
with IN.

which is a byproduct from the failure to integrate (Cosnefroy et al.,
2012). This in vivo experiment supports the proposed model in
which hRAD51 recruited by HIV-1 IN is able to release the IN
from viral DNA via formation of the nucleoﬁlament, resulting in
dysfunction of the PIC (Figure 3C). Although it is still unclear
whether the hRAD51 in a natural setting could restrict HIV-1
integration, this study provides the possibility of using a speciﬁc
stimulator of RAD51 such as RS-1 for a new antiviral approach
against HIV infection.

KAP1
Posttranslational modiﬁcations (PTMs) including phosphoryla-
tion, ubiquitination, and acetylation is the chemical alternation of
a protein’s primary structure after its translation, a process which
is well known to have a great impact on various protein func-
tions such as enzymatic activity, protein–protein interaction, and
subcellular localization (Walsh et al., 2005). Although the asso-
ciation between PTMs and the retroviral integration process has
not been fully addressed, it was demonstrated that the enzymatic

activity of HIV-1 IN is positively regulated by histone acetyl trans-
ferases (HATs; Cereseto et al., 2005; Terreni et al., 2010). HATs are
the cellular enzymes that transfer an acetyl group from acetyl-
coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) to the ε-amino group of certain basic
lysine residues of histone’s N-terminal, which modiﬁes the acces-
sibility of DNA to other proteins (Roth et al., 2001). p300, the
ﬁrst HAT protein that was reported to catalyze the acetylation
of HIV-1 IN, is a ∼300 kDa nuclear phosphoprotein originally
isolated as an interaction partner of adenovirus E1A (Sterner
and Berger, 2000). This HAT is also a paralog of the CREB-
binding protein (CBP), and the p300/CBP family proteins contain
several identical domains necessary for their function as HATs,
which include three cysteine–histidine rich domains (CH1, CH2,
CH3), a KIX domain, a bromodomain, and a HAT domain.
(Figure 4A). p300 directly binds to and acetylates three speciﬁc
lysine residues, Lys-264, Lys-266, and Lys-273, of the C-terminal
region of HIV-1 IN (Figure 4C), which is likely to enhance the
binding afﬁnity to LTR DNA as well as strand transfer activity of
IN in vitro (Cereseto et al., 2005). Importantly, an HIV-1 strain

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 6

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 6 — #6

Suzuki et al.

Cellular inhibition of retroviral integration

of HIV-1 IN at the same C-terminal lysines, and HIV-1 inte-
gration was shown to be impaired in GCN5 knockdown cells
(Terreni et al., 2010).

In the case of histones, acetylation of the internal lysines
affects several aspects of nucleosome function and generates new
protein–protein interactions. However, it is a reversible process,
and transcriptional activation of the nucleosome is repressed
by deacetylation mechanisms, which are mediated by histone
deacetylases (HDAC; Shahbazian and Grunstein, 2007). It is likely
that deacetylation of HIV-1 IN also takes place. To ﬁnd a cellu-
lar partner that selectively recognizes the acetylated IN, Cereset
and colleagues developed a unique yeast two-hybrid screening
assay, in which acetylated HIV-1 IN was constitutively expressed
as the bait by fusion of the p300 HAT domain to IN (Allouch et al.,
2011). From the screening of a human lymphocyte cDNA library,
they identiﬁed that a cellular protein, KAP1 was able to interact
with acetylated IN (Figure 4B; Allouch et al., 2011). KAP1 was
ﬁrst identiﬁed as a transcriptional corepressor that is recruited to
its target genes via interaction with the Kruppel-associated box-
domain-containing (KRAB) zinc-ﬁnger DNA proteins (Friedman
et al., 1996; Peng et al., 2000). Interestingly, KAP1 is a member
of the human TRIM family, and hence contains a RBCC (Ring
[really interesting new gene] ﬁnger, two B-box zinc ﬁngers and
a coiled coil) domain at the N-terminal, which is a characteristic
feature of the TRIM family protein domains (Figure 4B; Iyen-
gar and Farnham, 2011). Additionally, KAP1, also called TRIM28
and transcription intermediary factor (TIF) 1β, is composed of a
plant homeodomain (PHD) and bromodomain at the C-terminus,
and contains a central TIF1 signature sequence (TSS) domain and
a heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1)-binding domain, which are
found in other TIF1 subfamily members (Iyengar and Farnham,
2011). In accordance with the yeast two-hybrid screen, preferen-
tial binding of KAP1 to acetylated HIV-1 IN was conﬁrmed by
in vitro and in vivo analysis. Importantly, knockdown of KAP1
increased the level of integration in HIV-1-infected cells, which
was accompanied by a decrease in 2-LTR circles (Allouch et al.,
2011). When the infection experiments were performed with
HIV-1 carrying mutations in the C-terminal lysines (Lys-264, Lys-
266, Lys-273) of IN, knockdown of KAP1 did not signiﬁcantly
increase the levels of integrated DNA, indicating that KAP1-
mediated inhibition was related to the C-terminal acetylation of
IN. Consistent with this, the level of acetylated IN was shown
to be decreased by expression of KAP1 in cells (Allouch et al.,
2011). KAP1 has been reported to form complexes with HDAC
to regulate transcription at speciﬁc target sites on the genome via
modiﬁcation of histone structure (Iyengar and Farnham, 2011).
Together with the observation that KAP1 has a higher afﬁnity
to acetylated IN, the evidence raises a possibility that KAP1 may
serve as a scaffolding mediator that recruits HDAC to acetylated
HIV-1 IN (Figure 4C). Indeed, HIV-1 IN formed a complex
with KAP1 and HDAC1, and HIV-1 integration was enhanced
by treatment with the HDAC inhibitors (Allouch et al., 2011).
These evidences therefore support the proposed model that KAP1
recruits the HDAC to acetylated IN allowing for the HDAC1-
mediated deacetylation of IN to take place, which results in the
subsequent reduction of integration efﬁciency in HIV-1 infection
(Figure 4C).

FIGURE 4 | Regulation of HIV-1 integration by acetylation and
deacetylation of IN. (A) Acetyltransferases for HIV-1 IN. p300 and GCN5
have been identiﬁed as cellular enzymes catalyzing acetylation of HIV-1 IN.
Both proteins are members of histone acetyltransferase (HAT) family,
which transfer an acetyl group from acetyl coenzyme A to speciﬁc lysine
residues on substrate proteins; HATs function as transcriptional
co-activators in the nucleus. Although a conserved HAT domain is
indispensable to acetylation activity of HATs, other domains including
bromodomain (Br) apparently have effects on their function. p300 is able to
bind a variety of transcription factors through cysteine-histidine-rich module
(CH1, CH2, and CH3) and KIX domain. Nr, nuclear receptor-interacting box;
PCAF-HD, PCAF homology domain. (B) Schematic of KAP1. KAP1, also
known as TRIM28, is highly related to three other TRIM proteins, TIF1α,
TIF1γ, and TIF1δ. The TIF proteins, including KAP1, exhibit similar domain
organization, which includes RBCC (Ring/B-box/coiled coil) domain at the
N-terminal, TIF1 signature sequence (TSS) and heterochromatin protein 1
(HP1)-binding domains at central portion, and plant homeodomain (PHD)
and bromodomain (Br) at C-terminal. (C) Restriction of HIV-1 integration by
KAP1. Cellular acetyltransferase (HAT) such as p300 interacts with HIV-1 IN
and catalyzes acetylation of the IN. Three lysine residues in CTD of IN
(Lys-264, Lys-266, and Lys-273) have been reported as target sites for p300
and GCN5. The acetylation appears to enhance the DNA-binding activity
and strand transfer activity of IN. In a proposed model, KAP1 speciﬁcally
recognizes the acetylated form of IN and induces a protein complex
formation with histone deacetylase (HDAC), resulting in deacetylation of IN
and reduced integration activity.

+

that contained arginine substitutions at the critical C-terminal
lysine residues on IN exhibited a signiﬁcant replication defect in
CD4
cells, and the replication defect occurred at the integra-
tion step, indicating the importance of C-terminal acetylation of
IN in HIV-1 integration (Cereseto et al., 2005). An another HAT,
GCN5 (Figure 4A), was also found to mediate the acetylation

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 7

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 7 — #7

Suzuki et al.

Cellular inhibition of retroviral integration

A different inhibitory mechanism of KAP1 has been also
demonstrated in other retroviruses and endogenous retroviruses,
which involves the transcriptional repression of the provirus in
embryonic carcinoma and embryonic stem cells (Wolf and Goff,
2007, 2009; Wolf et al., 2008; Matsui et al., 2010; Rowe et al., 2010).
The KAP1-mediated inhibition of viral transcription appeared
to be largely attributable to the recruitment of KAP1 to cer-
(cid:2)
tain types of primer binding sites (PBS) near the 5
end of the
provirus containing PBS sequences complementary to tRNAPro
(MoMLV and human T-lymphotropic virus type I [HTLV-1]) and
tRNALys-1,2 (spumavirus and Mason–Pfeizer monkey virus; Wolf
et al., 2008; Wolf and Goff, 2009). In contrast, HIV-1 is not sus-
ceptible to the transcriptional silencing induced by KAP1 as its
PBS is complementary to neither tRNAPro nor tRNALys-1,2 (Wolf
et al., 2008). Since the study by Cereset and colleagues showed
that MoMLV integration was not affected by depletion of KAP1
(Allouch et al., 2011), the KAP1-mediated retroviral integration
block should only occur in HIV-1 replication due to the speciﬁc
interaction between KAP1 and HIV-1 IN. Therefore, it can be
concluded that KAP1 is an intrinsic restriction factor against a
broad range of retroviruses, which inhibits either the integra-
tion or post-integration step. However, despite the ubiquitous
expression of KAP1 in many cell types, substantial levels of HIV-1
integration can still be detected, indicating KAP1 may not be a very
powerful integration inhibitor. Yet, it would shed light on a poten-
tially novel KAP1-based strategy for the treatment of retrovirus
infections.

REGULATION OF INTEGRASE STABILITY BY
PHOSPHORYLATION: IMPLICATION OF UNKNOWN
CELLULAR INHIBITORY FACTOR INVOLVED IN
DEGRADATION OF UNPHOSPHORYLATED INTEGRASE
Phosphorylation is another type of PTM that is also likely to
inﬂuence in HIV-1 integration. Recently, phosphorylation of
HIV-1 IN by c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) was reported
(Manganaro et al., 2010). JNK is one of the major groups of
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), a family of well-
studied serine/threonine kinases involved in signal transduction
from extracellular stimuli such as growth factors, cytokines, infec-
tion, and stress (Raman et al., 2007; Cargnello and Roux, 2011).
JNK consists of three variants, JNK1, JNK2, and JNK3, which are
generated through alternative splicing but exhibit distinct expres-
sions and functions (Sabapathy et al., 2004). The MAPK signaling
pathway can also be activated by the interaction of T cell recep-
tors with antigen-major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
II molecules, resulting in T cell activation (Weiss and Littman,
1994). In HIV infection, the requirement for the activation states
of CD4
T cells for efﬁcient initiation and maintenance of repli-
cation has been well established (Stevenson et al., 1990; Pope and
Haase, 2003; Stevenson, 2003; Chiu et al., 2005). In particular, it
has been demonstrated that HIV-1 infection is restricted at the
post-entry stages in resting T cells, following reverse transcription
and prior to integration (Bukrinsky et al., 1992; Pierson et al., 2002;
Coiras et al., 2009).

+

Manganaro et al. (2010) reported that although expression lev-
T cells, it became activated
T cells, HIV-1

els of JNK was low in the resting CD4
upon stimulation, and that even in activated CD4

+

+

infection was impaired by treatment with a speciﬁc JNK inhibitor,
SP600125. Furthermore, decreased amounts of integrated DNA
+
was detected in the SP600125-treated activated CD4
T cells, indi-
cating JNK contributes to the efﬁcient infection and integration
of HIV-1. Importantly, IN was found to be phosphorylated, and a
conserved serine residue in the CCD, Ser-57, was identiﬁed as the
target site of phosphorylation. Since the phosphorylated IN could
not be detected in cells treated with SP600125, JNK appeared
to be the kinase responsible for the phosphorylation of IN
(Manganaro et al., 2010).

Next question to be asked was how the IN phosphorylation
augmented the efﬁciency of HIV-1 integration. In vitro integra-
tion activity assays using recombinant IN showed that an alanine
substitution at the Ser-57 residue did not affect the strand transfer
activity of HIV-1 IN, suggesting that this serine residue itself is not
involved in the enzymatic activity of IN (Manganaro et al., 2010).
Meanwhile, Manganaro et al. (2010) found that the Ser-57 and a
ﬂanking Pro-58 are conserved amongst most of the HIV-1 clades
and subtypes, and that the phosphorylated of the serine/proline
motif can potentially be recognized by peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans
isomerase (PPIase), Pin1 (Lu and Zhou, 2007). Pin1 is a regulator
of phosphorylation signaling which speciﬁcally recognizes phos-
phorylated serine or threonine residues preceding a proline. Pin1
then catalyzes the structural rearrangement of a target molecule
through cis-trans isomerization of its speciﬁc proline (Lu and
Zhou, 2007). Pin1 binds wild-type HIV-1 IN, but not the IN
mutant with a single amino acid mutant on the phosphorylation
site (S57A). As expected, treatment of IN-expressing cells with a
Pin1 inhibitor, Pib, decreased the stability of HIV-1 IN. Moreover,
in vitro incubation of recombinant IN with Pin1 increased IN resis-
tance against a protease, subtilisin, suggesting that Pin1 induced a
conformational change in phosphorylated IN, thereby rendering
it less sensitive to protein degradation (Manganaro et al., 2010).
Supporting this notion, treatment of cells with a Pin1 inhibitor
or the depletion of endogenous Pin1 by siRNA reduced the level
of integrated DNA in HIV-1-infected cells without any impair-
ment of the reverse transcription step (Manganaro et al., 2010).
More important, whereas HIV-1 carrying the S57A IN mutant
exhibited decreased integration activity, treatment with the protea-
some inhibitor MG132 restored integration activity (Manganaro
et al., 2010), demonstrating that JNK-mediated phosphorylation
of HIV-1 IN at Ser-57 and subsequent prolyl cis-trans isomeriza-
tion by Pin1 increased the stability of IN and thereby enhanced
integration efﬁciency in infected CD4
T cells. Taken together,
resting CD4
T cells could have lower expression/activation levels
of JNK, leading to decreased IN phosphorylation and consequently
decreased IN stability, resulting in inefﬁcient HIV-1 replication.
Also, one could speculate that extracellular stimulations, includ-
ing cytokines and chemokines, may enhance integration in resting
T cells via activation of the JNK pathway (Cameron et al., 2010;
Guo et al., 2011).

+

+

Of particular interest is that the study by Manganaro et al.
(2010) also implies yet-to-be identiﬁed host factor(s) partic-
ipating the degradation of IN, particularly unphosphorylated
form of IN, in the resting T cells. HIV-1 IN is well known
to undergo proteasome-mediated degradation via ubiquitination
(Devroe et al., 2003). A previous study has reported that the von

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 8

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 8 — #8

Suzuki et al.

Cellular inhibition of retroviral integration

Hippel–Lindau binding protein 1 (VBP1) and cullin2-based von
Hippel–Lindau (Cul2/VHL) ubiquitin ligase cooperate to mediate
the polyubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation
of IN, but this event was likely to occur at a post-integration step
and also to promote gene expression from the integrated provirus
in the nucleus (Mousnier et al., 2007). Therefore, further work
will be required to identify novel ubiquitin–proteasome prote-
olytic pathways that drive the cytoplasmic degradation of HIV-1
IN in a manner that restricts integration.

VACCINIA-RELATED KINASES
Integration reactions mediated by PICs can be categorized into
two pathways: (i) intermolecular integration into a target DNA
and (ii) intramolecular integration into the viral DNA, which is
also called autointegration (Lee and Craigie, 1994). In order to
establish productive infection, the retrovirus (or retroviral PIC)
needs to avoid the suicidal autointegration pathway. Hence, a
strong preference for intermolecular integration is one of the key
features of the retroviral PIC (Lee and Craigie, 1994). BAF was
identiﬁed as a host factor responsible for blocking the autointe-
gration of MoMLV PICs (Lee and Craigie, 1998). BAF is a small
dimeric protein (Margalit et al., 2007) and shown as a cellular com-
ponent of HIV-1 and MoMLV PICs (Suzuki and Craigie, 2002;
Lin and Engelman, 2003). Crystal structure analysis has revealed
that BAF binds double-stranded DNA through its helix-hairpin-
helix (HhH) motif (Bradley et al., 2005; Figure 5A). Importantly,
the dimerization of BAF appears to cross-bridge DNA, thereby
preventing the autointegration of retroviral PICs by compacting
viral DNA into rigid structure (Lee and Craigie, 1998; Suzuki and
Craigie, 2002; Bradley et al., 2005).

Barrier-to-autointegration factor is involved in the organiza-
tion of nuclear architecture through interaction with lamin A
and lamina-associated polypeptide 2-emerin-MAN1 (LEM) fam-
ily proteins, and therefore predominantly localizes in the nucleus
during interphase (Margalit et al., 2007). On the other hand, in the
mitotic phase, BAF is diffusely localized and subsequently assem-
bles on the chromatin core region at anaphase to form a scaffold
for the gathering of lamin A and LEM proteins to reconstitute
the nuclear envelope (Segura-Totten and Wilson, 2004; Margalit
et al., 2007). Intriguingly, these cell cycle-dependent actions of
BAF appear to be regulated by the phosphorylation (Margalit
et al., 2007). So far, vaccinia-related kinases (VRKs) have been
identiﬁed as the cellular kinases that participate in the BAF phos-
phorylation (Figure 5B; Nichols et al., 2006). VRKs are a family
of serine/threonine kinases, and three alternative splicing iso-
forms, VRK1, VRK2, and VRK3, are found in human and murine
cells (Nichols et al., 2006; Klerkx et al., 2009). They share sev-
eral domains comprised of ATP-binding motifs (Walker A and
Walker B), catalytic domains (subdomain VI), active sites (subdo-
main VII), and substrate recognition domains (subdomain VIII;
Figure 5B; Boyle and Traktman, 2004). VRK was ﬁrst identiﬁed
as cellular homolog of the poxvirus (vaccinia virus) B1 kinase
that plays an essential role in viral DNA replication in the early
stage of vaccinia virus infections (Figure 5B; Nichols et al., 2006).
Importantly, VRK-mediated phosphorylation of BAF causes the
loss of its DNA-binding ability (Nichols et al., 2006). Deple-
tion of VRK1 in Caenorhabditis elegans results in several mitotic

FIGURE 5 | Disruption of the retroviral PIC by phosphorylation of BAF.
(A) Features of BAF. BAF is highly conserved among multicellular
eukaryotes, and 86 out of 89 amino acid residues are identical between
humans and mice. This protein is composed of ﬁve helices (α-1 to -5) and a
310-helical turn, and DNA-binding activity of BAF is thought to be attributed
to the HhH motif. N-terminal threonine (T) and serine (S) residues (Thr-2,
Thu-3, and Ser-4) indicated in red are reported as phosphorylation sites of
BAF. (B) VRK family proteins. Domain organization of mouse VRKs and their
vaccinia viral homolog, B1 kinase, are shown. All the VRK/B1 family
proteins contain highly conserved enzymatic domain involved in the
phosphotransfer reaction, which is consists of the ATP binding motifs
(Walker A and Walker B), catalytic domain (subdomain VI), active site
(subdomain VII), and substrate recognition domain (subdomain VIII).
However, some substitutions in several residues are found in Walker A,
Walker B, and subdomain VI of VRK3, which may affect kinase activity of
this ortholog. Additionally, VRK1 and VRK3 possess putative NLS at the
C-terminal and N-terminal portions, respectively. (C) Reciprocal regulation
of PIC integration activity by BAF and VRK. As the viral double-stranded
DNA is synthesized by reverse transcription, BAF is recruited into the PIC in
cytoplasm through direct binding with viral DNA. Once BAF is incorporated
into the PIC, viral DNA is intramolecularly bridged by BAF’s dimerization and
DNA-binding activities. This intramolecular bridging by BAF compacts the
viral DNA, making it less accessible as a target for autointegration. In
addition, PIC associated BAF also anchors to the target DNA by its DNA
bridging property (intermolecular bridging), thereby stimulating the
intermolecular integration activity of the PIC. On the other hand, VRK is
able to induce release of BAF from the PIC via phosphorylation of BAF. By
the dissociation of BAF, viral DNA may adopt a more open structure,
resulting in its increased availability for autointegration.

defects and BAF delocalization (Gorjanacz et al., 2007), suggesting
that the release of BAF from chromatin during mitosis is regu-
lated by the VRK family proteins in a phosphorylation-dependent
manner.

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 9

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 9 — #9

Suzuki et al.

Cellular inhibition of retroviral integration

Since the DNA-binding property of BAF is crucial to the
authentic integration activity of
the retroviral PIC, down-
modulation of the BAF activity by phosphorylation may disrupt
the integration function of the PIC through dissociation of BAF
from viral DNA. Indeed, our recent study revealed that BAF could
be removed from the PIC following treatment with recombi-
nant VRK1 in vitro (Suzuki et al., 2010). More important, the
intermolecular integration activity of the PIC assay was strongly
inhibited by the VRK1 treatment, and this was accompanied by
an increase in autointegration activity (Lee and Craigie, 1994;
Suzuki et al., 2010). Little inhibition of the PIC activity was
observed in following treatment with mutant VRK1 harboring
alanine substitutions in the catalytic subdomain VI, and also in
PICs treated with wild-type VRK1 in the presence of a well-
known kinase inhibitor, staurosporine, indicating that disruption
of PIC function is attributed to the kinase activity of VRK1
(Suzuki et al., 2010). Based on these ﬁndings, a potential inhibitory
mechanism by which VRK1 restricts PIC integration activity can
be proposed: phosphorylation by VRK1 dissociates BAF from
the PIC, resulting in destructive autointegration of viral DNA
(Figure 5C).

When other members of the VRK family of proteins were
assessed for their ability to inhibit the intermolecular integration
activity of PICs, VRK2, but not VRK3, was found to abrogate
the function of PICs in a similar manner with VRK1 (Suzuki
et al., 2010). This raised the question of why VRK3 was unable
to inhibit PIC activity. Phosphorylation of BAF exhibits biphasic
phases (hypophosphorylation and hyperphosphorylation), with
the phosphorylation taking place on the Thr-2, Thr-3, and Ser-4
located on the N-terminus of BAF (Figure 5A). VRK1 and
VRK2 are able to catalyze the hyperphosphorylation (Nichols
et al., 2006). However, the BAF product phosphorylated by VRK3
is the hypophosphorylated form, and an in vitro kinase assay

REFERENCES
Allouch, A., Di Primio, C., Alpi, E.,
Lusic, M., Arosio, D., Giacca, M.,
and Cereseto, A. (2011). The TRIM
family protein KAP1 inhibits HIV-
1 integration. Cell Host Microbe 9,
484–495.

Al-Mawsawi, L. Q.,

and Neamati,
N.
(2007). Blocking interactions
between HIV-1 integrase and cellular
cofactors: an emerging anti-retroviral
strategy. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 28,
526–535.

Ao, Z., Huang, G., Yao, H., Xu,
Labine, M., Cochrane, A.
Z.,
W., and Yao, X. (2007).
Interac-
tion of human immunodeﬁciency
virus type 1 integrase with cellu-
lar nuclear import receptor importin
7 and its impact on viral replica-
tion.
J. Biol. Chem. 282, 13456–
13467.

Bowerman, B., Brown, P. O., Bishop,
J. M., and Varmus, H. E. (1989). A
nucleoprotein complex mediates the
integration of retroviral DNA. Genes
Dev. 3, 469–478.

Boyle, K. A., and Traktman, P. (2004).
Members of a novel family of mam-
malian protein kinases complement
the DNA-negative phenotype of a
vaccinia virus ts mutant defective
in the B1 kinase.
78,
1992–2005.

J. Virol.

Bradley, C. M., Ronning, D. R.,
Ghirlando, R., Craigie, R.,
and
Dyda, F. (2005). Structural basis
for DNA bridging by barrier-to-
autointegration factor. Nat. Struct.
Mol. Biol. 12, 935–936.

Brown, P. O., Bowerman, B., Varmus,
J. M. (1989).
H. E., and Bishop,
Retroviral integration: structure of
the initial covalent product and its
precursor, and a role for the viral IN
protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
86, 2525–2529.

Bukrinsky, M. I., Sharova, N., Dempsey,
M. P., Stanwick, T. L., Bukrinskaya,
A. G., Haggerty, S., and Stevenson,
M. (1992). Active nuclear import of
human immunodeﬁciency virus type
1 preintegration complexes. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 89, 6580–6584.

using BAF mutants, in which Thr-2, Thr-3, and/or Ser-4 had
been substituted with alanine, revealed that Ser-4 is the sole
site for the VRK3-mediated hypophosphorylation (Suzuki et al.,
2010). Ser-4 has been also indicated as initial phosphorylation
site by VRK1 and VRK2 (Nichols et al., 2006) and our pre-
liminary results of an in vitro kinase assay using BAF mutants
showed that subsequent phosphorylation likely takes place on
Thr-3 (Suzuki and Suzuki, unpublished data). These results
suggest that Ser-4 is the primary target of all VRK family pro-
teins, but that Thr-3 is an additional preferred target of VRK1
and VRK2. The hyperphosphorylation of BAF at both the N-
terminal Thr-3 and Ser-4 should therefore be a prerequisite for
the functional disruption of PIC function. Although the ﬁnd-
ings of our in vitro studies propose that VRK is a cellular kinase
harboring potentially restrictive activity against retroviral integra-
tion, delineating the precise role of the VRK family of proteins
in retrovirus infection and integration in vivo requires further
experimentation.

CONCLUSION
As discussed in this review, the processes leading up to integra-
tion are assisted by a number of host proteins. Furthermore, it
has become evident that there are some cellular proteins that act
as potential restriction factors. Research into intracellular effec-
tors and inhibitors of retroviral integration therefore provides an
important insight for the development of novel classes of anti-HIV
drugs that can act synergistically with existing drugs targeting the
active sites of viral enzymes or the binding pockets of cellular
receptors.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful to Wei Xin Chin for proofreading and commenting
on the manuscript.

Bushman, F. D., Fujiwara, T., and
Craigie, R. (1990). Retroviral DNA
integration directed by HIV integra-
tion protein in vitro. Science 249,
1555–1558.

+

Cameron, P. U., Saleh, S., Sallmann, G.,
Solomon, A., Wightman, F., Evans, V.
A., Boucher, G., Haddad, E. K., Sekaly,
R. P., Harman, A. N., Anderson,
J. L., Jones, K. L., Mak, J., Cun-
ningham, A. L., Jaworowski, A., and
Lewin, S. R. (2010). Establishment
T
of HIV-1 latency in resting CD4
cells depends on chemokine-induced
changes in the actin cytoskeleton.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
16934–16939.
Cargnello, M.,

and Roux, P. P.
(2011). Activation and function of
the MAPKs and their substrates,
the MAPK-activated protein kinases.
Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.
75,
50–83.

Cereseto, A., Manganaro, L., Gutier-
rez, M.
I., Terreni, M., Fitti-
paldi, A., Lusic, M., Marcello, A.,
and Giacca, M. (2005). Acetylation

of HIV-1 integrase by p300 regu-
lates viral integration. EMBO J. 24,
3070–3081.

Cherepanov, P., Devroe, E., Silver, P. A.,
and Engelman, A. (2004). Identiﬁca-
tion of an evolutionarily conserved
domain in human lens epithelium-
derived growth factor/transcriptional
co-activator p75 (LEDGF/p75) that
binds HIV-1 integrase. J. Biol. Chem.
279, 48883–48892.

Cherepanov, P., Maertens, G., Proost,
P., Devreese, B., Van Beeumen, J.,
Engelborghs, Y., De Clercq, E., and
Debyser, Z. (2003). HIV-1 integrase
forms stable tetramers and asso-
ciates with LEDGF/p75 protein in
human cells.
J. Biol. Chem. 278,
372–381.

Chiu, Y. L., Soros, V. B., Kreisberg,
J. F., Stopak, K., Yonemoto, W.,
and Greene, W. C. (2005). Cellular
APOBEC3G restricts HIV-1 infection
T cells. Nature 435,
in resting CD4
108–114.

+

Christ, F., Thys, W., De Rijck, J., Gijs-
bers, R., Albanese, A., Arosio, D.,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 10

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 10 — #10

Suzuki et al.

Cellular inhibition of retroviral integration

Emiliani, S., Rain, J. C., Benarous, R.,
Cereseto, A., and Debyser, Z. (2008).
Transportin-SR2 imports HIV into
the nucleus. Curr. Biol. 18, 1192–
1202.

Coiras, M., Lopez-Huertas, M. R.,
Perez-Olmeda, M., and Alcami, J.
(2009). Understanding HIV-1 latency
provides clues for the eradication
of long-term reservoirs. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 7, 798–812.

Cosnefroy, O., Tocco, A., Lesbats, P.,
Thierry, S., Calmels, C., Wiktorow-
icz, T., Reigadas, S., Kwon, Y., De
Cian, A., Desfarges, S., Bonot, P., San
Filippo, J., Litvak, S., Le Cam, E.,
Rethwilm, A., Fleury, H., Connell, P.
P., Sung, P., Delelis, O., Andreola, M.
L., and Parissi, V. (2012). Stimulation
of the human RAD51 nucleoﬁlament
restricts HIV-1 integration in vitro
and in infected cells.
J. Virol. 86,
513–526.

Craigie, R. (2001). HIV integrase, a brief
overview from chemistry to thera-
peutics. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 23213–
23216.

Craigie, R., Fujiwara, T., and Bushman,
F. (1990). The IN protein of Moloney
murine leukemia virus processes the
viral DNA ends and accomplishes
their integration in vitro. Cell 62,
829–837.

Daniel, R., Katz, R. A., and Skalka, A. M.
(1999). A role for DNA-PK in retro-
viral DNA integration. Science 284,
644–647.

De Iaco, A., and Luban, J. (2011). Inhi-
bition of HIV-1 infection by TNPO3
depletion is determined by capsid and
detectable after viral cDNA enters the
nucleus. Retrovirology 8, 98.

Desfarges, S., San Filippo, J., Fournier,
M., Calmels, C., Caumont-Sarcos, A.,
Litvak, S., Sung, P., and Parissi, V.
(2006). Chromosomal integration of
LTR-ﬂanked DNA in yeast express-
ing HIV-1 integrase: down regulation
by RAD51. Nucleic Acids Res. 34,
6215–6224.

Devroe, E., Engelman, A., and Silver,
P. A. (2003). Intracellular transport
of human immunodeﬁciency virus
type 1 integrase.
J. Cell Sci. 116,
4401–4408.

Engelman, A. (2003). The roles of cel-
lular factors in retroviral integration.
Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 281,
209–238.

integrase protein of human immun-
odeﬁciency virus type 1 each con-
tribute to nonspeciﬁc DNA binding.
J. Virol. 68, 5911–5917.

Engelman, A., Mizuuchi, K.,

and
Craigie, R. (1991). HIV-1 DNA inte-
gration: mechanism of viral DNA
cleavage and DNA strand transfer.
Cell 67, 1211–1221.

Farnet, C. M., and Bushman, F. D.
(1997). HIV-1 cDNA integration:
requirement of HMG I(Y) protein for
function of preintegration complexes
in vitro. Cell 88, 483–492.

Farnet, C. M.,

and Haseltine, W.
A. (1990).
Integration of human
immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 DNA
in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
87, 4164–4168.

Fassati, A., Gorlich, D., Harrison,
I., Zaytseva, L., and Mingot,
J.
M. (2003). Nuclear import of HIV-
1 intracellular reverse transcription
complexes is mediated by importin 7.
EMBO J. 22, 3675–3685.

Friedman, J. R., Fredericks, W. J., Jensen,
D. E., Speicher, D. W., Huang, X. P.,
Neilson, E. G., and Rauscher, F. J.
III. (1996). KAP-1, a novel corepres-
sor for the highly conserved KRAB
repression domain. Genes Dev. 10,
2067–2078.

Fujiwara, T., and Mizuuchi, K. (1988).
Retroviral DNA integration: struc-
ture of an integration intermediate.
Cell 54, 497–504.

Gao, K., Butler, S. L., and Bush-
man, F. (2001). Human immun-
odeﬁciency virus type 1 integrase:
arrangement of protein domains in
active cDNA complexes. EMBO J. 20,
3565–3576.

Goff, S. P. (2007). Host factors exploited
by retroviruses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
5, 253–263.

Gorjanacz, M., Klerkx, E. P., Galy,
V., Santarella, R., Lopez-Iglesias,
C., Askjaer, P., and Mattaj, I. W.
(2007). Caenorhabditis elegans BAF-
1 and its kinase VRK-1 partici-
pate directly in post-mitotic nuclear
envelope assembly. EMBO J. 26,
132–143.

Greger, J. G., Katz, R. A., Ishov, A. M.,
Maul, G. G., and Skalka, A. M. (2005).
The cellular protein daxx interacts
with avian sarcoma virus integrase
and viral DNA to repress viral tran-
scription. J. Virol. 79, 4610–4618.

The

lentiviral

Engelman, A., and Cherepanov, P.
(2008).
integrase
binding protein LEDGF/p75 and
HIV-1 replication.
PLoS Pathog.
4, e1000046. doi: 10.1371/journal.
ppat.1000046

Guo,

J., Wang, W., Yu, D.,

and
Wu, Y. (2011). Spinoculation triggers
dynamic actin and coﬁlin activity that
facilitates HIV-1 infection of trans-
formed and resting CD4 T cells. J.
Virol. 85, 9824–9833.

Engelman, A., Hickman, A. B., and
Craigie, R. (1994). The core and
the
carboxyl-terminal domains of

Hamamoto, S., Nishitsuji, H., Ama-
gasa, T., Kannagi, M., and Masuda,
T. (2006). Identiﬁcation of a novel

human immunodeﬁciency virus type
1 integrase
interactor, Gemin2,
that facilitates efﬁcient viral cDNA
synthesis
80,
5670–5677.

J. Virol.

in vivo.

Iyengar, S., and Farnham, P. J. (2011).
KAP1 protein: an enigmatic mas-
ter regulator of the genome. J. Biol.
Chem. 286, 26267–26276.

Jacque, J. M., and Stevenson, M. (2006).
The inner-nuclear-envelope protein
emerin regulates HIV-1 infectivity.
Nature 441, 641–645.

Kalpana, G. V., Marmon, S., Wang,
W., Crabtree, G. R., and Goff, S. P.
(1994). Binding and stimulation of
HIV-1 integrase by a human homolog
of yeast transcription factor SNF5.
Science 266, 2002–2006.

Katz, R. A., Merkel, G., Kulkosky, J.,
Leis, J., and Skalka, A. M. (1990). The
avian retroviral IN protein is both
necessary and sufﬁcient for integra-
tive recombination in vitro. Cell 63,
87–95.

Klerkx, E. P., Lazo, P. A., and Askjaer,
P. (2009). Emerging biological func-
tions of the vaccinia-related kinase
(VRK) family. Histol. Histopathol. 24,
749–759.

Krishnan, L., Matreyek, K. A., Oztop,
I., Lee, K., Tipper, C. H., Li, X., Dar,
M. J., Kewalramani, V. N., and Engel-
man, A. (2010). The requirement
for cellular transportin 3 (TNPO3 or
TRN-SR2) during infection maps to
human immunodeﬁciency virus type
1 capsid and not integrase. J. Virol.
84, 397–406.

Lee, M. S., and Craigie, R. (1994).
Protection of retroviral DNA from
autointegration: involvement of a cel-
lular factor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 91, 9823–9827.

Lee, M. S., and Craigie, R. (1998). A
previously unidentiﬁed host protein
protects retroviral DNA from autoin-
tegration. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
95, 1528–1533.

+

Lee, S. P., Xiao, J., Knutson, J. R.,
Lewis, M. S., and Han, M. K. (1997).
promotes the self-association
Zn2
of human immunodeﬁciency virus
type-1 integrase in vitro. Biochem-
istry 36, 173–180.

Lewinski, M. K., and Bushman, F. D.
(2005). Retroviral DNA integration –
mechanism and consequences. Adv.
Genet. 55, 147–181.

Li, L., Olvera,

J. M., Yoder, K. E.,
Mitchell, R. S., Butler, S. L., Lieber,
M., Martin, S. L., and Bushman, F. D.
(2001). Role of the non-homologous
DNA end joining pathway in the early
steps of retroviral infection. EMBO J.
20, 3272–3281.

Lin, C. W., and Engelman, A. (2003).
The barrier-to-autointegration factor

is a component of functional human
immunodeﬁciency
1
preintegration complexes. J. Virol. 77,
5030–5036.

virus

type

Lin, Z., Kong, H., Nei, M., and
Ma, H. (2006). Origins and evolu-
tion of the recA/RAD51 gene family:
evidence for ancient gene duplica-
tion and endosymbiotic gene trans-
fer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103,
10328–10333.

Liu, L., Oliveira, N. M., Cheney, K. M.,
Pade, C., Dreja, H., Bergin, A. M.,
Borgdorff, V., Beach, D. H., Bishop,
C. L., Dittmar, M. T., and McKnight,
A. (2011). A whole genome screen for
HIV restriction factors. Retrovirology
8, 94.

Llano, M., Saenz, D. T., Meehan, A.,
Wongthida, P., Peretz, M., Walker,
W. H., Teo, W., and Poeschla, E.
M. (2006). An essential role for
LEDGF/p75 in HIV integration. Sci-
ence 314, 461–464.

Lu, K. P., and Zhou, X. Z. (2007). The
prolyl isomerase PIN1: a pivotal new
twist in phosphorylation signalling
and disease. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
8, 904–916.

Lutzke, R. A., and Plasterk, R. H.
(1998). Structure-based mutational
analysis of
the C-terminal DNA-
binding domain of human immun-
odeﬁciency virus type 1 integrase:
critical residues for protein oligomer-
ization and DNA binding. J. Virol. 72,
4841–4848.

Manganaro, L., Lusic, M., Gutierrez,
M. I., Cereseto, A., Del Sal, G., and
Giacca, M. (2010). Concerted action
of cellular JNK and Pin1 restricts
HIV-1 genome integration to acti-
T lymphocytes. Nat.
vated CD4
Med. 16, 329–333.

+

Margalit, A., Brachner, A., Gotzmann,
J., Foisner, R., and Gruenbaum, Y.
(2007).
Barrier-to-autointegration
factor – a BAFﬂing little pro-
tein.
17,
202–208.

Trends Cell

Biol.

retroviral

Masuda, T. (2011). Non-enzymatic
functions of
integrase:
the next target for novel anti-HIV
drug development. Front. Micro-
biol. 2:210. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.
00210

Matreyek, K. A.,

(2011). The requirement

and Engelman,
A.
for
nucleoporin NUP153 during human
immunodeﬁciency virus type 1 infec-
tion is determined by the viral capsid.
J. Virol. 85, 7818–7827.

Matsui, T., Leung, D., Miyashita,
H., Maksakova,
I. A., Miyachi,
H., Kimura, H., Tachibana, M.,
Lorincz, M. C., and Shinkai, Y.
(2010). Proviral silencing in embry-
onic stem cells requires the histone

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 11

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 11 — #11

Suzuki et al.

Cellular inhibition of retroviral integration

methyltransferase ESET. Nature 464,
927–931.

Mousnier, A., Kubat, N., Massias-
Simon, A., Segeral, E., Rain, J. C.,
Benarous, R., Emiliani, S., and Darge-
mont, C. (2007). von Hippel Lindau
binding protein 1-mediated degrada-
tion of integrase affects HIV-1 gene
expression at a postintegration step.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104,
13615–13620.

Nichols, R. J., Wiebe, M. S., and Trakt-
man, P. (2006). The vaccinia-related
(cid:2)
termi-
kinases phosphorylate the N
nus of BAF, regulating its interaction
with DNA and its retention in the
nucleus. Mol. Biol. Cell 17, 2451–
2464.

Nishitsuji, H., Hayashi, T., Tkahashi,
T., Miyano, M., Kannagi, M., and
Masuda, T. (2009). Augmentation
of
reverse transcription by inte-
grase through an interaction with
host factor, SIP1/Gemin2 is criti-
cal for HIV-1 infection. PLoS ONE
4, e7825. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0007825

J. R.,

Peng, H., Begg, G. E., Schultz, D.
C., Friedman,
Jensen, D.
E., Speicher, D. W., and Rauscher,
F. J. III. (2000). Reconstitution of
the KRAB-KAP-1 repressor com-
plex: a model system for deﬁning
the molecular anatomy of RING-
B box-coiled-coil domain-mediated
protein-protein interactions. J. Mol.
Biol. 295, 1139–1162.

Pierson, T. C., Zhou, Y., Kieffer, T. L.,
Ruff, C. T., Buck, C., and Siliciano,
R. F. (2002). Molecular characteri-
zation of preintegration latency in
human immunodeﬁciency virus type
1 infection. J. Virol. 76, 8518–8531.

Pope, M., and Haase, A. T. (2003).
Transmission, acute HIV-1 infec-
tion and the quest
for strategies
to prevent infection. Nat. Med. 9,
847–852.

Raman, M., Chen, W., and Cobb, M.
H. (2007). Differential regulation and
properties of MAPKs. Oncogene 26,
3100–3112.

Roth, S. Y., Denu, J. M., and Allis, C.
D. (2001). Histone acetyltransferases.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 70, 81–120.

Rowe, H. M., Jakobsson, J., Mesnard,
D., Rougemont, J., Reynard, S., Aktas,
T., Maillard, P. V., Layard-Liesching,
H., Verp, S., Marquis,
J., Spitz,
F., Constam, D. B., and Trono, D.
(2010). KAP1 controls endogenous
retroviruses in embryonic stem cells.
Nature 463, 237–240.

Sabapathy, K., Hochedlinger, K., Nam,
S. Y., Bauer, A., Karin, M., and
Wagner, E. F. (2004). Distinct roles
for JNK1 and JNK2 in regulating
JNK activity and c-Jun-dependent

cell proliferation. Mol. Cell 15,
713–725.

San Filippo, J., Sung, P., and Klein,
H. (2008). Mechanism of eukaryotic
homologous recombination. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 77, 229–257.

(2004). BAF:

Segura-Totten, M., and Wilson, K.
L.
in chro-
matin, nuclear structure and retro-
virus integration. Trends Cell Biol. 14,
261–266.

roles

Shahbazian, M. D., and Grunstein, M.
(2007). Functions of site-speciﬁc his-
tone acetylation and deacetylation.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 76, 75–100.

Sherman, P. A.,

and Fyfe,

J. A.
(1990). Human immunodeﬁciency
virus integration protein expressed
in Escherichia coli possesses selective
DNA cleaving activity. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 87, 5119–5123.

Shun, M. C., Raghavendra, N. K., Van-
degraaff, N., Daigle, J. E., Hughes,
S., Kellam, P., Cherepanov, P., and
Engelman, A. (2007). LEDGF/p75
functions downstream from prein-
tegration complex formation to
effect gene-speciﬁc HIV-1 integra-
tion. Genes Dev. 21, 1767–1778.

Smith, J. A., and Daniel, R. (2006).
Following the path of
the virus:
the exploitation of host DNA repair
mechanisms by retroviruses. ACS
Chem. Biol. 1, 217–226.

Sorin, M., Cano, J., Das, S., Mathew,
S., Wu, X., Davies, K. P., Shi, X.,
Cheng, S. W., Ott, D., and Kalpana, G.
V. (2009). Recruitment of a SAP18-
HDAC1 complex into HIV-1 virions
and its requirement for viral replica-
tion. PLoS Pathog. 5, e1000463. doi:
10.1371/journal.ppat.1000463

Sterner, D. E.,

and Berger, S. L.
(2000). Acetylation of histones and
transcription-related factors. Micro-
biol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 64, 435–459.

Stevenson, M. (2003). HIV-1 pathogen-

esis. Nat. Med. 9, 853–860.

Stevenson, M.,

Stanwick, T. L.,
Dempsey, M. P., and Lamonica, C.
A. (1990). HIV-1 replication is con-
trolled at the level of T cell activation
and proviral integration. EMBO J. 9,
1551–1560.

Studamire, B., and Goff, S. P. (2010).
Interactions of host proteins with
the murine leukemia virus integrase.
Viruses 2, 1110–1145.

Suzuki, Y., and Craigie, R. (2002).
Regulatory mechanisms by which
barrier-to-autointegration
factor
blocks autointegration and stim-
ulates
integration
of Moloney murine leukemia virus
preintegration complexes.
J. Virol.
76, 12376–12380.

intermolecular

Suzuki, Y., and Craigie, R. (2007). The
road to chromatin – nuclear entry of

retroviruses. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 5,
187–196.

Suzuki, Y., Ogawa, K., Koyanagi, Y.,
and Suzuki, Y. (2010). Functional
disruption of the Moloney murine
leukemia virus preintegration com-
plex by vaccinia-related kinases. J.
Biol. Chem. 285, 24032–24043.

Suzuki, Y., Yang, H., and Craigie, R.
(2004). LAP2α and BAF collabo-
rate to organize the Moloney murine
leukemia virus preintegration com-
plex. EMBO J. 23, 4670–4678.

Terreni, M., Valentini, P., Liverani,
V., Gutierrez, M. I., Di Primio,
C., Di Fenza, A., Tozzini, V.,
Allouch, A., Albanese, A., Giacca,
M., and Cereseto, A. (2010). GCN5-
dependent acetylation of HIV-1 inte-
grase
integration.
Retrovirology 7, 18.

enhances viral

Turlure, F., Devroe, E., Silver, P. A.,
and Engelman, A. (2004). Human cell
proteins and human immunodeﬁ-
ciency virus DNA integration. Front.
Biosci. 9, 3187–3208.

Tyagi, M., and Kashanchi, F. (2012).
New and novel intrinsic host repres-
sive factors against HIV-1: PAF1 com-
plex, HERC5 and others. Retrovirol-
ogy 9, 19.

Van Maele, B., Busschots, K., Vandeker-
ckhove, L., Christ, F., and Debyser, Z.
(2006). Cellular co-factors of HIV-1
integration. Trends Biochem. Sci. 31,
98–105.

Walsh, C. T., Garneau-Tsodikova, S.,
and Gatto, G. J. Jr. (2005). Pro-
tein posttranslational modiﬁcations:
the chemistry of proteome diversiﬁ-
cations. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.
44, 7342–7372.

Wang, T. F., Chen, L. T., and Wang, A.
H. (2008). Right or left turn? RecA
family protein ﬁlaments promote
homologous recombination through
clockwise axial rotation. Bioessays 30,
48–56.

Wang, W., Cote, J., Xue, Y., Zhou,
S., Khavari, P. A., Biggar, S. R.,
Muchardt, C., Kalpana, G. V., Goff,
S. P., Yaniv, M., Workman, J. L.,
and Crabtree, G. R. (1996). Puriﬁ-
cation and biochemical heterogeneity
of the mammalian SWI-SNF com-
plex. EMBO J. 15, 5370–5382.

Weiss, A.,

and Littman, D. R.
(1994). Signal transduction by lym-
phocyte antigen receptors. Cell 76,
263–274.

Wilkinson, T. A., Januszyk, K., Phillips,
M. L., Tekeste, S. S., Zhang, M., Miller,
J. T., Le Grice, S. F., Clubb, R. T.,
and Chow, S. A. (2009). Identify-
ing and characterizing a functional
HIV-1 reverse transcriptase-binding
site on integrase. J. Biol. Chem. 284,
7931–7939.

Woerner, A. M., Klutch, M., Levin,
J. G., and Marcus-Sekura, C.
J.
(1992). Localization of DNA bind-
ing activity of HIV-1 integrase to
the C-terminal half of the protein.
AIDS Res. Hum. Retroviruses 8,
297–304.

Wolf, D., and Goff, S. P. (2007).
TRIM28 mediates primer binding
site-targeted silencing of murine
leukemia virus in embryonic cells.
Cell 131, 46–57.

Wolf, D., and Goff, S. P. (2008). Host
restriction factors blocking retrovi-
ral replication. Annu. Rev. Genet. 42,
143–163.

Wolf, D., and Goff, S. P. (2009). Embry-
onic stem cells use ZFP809 to silence
retroviral DNAs. Nature 458, 1201–
1204.

Wolf, D., Hug, K., and Goff, S. P.
(2008). TRIM28 mediates primer
binding site-targeted silencing of
Lys1,2 tRNA-utilizing retroviruses in
embryonic cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 105, 12521–12526.

Woodward, C. L., Prakobwanakit,
S., Mosessian, S., and Chow, S.
A. (2009). Integrase interacts with
nucleoporin NUP153 to mediate the
nuclear import of human immunod-
eﬁciency virus type 1. J. Virol. 83,
6522–6533.

Yamamoto, S. P., Okawa, K., Nakano,
T., Sano, K., Ogawa, K., Masuda,
T., Morikawa, Y., Koyanagi, Y., and
Suzuki, Y. (2011). Huwe1, a novel cel-
lular interactor of Gag-Pol through
integrase binding, negatively inﬂu-
ences HIV-1 infectivity. Microbes
Infect. 13, 339–349.

Yoder, K., Sarasin, A., Kraemer, K., McIl-
hatton, M., Bushman, F., and Fishel,
R. (2006). The DNA repair genes XPB
and XPD defend cells from retroviral
infection. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
103, 4622–4627.

Yung, E., Sorin, M., Pal, A., Craig, E.,
Morozov, A., Delattre, O., Kappes, J.,
Ott, D., and Kalpana, G. V. (2001).
Inhibition of HIV-1 virion produc-
tion by a transdominant mutant of
integrase interactor 1. Nat. Med. 7,
920–926.

Yung, E., Sorin, M., Wang, E. J., Peru-
mal, S., Ott, D., and Kalpana, G.
V. (2004). Speciﬁcity of interaction
of INI1/hSNF5 with retroviral inte-
grases and its functional signiﬁcance.
J. Virol. 78, 2222–2231.

Zaitseva, L., Cherepanov, P., Leyens,
L., Wilson, S. J., Rasaiyaah, J., and
Fassati, A. (2009). HIV-1 exploits
importin 7 to maximize nuclear
import of its DNA genome. Retrovi-
rology 6, 11.

Zheng, R., Jenkins, T. M., and Craigie,
R. (1996). Zinc folds the N-terminal

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 12

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 12 — #12

Suzuki et al.

Cellular inhibition of retroviral integration

domain of HIV-1 integrase, promotes
multimerization, and enhances cat-
alytic activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 93, 13659–13664.

Conflict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any

commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 13 April 2012; paper pend-
ing published: 08 May 2012; accepted:
02 June 2012; published online: 22 June
2012.

Citation: Suzuki Y, Chew ML and Suzuki
Y (2012) Role of host-encoded pro-
teins in restriction of retroviral
inte-
gration. Front. Microbio. 3:227. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00227
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Virology, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.

Copyright  2012 Suzuki, Chew and
Suzuki. This is an open-access arti-
cle distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 227 | 13

“fmicb-03-00227” — 2012/6/20 — 18:03 — page 13 — #13

