REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 09 March 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00086

Invasion of Nostocales (cyanobacteria) to subtropical and
temperate freshwater lakes – physiological, regional, and
global driving forces

Assaf Sukenik 1*, Ora Hadas 1, Aaron Kaplan2 and Antonio Quesada3

1 The Yigal Allon Kinneret Limnological Laboratory, Israel Oceanographic and Limnological Research, Migdal, Israel
2 Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel
3 Departamento de Biología, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain

Edited by:
Anton F. Post, H. Steinitz Marine
Biology Laboratory, USA
Reviewed by:
Robert M. McKay, Bowling Green
State University, USA
Rachael Marie Morgan-Kiss, Miami
University, USA
*Correspondence:
Assaf Sukenik, The Yigal Allon
Kinneret Limnological Laboratory,
Israel Oceanographic and
Limnological Research, P.O. Box 447,
Migdal 14950, Israel.
e-mail: assaf@ocean.org.il

Similar to the increased number of studies on invasive plants and animals in terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems, many reports were recently published on the invasion of Nostocales
(cyanobacteria) to freshwater environments worldwide. Invasion and proliferation of Nos-
tocales in new habitats have the potential to signiﬁcantly alter the structure of the native
community and to modify ecosystem functioning. But most importantly, they inﬂuence
the water quality due to a variety of toxic compounds that some species produce. There-
fore a special attention was given to the invasion and persistence of toxic cyanobacteria
in many aquatic ecosystems. Here we summarize the currently published records on the
invasion of two Nostocales genera, Cylindrospermopsis and Aphanizomenon, to lakes and
water reservoirs in subtropical and temperate zones.These invading species possess traits
thought to be common to many invasive organisms: high growth rate, high resource uti-
lization efﬁciency and overall superior competitive abilities over native species when local
conditions vary. Assuming that dispersion routes of cyanobacteria have not been changed
much in recent decades, their recent establishment and proliferation in new habitats indi-
cate changes in the environment under which they can exploit their physiological advantage
over the native phytoplankton population. In many cases, global warming was identiﬁed
as the major driving force for the invasion of Nostocales. Due to this uncontrollable trend,
invasive Nostocales species are expected to maintain their presence in new habitats and
further expand to new environments. In other cases, regional changes in nutrient loads
and in biotic conditions were attributed to the invasion events.

Keywords: cyanobacteria, Nostocales, Cylindrospermopsis, Aphanizomenon, invasive species, climate change,
eutrophication

INTRODUCTION
The entry, establishment, and spread of non – native species to
a new ecosystem, is frequently described as biological invasion
(Vitousek et al., 1997; Ricciardi and Cohen, 2007). In many cases,
biological invasions are caused by human – induced environmen-
tal interference and have substantial economic impact, serious eco-
logical consequences, and human health hazards (Pimentel et al.,
2001). They also may threaten global biodiversity by altering the
structure and function of ecosystems and disrupting key biological
interactions (Levine et al., 2003; Traveset and Richardson, 2006).
The invasion of freshwater and marine ecosystems by non-native
species of various taxonomic groups, mostly crustaceans, mussels,
ﬁsh, and aquatic macrophytes is well documented (Meinesz et al.,
2001; Richardson, 2011). The invasion of free-living microorgan-
isms to new aquatic habitats is rather cryptic and difﬁcult to detect
therefore invasions of these “invisible invaders” have been rarely
reported (Litchman, 2010). Furthermore, information on prior
and current composition of the microbial communities, which is
required to determine if a given microorganism is an invader, is
often missing. Algae and cyanobacteria are exceptions in that sense

as they have visible characteristic of spectral signature and micro-
scopic morphological features. This property partly contributed
to the increased number of reports on cyanobacteria invasion to
lakes and water reservoirs across Europe, North, and South Amer-
ica and the Middle East that were recently published (Dyble et al.,
2002; Wiedner et al., 2007; Hadas et al., submitted).

Here we summarize recently published records on the inva-
sion of cyanobacteria to subtropical and temperate lakes and
water reservoirs and try to forecast different scenarios of ecolog-
ical and management consequences. The invasion of two Nos-
tocales genera, Cylindrospermopsis and Aphanizomenon is pre-
sented and analyzed based on the main concepts of invasion
ecology. The following issues are critically addressed: recent vari-
ations in geographic distribution of invasive Nostocales; How
does a Nostocales species become an invader? What are the spe-
cial traits of the invading Nostocales? What are the level and the
role of genetic variability in the invasion of Nostocales? Is inva-
sion of Nostocales to new location further expected and under
what conditions? What are the expected ecological effects of the
invasion?

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 86 | 1

Sukenik et al.

Invasion of Nostocales

THE CONCEPT OF INVADING CYANOBACTERIA
Biological invasion is considered as an extension of normal col-
onization processes such as succession (Elton, 1958) therefore it
was proposed that the term “invasive species” will be restricted to
describe non-native species that expanded their geographic range,
became abundant and have environmental and economic impact
(Colautti and Macisaac, 2004). Because the terminology associated
with biological invasion is rather confusing and sometimes mis-
leading (Colautti and Macisaac, 2004), here we deﬁne an invading
or a non-native species as a species that spreads beyond its native
range or a species that enters a habitat where it had not resided
before. However, it should be kept in mind that many cyanobac-
teria species (as well as other microorganisms) can inhabit an
aquatic ecosystem unnoticed, since it may remain at a rather low
biomass concentration and it does not form a conspicuous frac-
tion of the community. Furthermore, the lack of detailed water
quality monitoring program or an insufﬁciently comprehensive
surveillance do not pick up the presence of these species (Kling
et al., 2011). Typically it is only when a non-native population
is widespread and abundant, and causes ecological or economic
harms, that it is named “invasive.” It is possible for a species to be
invasive in one ecosystem, but non-invasive in another. This can be
due to a variety of factors, such as the presence of less-than-ideal
habitat conditions (Lockwood et al., 2007). We further suggest
evaluating the invasion of free-living microorganisms within an
appropriate timeframe, since an invader may become a common
resident of a dynamically changing environment. Therefore native
and non-native species may be viewed as part of a continuum with
respect to their time of residency and the extent of evolutionary
and ecological interactions they have within a given environment.

THE GLOBAL EXPANSION OF NOSTOCALES
During the last decades, the number of reports on cyanobacterial
domination and persistence in freshwater and marine ecosystems

signiﬁcantly increased covering spatial and temporal distribution
of persistent perennial blooms. Many of these bloom events are of
toxic Microcystis species and strains that proliferate under current
environmental alterations, including nutrient enrichment, global
warming, and regional hydrologic changes (Paerl and Paul, 2011).
However, not all blooms are associated with an invasion process
as many species are of broad geographic distribution and rapidly
respond to current environmental changes.

The most important freshwater invasive Nostocales are the
tropical species C. raciborskii and to a lesser extent also Aph.
ovalisporum. The map in Figure 1 shows the current global dis-
tribution of C. raciborskii and Aph. ovalisporum in their native
tropical region and in subtropical and temperate areas to which
they expanded in the last two decades. C. raciborskii is a tropi-
cal species which was ﬁrst described from Indonesia (Java) and
was subsequently discovered in India and Thailand, Japan, the
Philippines, Egypt, Senegal, Brazil, Cuba, Chile, Uruguay, Aus-
tralia, New Zealand, and Florida (Bouvy et al., 2000; Molica et al.,
2002; Dobberfuhl, 2003; Komárek and Komárkova, 2003; Wood
and Stirling, 2003; Briand et al., 2004; Chonudomkul et al., 2004;
Vidal and Kruk, 2008). Recently Kaštovský et al. (2011) summa-
rized the invasion of freshwater cyanobacteria and algae to aquatic
ecosystems in the Czech Republic and portrayed the invasion of C.
raciborskii from its native tropical area to subtropical and temper-
ate zones. The expansion of C. raciborskii and Aph. ovalisporum to
new geographic regions is described below.

CENTRAL EUROPE (GERMANY, FRANCE) AND THE IBERIAN PENINSULA
The invasion of cyanobacteria strains in Central Europe as high
biomass of the typically tropical species C. raciborskii was ﬁrst
reported in the 1970s (Romo and Miracle, 1994; Padisák, 1997).
Long term phytoplankton records in some European lakes demon-
strate a clear increase of some cyanobacterial species that had
been absent or overlooked before (Padisák, 1997). Although C.

FIGURE 1 | The expansion of the Nostocales Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (triangles) and Aphanizomenon ovalisporum (squares) to temperate and
subtropical regions shown in a world climate zones map. (Map source: http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/place/mapCollection/Climate_Zone).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 86 | 2

Sukenik et al.

Invasion of Nostocales

raciborskii was known in Europe since the 1930s, it was marginal
to the southern European countries (e.g., Greece; see references in
Mehnert et al., 2010). However, in the last two decades, this species
has appeared in northern European regions and is currently wide-
spread at central latitudes (Kokoci ´nski et al., 2009). Other Nos-
tocales such as Aph. aphanizomenoides (currently designated as
Sphaerospermum) and Aph. ovalisporum, are also considered inva-
sive species in Europe and have been reported at some locations
as newcomers. Aph. ovalisporum is especially relevant because it
is known to produce cylindrospermopsin, although several non-
toxic strains were reported (Ballot et al., 2011). Aph. ovalisporum
was described in different ecosystems of southern Europe (Bazz-
ichelli and Abdelahad, 1994) and in the Iberian Peninsula where
it produced massive blooms for the ﬁrst time in 2005 (Quesada
et al., 2006). Later, it has been found at least in seven water bodies
in central Spain (Cirés, 2012) and in several water bodies in the
southern areas of the country (C. de Hoyos, Personal Communica-
tion). Aph. ovalisporum has been found in the Iberian Peninsula,
both in deep stratiﬁed reservoirs and in very shallow (less than
1 m) ponds of urban gardens. The spread of Aph. ovalisporum
throughout the peninsula is considered invasion since a solid ref-
erence for its presence and bloom prior to the current reports is
missing.

While ﬁeld studies on the adaptation of the European species
and their invasive potential are very scarce, laboratory studies with
isolated strains have demonstrated that some invasive species have
strong competitive abilities under changing scenarios. Mehnert
et al. (2010) compared several “native” strains with “invasive”
species and found that under low temperature, native species
showed a higher growth rate than the invasive ones. However,
under higher temperatures, the trend was the opposite and inva-
sive strains performed better. Using these data, the authors, in
a modeling effort, demonstrated that under a scenario of cli-
mate change with an increase of 4˚C in the water temperature,
the invasive species C. raciborskii would outcompete the native
species (Aph. gracile) and that the potentially invasive Aph. oval-
isporum would be an important component in the community
(Mehnert et al., 2010). Although akinete production and over-
wintering/seeding play an important role in the life cycle of
Nostocales, it is not necessarily the only mechanism for seeding;
for example Aphanizomenon can seed from vegetative cells and
ﬁlaments overwintering under ice (Grossart HP, personal commu-
nication). Temperature-dependent release of cylindrospermopsin
was reported for Aph. ovalisporum, implicating management com-
plications associated with global change scenarios (Cirés et al.,
2011).

MIDDLE EAST
An exceptional bloom of Aph. ovalisporum ﬁrst appeared in Lake
Kinneret (Sea of Galilee), Israel in July 1994 and dominated the
summer phytoplankton population for a few weeks (Pollingher
et al., 1998). This toxic species (a producer of cylindrospermopsin)
remained a regular member of the summer phytoplankton com-
munity since then and variably contributes between 10 and 40% to
the summer phytoplankton biomass (Zohary, 2004). The reason
for Aph. ovalisporum’s ﬁrst appearance and its later establishment
in Lake Kinneret was a subject for debate (Berman, 1997, 2001;

Berman and Shteinman, 1998; Gophen et al., 1999) but it is clear
now that this species took advantage of a new set of conditions
that were imposed by global and regional changes (Hadas et al.,
submitted). The origin of the Aph. ovalisporum strain that estab-
lished in Lake Kinneret remained unclear. A long and detailed
record of the phytoplankton population in Lake Kinneret (since
1964) clearly shows its absence, although its presence at a level
which is below the detection limit cannot be excluded. Interest-
ingly, the Aph. ovalisporum strain isolated from Lake Kinneret was
genotypically related to strains of Anabaena bergii isolated from
constructed man-made lakes in Queensland, Australia (Shaw et al.,
1999). Nevertheless, Anabaena bergii was not reported to bloom
in the lake. The invasion process was repeated once again in Lake
Kinneret as C. rasiborskii was ﬁrst reported in 2000 as a minor
component of the summer phytoplankton community but dom-
inated the community in summer 2005 with biomass as high as
−2 (Hadas et al., submitted). Again, it is rather dif-
68 g (ww) m
ﬁcult to trace the origin of Lake Kinneret C. raciborskii but the
fact that it is a non-cylindrospermopsin producing strain sug-
gests that it may be related to European strains. These isolates do
not produce cylindrospermopsin as opposed to Australian strains
known to produce cylindrospermopsin and to Brazilian strains
that have been reported to produce paralytic shellﬁsh poisoning
toxins (Neilan et al., 2003).

Other reports on Nostocales species in the Middle East include
the Caspian Sea and Egypt. C. raciborskii was reported as a dom-
inant phytoplankton species in the open and freshwater basin in
the west part of the Anzali Lagoon (Caspian Sea, Iran). It was also
dominant for short periods after ﬂooding events in rivers ﬂow-
ing into the lagoon (Ramezanpoor, 2004). Toxic C. raciborskii and
Raphidiopsis mediterranea were reported in an Egyptian shallow
(4 m depth) freshwater El-Dowyrat ﬁsh pond for the ﬁrst time in
2002. Human activities at the end of 2001, including removal of
trees and elimination of macrophytes around the ﬁsh pond have
led to an increase in temperature at the surface waters of the pond
(25–30˚C). Both species showed seasonal variations with highest
densities recorded in August each year (Mohamed, 2007). The loss
of macrophytes was reported as one of the variables promoting
the proliferation of C. raciborskii also in New Zealand lakes (Ryan
et al., 2003). Thus local maintenance activities may be involved in
an increase in temperature of the water column of temperate lakes
and expand the distribution of C. raciborskii (Briand et al., 2004).

NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA
The record of C. raciboskii-like Nostocales in North America goes
back to 1955 when Anabaenopsis seriata Prescott, was reported
from Kansas. Other reports of morphologically similar species
originated from Minneapolis and Lake Erie (Kling, 2009). It was
only in the 1990s when C. raciborskii was identiﬁed in many Florida
lakes and rivers (Chapman and Schelske, 1997). Since then, C.
raciborskii has been found in many water bodies of the central
and eastern United States (Kling, 2009) including in many lakes
and reservoirs in Indiana (Jones and Sauter, 2005). These sites
tended to be shallow and turbid with high epilimnetic phosphorus
and high chlorophyll a values (Jones and Sauter, 2005). In 2004,
C. raciborskii was identiﬁed in water samples from the Assini-
boine River, Manitoba Canada. Variable morphological features

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 86 | 3

Sukenik et al.

Invasion of Nostocales

were reported in accordance with earlier reports from Europe, and
predictions based on the adaptability of that species to eutrophic
conditions, elevated temperatures and turbid waters suggested its
expansion in Lake Winnipeg and replacing the original phyto-
plankton assemblage (Leavitt et al., 2006; Patoine et al., 2006).
Indeed summer blooms development and phytoplankton succes-
sion was recently reported. Lake Winnipeg shows reduced taxo-
nomic diversity and an increased predominance of nitrogen-ﬁxing
cyanobacteria (Kling et al., 2011).

In South America C. raciborskii is well known in tropical waters
of Brazil (Huszar et al., 2000), although the information about
its distribution in southern latitudes is disperse and incomplete
(Komárek, 2002). Vidal and Kruk (2008) analyzed spatial distrib-
ution and relative frequency of C. raciborskii in southern Uruguay,
probably its southernmost distribution. C. raciborskii was found
in several polymictic shallow eutrophic lakes as a dominant sum-
mer population and variable morphology. It was suggested higher
occurrence of C. raciborskii in that climatic zone was associ-
ated with shallow, well-mixed eutrophic systems. Furthermore,
morphological variations in C. raciborskii were not associated
with latitudinal, continental, or even country distribution and
independent of climatic origin.

THE INVASION PROCESS
Successful biological
invasions involve complex interactions
between the invading species and the physical and biological char-
acteristics of the recipient environment. Often, invasive cyanobac-
teria species owe their success in colonizing new ecosystems to
unique physiological characteristics (Figure 2). The invasion may
be initiated with dispersion to new zones and is facilitated by

FIGURE 2 | Traits and process that support the invasiveness of
cyanobacteria according to its three major components: dispersion,
establishment, and ecological impact. References (1) Neilan et al., 2003;
(2) Kaplan-Levy et al., 2010; (3) Wiedner et al., 2007; (4) Suikkanen et al.,
2010; (5) Rücker et al., 2009;(6) Padisák, 1997; (7) Isvánovics et al., 2000; (8)
Posselt et al., 2009; (9) Hadas et al., submitted; (10) Bar-Yosef et al., 2010;
(11) Briand et al., 2004.

human activities by migrating animals or birds or by winds. Obvi-
ously, aeolian transport is an efﬁcient means to transfer free-living
microorganisms, prokaryotes, and protists (Smith et al., 2011).
But reaching a new environment is not sufﬁcient and the invader
needs a variety of traits that support its establishment and prolif-
eration. Two distinctive traits of Nostocalesa are: (1) The ability to
form dormant cells (akinetes) that may survive long and extreme
dispersion routes, on one hand and serve as overwintering form
that survive unfavorable conditions and assure perennial germi-
nation and proliferation, on the other hand. (2) The ability to
ﬁx atmospheric nitrogen in the absence of combined inorganic
sources. This last trait opens invasion opportunities for Nostocales
in oligotrophic aquatic ecosystems, besides ecosystems temporar-
ily limited in combined nitrogen and extends the spectrum of
ecosystems to which they can invade.

Invasive cyanobacteria have growth rates that are relatively high
compared with those of native species (Isvánovics et al., 2000).
They may have high resource use efﬁciency or possess traits allow-
ing them to gain access to resources unavailable to other species,
such as the capacity to ﬁx molecular nitrogen. C. raciborskii has
high competitiveness under ﬂuctuating nitrogen availability due
to efﬁcient uptake capacity for ammonium (Figueredo et al., 2007)
and it also can ﬁx atmospheric nitrogen, which allows it to escape
N limitation (Briand et al., 2004; Moisander et al., 2011). This
species may also utilize other limiting resources, such as phospho-
rus, more efﬁciently than other cyanobacteria due to high afﬁnity
and P storage capacity (Isvánovics et al., 2000; Wu et al., 2011) and,
thus, be a superior nutrient competitor. Padisák (1997) suggested
that C. raciborskii, tends to invade lakes with very high nutrient
concentrations and low phytoplankton diversity, in addition to its
ability to form akinetes allowing easy dispersal and environmental
resistance. An important feature of Cylindrospermopsis is its wide
thermal tolerance (Briand et al., 2004), which is essential to main-
tain the populations during cold winters. Detailed information on
the effect of temperature on Nostocales life cycle processes such as
akinete formation, their survival and germination, and the recruit-
ment of vegetative ﬁlaments is currently scarce, but Cirés (2012)
indicated that akinetes production of Aph. ovalisporum is rather
restricted to a relative narrow temperature range. Padisák (1997)
reported that akinetes of C. raciborskii germinate at temperatures
<24˚C. Further elucidation of life cycle processes responding to
temperature is required in order to determine the invasiveness
capabilities and limitations of various Nostocales species.

In many cases, ﬂoating Nostocales populations create a thick
scum that blocks light penetration through the water column and
inhibits the growth of other species, thus under high cyanobacte-
rial growth, the populations remain established for longer periods
minimizing competition by other algal groups. A scum formation
is a dynamic process that depends on a delicate balance between
ﬂotation, cellular ballast and water turbulence (Calandrino and
Paerl, 2011). Filaments ﬂoating at the water surface gain advan-
tage over sub-surface phytoplankton populations. They directly
intercept CO2 diffusing into the water from the atmosphere,
thus minimizing inorganic carbon limitation of photosynthetic
growth. Buoyant species contain UV-absorbing compounds such
as mycosporine-like amino acids (MAAs) and scytonemin that
ensure survival under extremely high irradiance conditions (Paerl

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 86 | 4

Sukenik et al.

Invasion of Nostocales

and Paul, 2011). However, in some occasions scum formation
represents a trap for the organisms that lose their dynamic buoy-
ancy behavior and they are exposed to full sunshine (including
high UV radiation in summer), as well as to nutrient deprivation.
Frequently they die and remain on the water body shores with
extremely low metabolic activities (i.e., C and N uptake, Oliver
and Ganf, 2000 and references therein).

Another trait commonly found among Nostocales but also in
other cyanobacteria (i.e., Microcystis) is the ability to synthesize
a suite of secondary metabolites some of which were identiﬁed
toxic to humans and animals (Stewart et al., 2011) and others may
affect community structure functioning as allelo-chemicals that
inhibit other phytoplankton species or deter and reduce grazing
(Fastner et al., 2007; Paerl et al., 2011). Allelopathy was sug-
gested as a beneﬁcial trait of C. raciborskii that contributes to
its stable dominance and geographic expansion (Figueredo et al.,
2007) but also for other cyanobacteria species (Kaplan et al., in
review). A unique feature of Aph. ovalisporum to acquire phos-
phate under oligotrophic conditions was recently reported by Bar-
Yosef et al. (2010). Excreted chemicals including the toxin cylin-
drospermopsin cause cells of some other phytoplankton species
to make extracellular alkaline phosphatase whose inorganic phos-
phate product can be used by Aph. ovalisporum due to its high
afﬁnity to phosphate, thus contributing to its proliferation and
domination. Aph. ovalisporum has been also found to outcompete
other cyanobacteria at high temperatures due to higher growth
rates than other Nostocales under these circumstances (Mehnert
et al., 2010; Cirés et al., 2011).

In an attempt to follow the invasion route of C. raciborskii
to new ecosystems Neilan et al. (2003) studied genetic varia-
tions between strains isolated from freshwater rivers and reser-
voirs in Australia, Brazil, Germany, Hungary, Portugal, and the
USA by characterizing their 16S rRNA gene nucleotide sequences
and by analyzing cyanobacterium-speciﬁc short tandem repeat
sequence (HIP1). Three distinct groups of C. raciborskii strains
were clustered: (1) a group consisting of strains from the USA
and Brazil; (2) a group comprised of European strains (Germany,
Hungary, and Portugal); (3) a group of strains from Australia.
A subsequent study that examined other isolates of C. raci-
borskii revealed the same continental cluster distribution based
on the 16S–23S internally transcribed spacer (ITS1) sequences
(Gugger et al., 2005). This study suggests that the current expan-
sion of C. raciborskii in Europe and in Central – and North
America did not result from recent invasion and colonization
by African or Australian strains (Padisák, 1997) but rather repre-
sent local strains that maintained “cryptic” populations over time
and only recently proliferated due to climate change and varia-
tions in other environmental conditions. In a recent study, Piccini
et al. (2011) proposed that phenotypic and genetic variability
of C. raciborskii populations is linked to the existence of differ-
ent ecotypes whose success is subject to the local environmental
conditions.

Nevertheless, analysis of

the 16S rRNA gene nucleotide
sequences revealed 99.1% similarity between the strains of C. raci-
borskii collected from a range of global locations and continental
clustering was not supported by statistically signiﬁcant bootstrap
values (Neilan et al., 2003). Therefore it cannot be excluded that C.

raciborskii was transferred from the Australasian region to Europe
unintentionally by humans or by migrating birds, thus provid-
ing the source of this cyanobacterium which is now reported in
many previously unaffected temperate and subtropical water bod-
ies. It is further speculated that some physiological characteristics
unique to C. raciborskii support its proliferation in newly invaded
ecosystems as they are currently exposed to higher temperature
and environmental perturbations.

GLOBAL VERSUS REGIONAL DRIVING FORCES
In order to exploit its wide spectrum of physiological traits and
to successfully outcompete native species, the conditions in a new
habitat have to ﬁt the invader’s needs. Increased water tempera-
tures, mostly during the summer, in subtropical, and temperate
zones, is considered one of the major factors supported the inva-
sion of C. raciborskii and other Nostocales (Figure 2). (Padisák,
1997; Briand et al., 2004; Rücker et al., 2009). Both C. raciborskii
and Aph. ovalisporum are known to proliferate at temperatures
higher than 20˚C (Hadas et al., 1999, 2002; Mehnert et al., 2010),
thus moderate elevation in water temperatures may open new
ecological habitats for them. The persistence of Nostocales in their
new locations is further maintained by their ability to form dor-
mant cells, akinetes, which stay dormant but viable in the sediment
for extended periods of time (Hense and Beckmann, 2006; Kaplan-
Levy et al., 2010). This seed bank may reside in the sediment
and wait for a warm summer to germinate. Consequently, bloom
events may follow local climatic patterns. It is important to note
that freshly settled akinetes are more likely to germinate during
the next summer relative to those settled in earlier blooms as the
latter are already covered deeper in the sediments and probably
have lower germination potency.

Nostocales species are recently reported to reside in, and dom-
inate eutrophic as well as oligotrophic aquatic systems (Figure 3).
Eutrophic conditions provide ample nutrients that can be easily
and competitively utilized by opportunistic invaders (Piehler et al.,
2009). Such eutrophic systems maintain high internal nutrient
recycling processes that fortify primary production and biomass
accumulation. Although N2 ﬁxation is commonly recorded during
Nostocales blooms in eutrophic aquatic systems (mainly indicated
by the presence of heterocysts, specialized cells formed under N
limiting conditions), this process is responsible for up to 2% of N
acquisition by the phytoplankton community (Ferber et al., 2004;
Ariosa et al., 2006). The ability of many Nostocales to efﬁciently
use low light, allows their growth in turbid waters as well as at high
biomass concentrations.

Regional inappropriate management of watersheds and high
pollution impact induce eutrophication, and are certainly involved
in the Nostocales geographic expansion. But these invading species
can survive and propagate also under oligotrophic conditions
(Figure 3). This is achieved due to their various efﬁcient phos-
phate acquisition capabilities (Isvánovics et al., 2000; Spr˝ober
et al., 2003; Posselt et al., 2009; Bar-Yosef et al., 2010) and nitro-
gen ﬁxation which seems to be more relevant under oligotrophic
than under eutrophic conditions. Thus, in oligotrophic systems,
nitrogen cannot be considered as a limiting factor. Phosphate
availability controls the development of the N2 ﬁxing popula-
tion and its growth. Consequently, management efforts to control

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 86 | 5

Sukenik et al.

Invasion of Nostocales

FIGURE 3 | Schematic presentation illustrating the proliferation and
bloom potential of invasive Nostocales in eutrophic and oligotrophic
lakes. Higher water temperatures open new habitats in which many
Nostocales species can proliferate, taking advantage of their efﬁcient
physiological process. In eutrophic waters, a massive bloom and scum
production is expected (depicted by a dense green patch) due to high external
nutrient load and intense internal nutrient recycling (wide arrows). In
oligotrophic waters a moderate bloom is likely to occur based on heterocysts

formation and N2 ﬁxation and is controlled by restricted external and internal P
load (narrow arrows). Dormant cells, akinetes, are formed in both cases (more
akinetes are expected in eutrophic systems due to high biomass content) and
provide the basis for perennial blooms. Note that nutrient recycling from
bottom sediments occur in both systems but is more essential source for N
and P in oligotrophic system. Nitrogen ﬁxation is also evident in eutrophic
systems only when the ample inorganic N provided by external and internal
sources is exhausted.

eutrophication by reducing N loads, apparently effective in reduc-
ing blooms of Microcystis and other Chroococcales species, may
actually support the growth of Nostocales which easily outcom-
pete native species in such N limited ecosystems (Schindler et al.,
2008).

CONSEQUENCES OF NOSTOCALES INVASIONS
The immediate consequence of Nostocales invasion, besides the
ecological impairment, is the expansion of toxic blooms as vari-
ous strains produce harmful substances. Many Aph. ovalisporum
and C. raciborskii strains produce the cytotoxic compound cylin-
drospermopsin whereas several Brazilian C. raciborskii strains
have been reported to produce paralytic shellﬁsh poisoning tox-
ins: neosaxitoxin, saxitoxin, and gonyautoxins (Lagos et al., 1999).
Interestingly, many strains isolated from temperate lakes in Europe
and Northern America did not produce any known toxin, although
they were found toxic in various bioassay experiments (Saker
et al., 2004). Recent studies indicated that a given population
may be composed of toxic and non-toxic strains (Ballot et al.,
2011). The bloom of toxic Nostocales presents an immediate
threat to human and animals that use the water for drinking,
bathing and recreational activities (Carmichael, 2001). Local and
governmental authorities are requested to provide solutions to
minimize and control the bloom events by taking scientiﬁcally
based management measures that should include consideration
of the invasiveness of this cyanobacterial group under a sce-
nario of global change (Jones and Sauter, 2005; Schindler et al.,
2008).

The domination of recently invaded Nostocales affects the
entire ecosystem as native phytoplankton species become rare
and displaced and higher trophic levels may be affected via their
toxins or due to loss of essential components of their food
chain. C. raciborskii is known to affect the growth, reproduc-
tion and feeding of zooplankton (Leonard and Paerl, 2005) and
cylindrospermopsin was shown to be accumulated in ﬁsh and

in freshwater mussels (Saker and Eaglesham, 1999; Saker et al.,
2004).

PROSPECTIVE AND PREDICTIONS
The current trend of increasing bloom events of cyanobacteria,
including Nostocales, will probably be further enhanced as global
warming continues. Any further temperature increase would pro-
mote the growth and development of Nostocales species in general,
and that of the invasive species in particular, and would enable
further expansion in the temperate zone (Mehnert et al., 2010).
This trend was further conﬁrmed by a coupled biological–physical
model that predicted that high temperatures favor cyanobacteria
over other phytoplankton taxa through increased growth rates that
boost the development of blooms (Juehnk et al., 2011). A similar
conclusion was reached by Wiedner et al. (2007) who evaluated a
case of an earlier rise in water temperature associated with climate
change. They suggested that such a scenario will prompt further
spread of C. raciborskii to the temperate zone as earlier warming
permits earlier germination, thereby shifting the pelagic popula-
tions to conditions which advance population establishment and
growth. However, these models do not consider the ecological
variations expected after this earlier germination, as different graz-
ing pressure due to different grazer population (e.g., Winder and
Schindler, 2004) or nutrient depletion that may follow an early
bloom. These ecological variations are hard to predict and should
be further investigated to improve models prediction.

While the possibilities to control and reduce the current trend
of global climate change are rather limited, the management
of eutrophication processes is feasible. Since a synergistic effect
of nutrients and climate was frequently indicated in many sites
invaded by Nostocales, it is important that nutrient concentrations
in many temperate and subtropical lakes be reduced substantially
from present values if cyanobacterial dominance is to be controlled
(Kosten et al., 2012). Based on long term experimental manipula-
tion, Schindler et al. (2008) concluded that N-ﬁxing cyanobacteria

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 86 | 6

Sukenik et al.

Invasion of Nostocales

cannot be limited by a shortage of dissolved N and instead are
competitively favored. Thus reducing N inputs could actually
intensify the dominance of N-ﬁxing cyanobacteria thus enhancing
the expansion of invasive Nostocales. The alternative approach to
control and reduce blooms of invasive Nostocales species and their
further expansion is to control and reduce external and internal
sources of phosphorus, a complex task by itself.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partly supported by the German Ministry of
Research and Technology (BMBF) and Israel Ministry of Science
and Technology (MOST) under contracts FKZ 02WT0985 and
WR803. Assaf Sukenik and Ora Hadas acknowledge the continu-
ous support of the Israel Water Authority provided to the Kinneret
Limnological Laboratory, IOLR.

REFERENCES
Ariosa, Y., Carrasco, D., Quesada, A.,
and Eduardo, F.-V. (2006). Incorpo-
ration of different N sources and
light response curves of nitrogenase
and photosynthesis by cyanobacter-
ial blooms from rice ﬁelds. Microb.
Ecol. 51, 394–403.
Ballot, A., Ramm,

J., Rundberget,
T., Kaplan-Levy, R. N., Hadas,
O., Sukenik, A.,
and Wiedner,
C.
(2011). Occurrence of non-
cylindrospermopsin-producing
Aphanizomenon ovalisporum and
Anabaena bergii
in Lake Kin-
neret (Israel). J. Plankton Res. 33,
1736–1746.

Bar-Yosef, Y., Sukenik, A., Hadas, O.,
Viner-Mozzini, Y., and Kaplan, A.
(2010). Enslavement in the water
body by toxic Aphanizomenon oval-
isporum,
inducing alkaline phos-
phatase in phytoplanktons. Curr.
Biol. 20, 1557–1561.

Caractérisation

Bazzichelli, G., and Abdelahad, N.
(1994).
mor-
phométrique et statistique de deux
populations d’Aphanizomenon du
groupe Aphanizomenon ovalisporum
Forti des lacs de Nemi et Albano
(Italie). Algological Studies/Archiv
für Hydrobiologie 73(Suppl.), 1–21.
Berman, T. (1997). Dissolved organic
nitrogen utilization by an Aphani-
zomenon bloom in Lake Kinneret. J.
Plankton Res. 19, 577–586.
(2001). The

Berman, T.

role of
DON and the effect of N:P ratios
on occurrence of cyanobacterial
blooms: implications from the out-
growth of Aphanizomenon in Lake
Kinneret. Limnol. Oceanogr. 46,
443–447.

Berman, T., and Shteinman, B. (1998).
Phytoplankton development and
turbulent mixing in Lake Kinneret
(1992–1996). J. Plankton Res. 20,
709–726.

Bouvy, M., Falcão, D., Marinho, M.,
Pagano, M., and Moura, A. (2000).
Occurrence of Cylindrospermopsis
(Cyanobacteria)
in 39 Brazilian
tropical reservoirs during the 1998
drought. Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 23,
13–27.

Briand, J.-F., Leboulanger, C., Humbert,
J.-F., Bernard, C., and Dufour,
P.
Cylindrospermopsis

(2004).

raciborskii (cyanobacteria) invasion
at mid-latitudes:
selection, wide
physiological
tolerance, or global
warming? J. Phycol. 40, 231–238.

for the proliferation of

Calandrino, E. S., and Paerl, H. W.
(2011). Determining the poten-
tial
the
harmful cyanobacterium Cylindros-
permopsis raciborskii
in Currituck
Sound, North Carolina. Harmful
Algae 11, 1–9.

of

Carmichael, W. W.

(2001). Health
toxin-producing
effects
cyanobacteria: “the CyanoHABs.”
Hum. Ecol. Risk Assess. 7, 1393–1407.
Chapman, A. D., and Schelske, C.
L. (1997). Recent appearance of
Cylindrospermopsis (Cyanobacteria)
in ﬁve hypertrophic Florida Lakes. J.
Phycol. 33, 191–195.

Chonudomkul, D., Yongmanitchai, W.,
Theeragool, G., Kawachi, M., Kasai,
F., Kaya, K., and Watanabe, M.
M.
(2004). Morphology, genetic
diversity, temperature tolerance and
toxicity of Cylindrospermopsis raci-
(Nostocales, Cyanobacte-
borskii
ria)
from Thailand and
Japan. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 48,
345–355.

strains

Cirés, S. (2012). Ecophysiology, Annual
Life-Cycles and Cyanotoxin Pro-
duction of Planktonic Cyanobacte-
ria Anabaena, Aphanizomenon and
Microcystis
in Spanish Freshwater
Reservoirs. Ph.D. thesis, Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid.
Cirés, S., Wörmer, L., Timón,

J.,
and Quesada, A.
Wiedner, C.,
(2011). Cylindrospermopsin pro-
duction and release by the poten-
tially invasive cyanobacterium Aph-
anizomenon ovalisporum under tem-
perature and light gradients. Harm-
ful Algae 10, 668–675.

Colautti, R. I., and Macisaac, H. J.
(2004). A neutral terminology to
deﬁne“invasive”species. Divers. Dis-
trib. 10, 135–141.

Dobberfuhl, D. R. (2003). Cylindrosper-
mopsis raciborskii
in three central
Florida lakes: population dynamics,
controls, and management impli-
cations. Lake Reserv. Manag. 19,
341–348.

Dyble, J., Paerl, H. W., and Neilan, B.
A. (2002). Genetic characterization
of Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii

isolates

(Cyanobacteria)
from
diverse geographic origins based
on nifH and cpcBA-IGS nucleotide
sequence analysis. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 68, 2567–2571.

Elton, C. S. (1958). The Ecology of Inva-
sions by Animals and Plants. London:
Methuen.

Fastner,

J., Rücker,

J., Stüken, A.,
Preußel, K., Nixdorf, B., Chorus, I.,
Köhler, A., and Wiedner, C. (2007).
Occurrence of
the cyanobacterial
toxin cylindrospermopsin in north-
east Germany. Environ. Toxicol. 22,
26–32.

Ferber, L. R., Levine, S. N., Lini,
A., and Livingston, G. P. (2004).
Do cyanobacteria dominate
in
eutrophic lakes because they ﬁx
atmospheric nitrogen? Freshw. Biol.
49, 690–708.

Figueredo, C. C., Giani, A.,

and
Bird, D. F. (2007). Does allelopa-
thy contribute to Cylindrospermop-
sis raciborskii (cyanobacteria) bloom
occurrence and geographic expan-
sion? J. Phycol. 43, 256–265.

deﬁciency,

Gophen, M., Smith, V. H., Nishri,
A., and Threlkeld, S. T. (1999).
Nitrogen
phospho-
rus sufﬁciency, and the invasion
of Lake Kinneret, Israel, by the
N2-ﬁxing cyanobacterium Aphani-
zomenon ovalisporum. Aquat. Sci. 61,
293–306.

Gugger, M., Molica, R., Le Berre, B.,
Dufour, P., Bernard, C., and Hum-
bert, J.-F. (2005). Genetic diver-
sity of Cylindrospermopsis strains
(Cyanobacteria) isolated from four
continents. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
71, 1097–1100.

Hadas, O., Pinkas, R., Delphine, E.,
Vardi, A., Kaplan, A., and Sukenik, A.
(1999). Limnological and ecophys-
iological aspects of Aphanizomenon
ovalisporum bloom in Lake Kin-
neret, Israel. J. Plankton Res. 21,
1439–1453.

Hadas, O., Pinkas, R., Malinsky-
Rushansky, N., Shalev-Alon, G., Del-
phine, E., Berner, T., Sukenik, A.,
and Kaplan, A. (2002). Physiologi-
cal variables determined under lab-
oratory conditions may explain the
bloom of Aphanizomenon ovalispo-
rum in Lake Kinneret. Eur. J. Phycol.
37, 259–267.

Hense, I., and Beckmann, A. (2006).
Towards a model of cyanobacteria
life cycle – effects of growing and
resting stages on bloom formation of
N2-ﬁxing species. Ecol. Modell. 195,
205–218.

Huszar,V. L. M., Silva, L. H. S., Marinho,
M., Domingos, P., and Sant’anna, C.
L. (2000). Cyanoprokaryote assem-
blages in eight productive tropical
Brazilian waters. Hydrobiologia 424,
67–77.

Isvánovics, V., Shaﬁk, H. M., Présing,
M., and Juhos, S. (2000). Growth
and phosphate uptake kinetics of the
cyanobacterium, Cylindrospermop-
sis raciborskii
(Cyanophyceae) in
throughﬂow cultures. Freshw. Biol.
43, 257–275.

Jones, W. W., and Sauter, S. (2005).
Distribution and abundance of
Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii
in Indiana lakes and reservoirs.
Schoool of Public and Environ-
mental Affairs, Indiana University.
Available
http://www.spea.
indiana.edu/clp/ﬁnalcylindro%20
web.pdf

al:

Juehnk, K. D., Brueggemann, R., Rücker,
J., Luther, B., Simon, U., Nixdorf, B.,
and Wiedner, C. (2011). Modelling
life cycle and population dynam-
ics of Nostocales (cyanobacteria).
Environ. Modell. Softw. 26, 669–677.
Kaplan-Levy, R. N., Hadas, O., Sum-
mers, M. L., Rücker, J., and Sukenik,
A. (2010). “Akinetes – dormant cells
of cyanobacteria,” in Dormancy of
Cells and Organisms, eds J. Cerdà,
M. Clark, and E. Lubzens (Berlin:
Springer), 269–300.

Kaštovský,

J., Hauer, T., Mareš,

J.,
Krautová, M., Bešta, T., Komárek, J.,
Desortová, B., Heteša, J., Hindáková,
A., Houk, V., Janeˇcek, E., Kopp, R.,
Marvan, P., Pumann, P., Skácelová,
O., and Zapomˇelová, E. (2011). A
review of the alien and expansive
species of freshwater cyanobacteria
and algae in the Czech Republic.
Biol. Invasions 12, 3599–3625.

Kling, H. (2009). Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii (Nostocales, Cyanobacte-
ria): a brief historic overview and
recent discovery in the Assiniboine
River (Canada). Fottea 9, 45–47.

Kling, H. J., Watson, S. B., Mccul-
lough, G. K., and Stainton, M. P.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 86 | 7

Sukenik et al.

Invasion of Nostocales

(2011). Bloom development and
phytoplankton succession in Lake
Winnipeg: a comparison of his-
torical records with recent data.
Aquat. Ecosystems Health Manag. 14,
219–224.

Komárek,

report of

Kokoci ´nski, M., Dziga, D., Spoof, L., Ste-
faniak, K., Jurczak, T., Mankiewicz-
Boczek, J., and Meriluoto, J. (2009).
First
the cyanobacte-
rial
toxin cylindrospermopsin in
the shallow, eutrophic lakes of
western Poland. Chemosphere 74,
669–675.
J.

in
cyanobacterial taxonomy: implica-
tions for most common toxin pro-
ducing species,” in Workshop Fresh-
water Harmful Algal Blooms: Health
Risk and Control Management, eds
S. Melchiorre, E. Viaggiu, and M.
Bruno (Rapporti ISTISAN: Rome),
6–43.
Komárek,

(2002). “Problems

J.
(2003). Phenotype diversity of
the cyanoprokaryotic genus Cylin-
drospermopsis (Nostocales); review
2002. Fottea (Praha) 3, 1–30.

and Komárkova,

J.,

Kosten, S., Huszar, V. L. M., Bécares, E.,
Costa, L. S., Van Donk, E., Hansson,
L.-A., Jeppesen, E., Kruk, C., Lacerot,
G., Mazzeo, N., De Meester, L., Moss,
B., Lürling, M., Nõges, T., Romo,
S., and Scheffer, M. (2012). Warmer
climates boost cyanobacterial domi-
nance in shallow lakes. Glob. Chang.
Biol. 18, 118–126.

Lagos, N., Onodera, H., Zagatto, P. A.,
Andrinolo, D., Azevedo, S. M. F. Q.,
and Oshima, Y. (1999). The ﬁrst
evidence of paralytic shellﬁsh tox-
ins in the freshwater cyanobacterium
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii, iso-
lated from Brazil. Toxicon 37,
1359–1373.

Leavitt, P. R., Brock, C. S., Ebel, C.,
and Alain, P. (2006). Landscape-
scale effects of urban nitrogen on a
chain of freshwater lakes in Central
North America. Limnol. Oceanogr.
51, 2262–2277.

Leonard,

(2005).
J., and Paerl, H.
Zooplankton community
struc-
ture, micro-zooplankton grazing
impact, and seston energy content
in the St.
system,
Florida as inﬂuenced by the toxic
cyanobacterium Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii. Hydrobiologia
537,
89–97.

Johns River

Levine, J. M.,Vilà, M.,Antonio, C. M. D.,
Dukes, J. S., Grigulis, K., and Lavorel,
S. (2003). Mechanisms underlying
the impacts of exotic plant invasions.
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 270,
775–781.

Litchman, E. (2010). Invisible invaders:
non-pathogenic invasive microbes

in aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems.
Ecol. Lett. 13, 1560–1572.

Lockwood, J., Hoopes, M., and Mar-
chetti, M. (2007). Invasion Ecology.
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Mehnert, G., Leunert, F., Cires, S.,
Johnk, K. D., Rucker, J., Nixdorf,
B., and Wiedner, C. (2010). Com-
petitiveness of invasive and native
cyanobacteria from temperate fresh-
waters under various light and tem-
perature conditions. J. Plankton Res.
32, 1009–1021.

Meinesz, A., Belsher, T., Thibaut,
T., Antolic, B., Mustapha, K. B.,
Boudouresque, C.-F., Chiaverini, D.,
Cinelli, F., Cottalorda, J.-M., Djel-
louli, A., El Abed, A., Orestano,
C., Grau, A. M., Ivesa, L., Jaklin,
A., Langar, H., Massuti-Pascual, E.,
Peirano, A., Tunesi, L., De Vauge-
las, J., Zavodnik, N., and Zuljevic,
A. (2001). The introduced green
alga Caulerpa taxifolia continues to
spread in the Mediterranean. Biol.
Invasions 3, 201–210.

toxic Cylindrospermopsis

Mohamed, Z. A. (2007). First report
of
raci-
borskii and Raphidiopsis mediter-
ranea (Cyanoprokaryota) in Egypt-
ian fresh waters. FEMS Microbiol.
Ecol. 59, 749–761.

Moisander, P. H., Cheshire, L. A.,
Braddy, J., Calandrino, E. S., Hoff-
man, M., Piehler, M. F., and Paerl, H.
W. (2011). Facultative diazotrophy
increases Cylindrospermopsis
raci-
borskii competitiveness under ﬂuc-
tuating nitrogen availability. FEMS
Microb. Ecol. 79, 800–811.

Molica, R., Onodera, H., García, C.,
Rivas, M., Andrinolo, D., Nasci-
mento, S., Meguro, H., Oshima,
Y., Azevedo, S., and Lagos, N.
(2002). Toxins in the freshwater
cyanobacterium Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii (Cyanophyceae) isolated
from Tabocas reservoir in Caruaru,
Brazil, including demonstration of a
new saxitoxin analogue. Phycologia
41, 606–611.

Neilan, B. A., Saker, M. L., Fastner,
J., Törökné, A., and Burns, B. P.
(2003). Phylogeography of the inva-
sive cyanobacterium Cylindrosper-
mopsis raciborskii. Mol. Ecol. 12,
133–140.

Oliver, R., and Ganf, G. (2000). “Fresh-
water blooms,” in The Ecology
of Cyanobacteria, eds B. Whit-
ton and M. Potts
(Dordrecht:
Kluwer
Publishers),
Academic
149–194.

Padisák, J. (1997). Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii (Woloszynska) Seenayya
et Subba Raju,
an expanding,
highly
cyanobacterium:
adaptive
worldwide distribution and review

of its ecology. Archiv für Hydrobiolo-
gie 107, 563–593.

cyanobacterial

Paerl, H. W., Hall, N. S., and Calan-
drino, E. S. (2011). Controlling
harmful
blooms
in a world experiencing anthro-
pogenic
climatic-induced
change. Sci. Total Environ. 409,
1739–1745.

and

Paerl, H. W., and Paul, V. J. (2011).
Climate change:
to global
expansion of harmful cyanobacteria.
Water Res. 46, 1349–1363.

links

Patoine, A., Graham, M. D., and Leav-
itt, P. R. (2006). Spatial variation
of nitrogen ﬁxation in lakes of
the northern Great Plains. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 51, 1665–1677.

Piccini, C., Aubriot, L., Fabre, A., Ama-
ral, V., Gonzalez-Piana, M., Giani,
A., Figueredo, C. C., Vidal, L., Kruk,
C., and Bonilla, S. (2011). Genetic
and eco-physiological differences of
South American Cylindrospermop-
sis raciborskii
isolates support the
hypothesis of multiple ecotypes.
Harmful Algae 10, 644–653.

Piehler, M. F., Dyble, J., Moisander, P.
H., Chapman, A. D., Hendrickson, J.,
and Paerl, H. W. (2009). Interactions
between nitrogen dynamics and the
phytoplankton community in Lake
George, Florida, USA. Lake Reserv.
Manag. 25, 1–14.

Pimentel, D., Mcnair, S.,

Janecka,
J., Wightman,
J., Simmonds, C.,
O’connell, C., Wong, E., Russel, L.,
Zern, J., Aquino, T., and Tsomondo,
T. (2001). Economic and environ-
mental threats of alien plant, animal,
and microbe invasions. Agriculture
Ecosystems Environ. 84, 1–20.

Pollingher, U., Hadas, O., Yacobi, Y. Z.,
Zohary, T., and Berman, T. (1998).
Aphanizomenon ovalisporum (Forti)
in Lake Kinneret, Israel. J. Plankton
Res. 20, 1321–1339.

Posselt, A.

J., Burford, M. A., and
Shaw, G. (2009). Pulses of phos-
phate promote dominance of the
toxic cyanophyte Cylindrospermop-
subtropical
sis
water
45,
540–546.

J. Phycol.

raciborskii

reservoir.

in a

Quesada, A., Moreno, E., Carrasco, D.,
Paniagua, T., Wormer, L., Hoyos, C.
D., and Sukenik, A. (2006). Tox-
icity of Aphanizomenon ovalispo-
rum (Cyanobacteria) in a Spanish
water reservoir. Eur. J. Phycol. 41,
39–45.

Ramezanpoor, Z. (2004). Ecological
study of phytoplankton of the Anzali
lagoon (N Iran) and its outﬂow
into the Caspian Sea. Czech Phycol.
Olomouc 4, 145–154.

Ricciardi, A., and Cohen, J. (2007). The
invasiveness of an introduced species

does not predict its impact. Biol.
Invasions 9, 309–315.

Richardson, D. (ed.). (2011). Fifty Years
of Invasion Ecology – The Legacy
of Charles Elton Chichester. Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell.

Romo, S., and Miracle, M. R. (1994).
and ecol-
Population dynamics
ogy of subdominant phytoplankton
species in a shallow hypertrophic
lake (Albufera of Valencia, Spain).
Hydrobiologia 273, 37–56.

Rücker, J., Tingwey, E., Wiedner, C.,
Anu, C., and Nixdorf, B. (2009).
Impact of the inoculum size on the
population of Nostocales cyanobac-
teria in temperate lakes. J. Plankton
Res. 31, 1151–1159.

Ryan, E. F., P, H. D., and Barnes,
G. (2003). Recent occurrence of
Cylindrospermopsis
in
Waikato lakes of New Zealand.
N. Z. J. Mar. Freshwater Res. 37,
829–836.

raciborskii

Saker, M. L., and Eaglesham, G.
K. (1999). The accumulation of
cylindrospermopsin
from the
cyanobacterium Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii in tissues of the redclaw
crayﬁsh Cherax quadricarinatus.
Toxicon 37, 1065–1077.

Saker, M. L., Metcalf, J. S., Codd, G.
A., and Vasconcelos, V. M. (2004).
Accumulation and depuration of
the cyanobacterial toxin cylindros-
permopsin in the freshwater mus-
sel Anodonta cygnea. Toxicon 43,
185–194.

Schindler, D. W., Hecky, R. E., Find-
lay, D. L., Stainton, M. P., Parker,
B. R., Paterson, M. J., Beaty, K.
G., Lyng, M., and Kasian, S. E.
M. (2008). Eutrophication of lakes
cannot be controlled by reducing
nitrogen input: results of a 37-
year whole-ecosystem experiment.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
11254–11258.

Shaw, G. R., Sukenik, A., Livne, A.,
Chiswell, R. K., Smith, M. J., Sea-
wright, A. A., Norris, R. L., Eagle-
sham, G. K., and Moore, M. R.
(1999). Blooms of the cylindros-
permopsin containing cyanobac-
terium, Aphanizomenon ovalisporum
(Forti), in newly constructed lakes,
Queensland, Australia. Environ. Tox-
icol. 14, 167–177.

Smith, D. J., Grifﬁn, D. W., and Jaffe,
D. A. (2011). The high life: transport
of microbes in the atmosphere. Eos
Trans. 92, 249.

Spr˝ober, P., Shaﬁk, H. M., Prés-
and
ing, M., Kovács, A. W.,
Herodek,
Nitro-
gen uptake and ﬁxation in the
cyanobacterium Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii under different nitrogen

(2003).

S.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 86 | 8

Sukenik et al.

Invasion of Nostocales

conditions. Hydrobiologia 506–509,
169–174.

Stewart,

in Water

I., Carmichael, W. W.,
and Backer, L.C. (2011). “Toxic
Cyanobacteria,”
and
Sanitation-Related Diseases and the
Environment, ed. J. M. H. Selendy
(John Wiley and Sons, Inc.), 95–110.
Suikkanen, S., Kaartokallio, H., Hällfors,
S., Huttunen, M., and Laamanen,
M. (2010). Life cycle strategies of
bloom-forming, ﬁlamentous cyano-
bacteria in the Baltic Sea. Deep Sea
Res. Part 2 Top. Stud. Oceanogr. 57,
199–209.

Traveset, A., and Richardson, D. M.
(2006). Biological invasions as dis-
ruptors of plant reproductive mut-
ualisms. Trends Ecol. Evol. 21,
208–216.

Vidal, L.,

and Kruk, C.

Cylindrospermopsis

(2008).
raciborskii

to

its dis-
(Cyanobacteria) extends
(cid:2)
S:
tribution
34(53
Latitude
taxonomical and ecological features
in Uruguayan eutrophic lakes. Pan
Am. J. Aquat. Sci. 3, 142–151.

J., and Melillo,

Vitousek, P. M., Mooney, H. A., Lub-
chenco,
J. M.
(1997). Human domination of
earth’s
277,
494–499.

ecosystems. Science

Wiedner, C., Rücker, J., Brüggemann,
R., and Nixdorf, B. (2007). Cli-
mate change affects
timing and
size of populations of an inva-
sive cyanobacterium in temperate
regions. Oecologia 152, 473–484.

Winder, M., and Schindler, D. E. (2004).
Climate change uncouples trophic
interactions in a lake ecosystem.
Ecology 85, 2100–2106.

Wood, S. A., and Stirling, D.

J.
(2003). First identiﬁcation of the

cylindrospermopsin-producing
cyanobacterium Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii in New Zealand. N. Z. J.
Mar. Freshwater Res. 37, 821–828.

Wu, Z., Zeng, B., Li, R., and Song, L.
(2011). Physiological regulation of
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Nos-
tocales, Cyanobacteria) in response
to inorganic phosphorus limitation.
Harmful Algae 15, 53–58.

Zohary, T. (2004). Changes to the phy-
toplankton assemblage of Lake Kin-
neret after decades of a predictable,
repetitive pattern. Freshw. Biol. 49,
1355–1371.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 11 January 2012; accepted:
20 February 2012; published online: 09
March 2012.
Citation: Sukenik A, Hadas O, Kaplan
A and Quesada A (2012) Invasion of
Nostocales (cyanobacteria) to subtrop-
ical and temperate freshwater lakes –
physiological, regional, and global dri-
ving forces. Front. Microbio. 3:86. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00086
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Aquatic Microbiology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Sukenik, Hadas,
Kaplan and Quesada. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 86 | 9

