REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 10 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00120

Concepts and principles of photodynamic therapy as an
alternative antifungal discovery platform

Tianhong Dai 1,2, Beth B. Fuchs 3, Jeffrey J. Coleman3, Renato A. Prates 4†, Christos Astrakas 5,
Tyler G. St. Denis 1,6, Martha S. Ribeiro4, Eleftherios Mylonakis 3, Michael R. Hamblin1,2,7 and
George P. Tegos 1,2,8,9*

1 Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
2 Department of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
3 Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
4 Center for Lasers and Applications, IPEN–CNEN/SP, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
5 Division of Internal Medicine, Democritus University of Thrace Medical School, Alexandroupolis, Greece
6 Department of Chemistry, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
7 Harvard–MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
8 Center for Molecular Discovery, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA
9 Department of Pathology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM, USA

Edited by:
Bruce C. Campbell, Western Regional
Research Centre, USA
Reviewed by:
Paul Cos, Antwerp University,
Belgium
Simon Andrew Johnston, University
of Birmingham, UK
*Correspondence:
George P. Tegos, Department of
Pathology, School of Medicine,
Center for Molecular Discovery, UNM
Health Sciences Center, University of
New Mexico, 2325 Camino de Salud,
CRF 217A MSC 07-4025
Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.
e-mail: gtegos@salud.unm.edu
†Present address:
Renato A. Prates, School of Dentistry,
University Nove de Julho (UNINOVE),
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Opportunistic fungal pathogens may cause superﬁcial or serious invasive infections, espe-
cially in immunocompromised and debilitated patients. Invasive mycoses represent an
exponentially growing threat for human health due to a combination of slow diagnosis
and the existence of relatively few classes of available and effective antifungal drugs.
Therefore systemic fungal
infections result in high attributable mortality. There is an
urgent need to pursue and deploy novel and effective alternative antifungal counter-
measures. Photodynamic therapy (PDT) was established as a successful modality for
malignancies and age-related macular degeneration but photodynamic inactivation has
only recently been intensively investigated as an alternative antimicrobial discovery and
development platform. The concept of photodynamic inactivation requires microbial expo-
sure to either exogenous or endogenous photosensitizer molecules, followed by visible
light energy, typically wavelengths in the red/near infrared region that cause the exci-
tation of the photosensitizers resulting in the production of singlet oxygen and other
reactive oxygen species that react with intracellular components, and consequently pro-
duce cell
inactivation and death. Antifungal PDT is an area of increasing interest, as
research is advancing (i) to identify the photochemical and photophysical mechanisms
involved in photoinactivation; (ii) to develop potent and clinically compatible photosensi-
tizers; (iii) to understand how photoinactivation is affected by key microbial phenotypic
elements multidrug resistance and efﬂux, virulence and pathogenesis determinants, and
formation of bioﬁlms; (iv) to explore novel photosensitizer delivery platforms; and (v) to
identify photoinactivation applications beyond the clinical setting such as environmental
disinfectants.

Keywords: photodynamic inactivation, photodynamic therapy, photosensitizer, reactive oxygen species, perme-
ability barrier, multidrug efﬂux systems, bioﬁlms, clinical applications

INTRODUCTION
FUNGAL INFECTIONS AND COUNTERMEASURES
Fungi are common causative agents of diseases in both the
immune competent as well as the immune compromised patient

Abbreviations: ABC, ATP binding cassette; ALA, 5-aminolevulinic acid; APDI,
antimicrobial photodynamic inactivation; BCVA, best-corrected visual acuity; BSI,
blood stream infections; CDR1, Candida drug resistance 1; CFU, colony form-
ing unit; CMD, choroidal major diameter; CNV, choroidal neovascularization; EPI,
efﬂux pump inhibitor; ETC, electron transport chain; EtNBSe, selenium analog
of benzophenothiazinium salt; HOMO, highest occupied molecular orbital; IA,
invasive aspergillosis; IC, invasive candidiasis; IL-1, interleukin-1; LUMO, low-
est occupied molecular orbital; MAL, methyl 5-aminolevulinic acid; MB, meth-
ylene blue; MDR1, multidrug resistance 1; MFS, major facilitator superfam-
ily; MIC, minimal inhibitory concentration; NMB, new methylene blue; PDI,

populations. The diseases include cutaneous, subcutaneous,
mucosal invasion, and can be found as blood stream infections
(BSI) that are life-threatening (Gavalda et al., 2005; Sobel, 2007;
Caston-Osorio et al., 2008; Ameen, 2009; Horn et al., 2009; Neofy-
tos et al., 2009; Pappas et al., 2009). Dermatophytosis is probably
the most prevalent of all fungal diseases but also the least stud-
ied in regard to host–fungus interactions (Vermout et al., 2008).

photodynamic inactivation; PDR, pleiotropic drug resistance; PDT, photodynamic
therapy; PEI-ce6, polyethyleneimine-chlorin(e6); PMMA, poly-methyl methacry-
late; PS, Photosensitizer; RB, rose bengal; RD, respiratory deﬁciency; RND, resistant
nodulation (cell) division; RNS, reactive nitrogen species; ROS, reactive oxygen
species; SOR1, singlet oxygen resistance 1; TBO, toluidine blue.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 1

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

Fungal diseases are endemic in certain parts of the world and
include blastomycosis, chromoblastomycosis, coccidioidomyco-
sis, histoplasmosis, paracoccidioidomycosis, penicilliosis, or pan-
demic including invasive aspergillosis (IA), invasive candidiasis
(IC), cryptococcosis, dermatophytosis, fusariosis, and mucormy-
cosis. Very likely, the greatest threat to life results from those
pathogens that cause BSI, yet with IA and IC diagnosis is not
easy and often these diseases are treated empirically when blood
cultures are negative for bacterial pathogens. In the case of IC,
there can be numerous risk factors that, for the most part, are non-
speciﬁc. Candida spp. are the third leading cause and are associated
with the highest mortality of catheter-related infections (Crump
and Collignon, 2000). Although prevention of IC using azole pro-
phylaxis can be effective in selected high-risk patient populations,
selection for invasive infection by resistant non-albicans Candida
species or molds is a potentially devastating consequence. Despite
improvements in antifungal therapy, the mortality rate due to Can-
dida BSI has improved little over the last two decades, remaining
high at 15–49% (Gudlaugsson et al., 2003). A BSI episode signiﬁ-
cantly increases cost of care. In one analysis, the estimated cost of
an IC BSI episode was $34,123 per Medicare patient and $44,536
per private insurance patient (1997, US$), with an overall eco-
nomic burden of $2 billion dollars annually in the USA (Rentz
et al., 1998).

The increased infection of immunocompromised hosts is dra-
matically illustrated by Cryptococcus neoformans, a pathogen that
rose to prominence as the causative agent of cryptococcosis, which
is a life-threatening disease that has emerged in parallel with the
HIV/AIDS epidemic. Cryptococcosis results from inhalation of
fungal cells with subsequent lung infection and pneumonia. In
the absence of an effective immune response, the fungus can dis-
seminate to the brain to cause meningoencephalitis, the symptoms
of which include headache, fever, visual problems, and an altered
mental state (Brizendine and Pappas, 2010). C. neoformans causes
an estimated one million cases of meningoencephalitis globally
per year in patients with AIDS, leading to approximately 625,000
deaths (Park et al., 2009). The bulk of this disease incidence is in
sub-Saharan Africa, where fatal cases of cryptococcosis may exceed
deaths from tuberculosis in some areas (Park et al., 2009). The
importance of immune suppression in predisposition to infec-
tion has been challenged by the recent discovery of specialized
interactions between the fungus and its mammalian hosts, and by
the emergence of the related species Cryptococcus gattii as a pri-
mary pathogen of immunocompetent populations (D’Souza et al.,
2011). A set of recently discovered cryptococcal pathogenesis fea-
tures reveal the fungal adaptation to the mammalian environment
(Alanio et al., 2011). These features include not only remarkably
sophisticated interactions with phagocytic cells to promote intra-
cellular survival, dissemination to the central nervous system, and
escape (Alanio et al., 2011; Kronstad et al., 2011), but also surpris-
ing morphological and genomic adaptations such as the formation
of polyploid giant cells in the lung (Fuchs et al., 2010).

The state of the art in antifungal drug discovery includes only
a few new compounds which offer some hope for eradication
of fungal diseases (Ostrosky-Zeichner et al., 2010). Speciﬁcally:
(1) the echinocandins act against a speciﬁc component of fun-
gal pathogens. As such, their safety proﬁle is quite good, unlike

triazoles that are notorious for causing drug–drug interactions
and toxicity; (2) the formulation of amphotericin B was changed
to achieve better absorption as this drug is now available as a lipid
formulation encapsulation. This modiﬁcation has reduced toxic-
ity due to off-target effects on host cells but has an increased cost;
(3) enhanced activity has been observed with two of the newer
triazoles, posaconazole, and voriconazole; (4) new triazoles are in
development (albaconazole and ravuconazole); (5) echinocandins
are slow in development and ineffective against C. neoformans.
While β-1,3-glucan is present in the cell wall of this pathogen,
caspofungin may have reduced activity against the β-1,3-glucan
synthase (Feldmesser et al., 2000); (6) drug resistance to triazoles
is a common feature of several species of Candida; an increase
in resistance to echinocandins is frequently reported; and, impor-
tantly, (7) the impressive number of references to resistance devel-
oping to antifungals (Pfaller et al., 2010) makes the development of
new antifungal countermeasures a necessity. One promising anti-
fungal modality is the light-based technology of photodynamic
therapy (PDT). This review summarizes the progress in antifungal
PDT attempting to formulate the principles as well as the concepts
for its successful implementation.

THE PLATFORM OF PHOTODYNAMIC THERAPY
Photodynamic therapy (St. Denis et al., 2011a) was discovered
in 1900 by Oskar Raab and Hermann von Tappeiner who found
that Paramecium spp. protozoans were killed after staining with
acridine orange and subsequent exposure to bright light (Raab,
1900). In the 1970s, PDT was initially developed as a therapy for
cancer after it was discovered that porphyrins selectively local-
ized in tumors (Mitton and Ackroyd, 2008). Since then, PDT has
been clinically used for treatment of various malignancies and
is an approved therapy for destruction of choroidal neovascu-
larization (CNV) in age-related macular degeneration. Recently,
antimicrobial PDT has been proposed as an alternative approach
for localized infections (St. Denis et al., 2011a).

Photodynamic therapy involves the use of a non-toxic light-
sensitive dye called a photosensitizer (PS) combined with harmless
visible light of the appropriate wavelength to match the absorp-
tion spectrum of the PS. After photon absorption the PS reaches
an excited state that can undergo reaction with ambient oxygen,
resulting in the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). PDT
is a highly selective modality as (i) the PS can be targeted to the
unwanted cells or tissue (Hunt, 2002) and (ii) cell death is spa-
tially limited to regions where light of the appropriate wavelength
is applied. Since some PS bind rapidly and selectively to microbial
cells, it was suggested that PDT could be used as an anti-infective
approach; this became a reality in the mid 1990s (Nitzan et al.,
1992).

THE PHOTOPHYSICAL PROCESSES OF PDT
The three principle components of PDT are the PS, visible light,
and oxygen. These individually harmless components, when com-
bined, yield potent ROS (Figure 1). Dyes have molecular structures
that are typiﬁed by conjugated double bonds containing a delocal-
ized system of π-electrons. In the PS ground (singlet) state, these
electrons are spin paired in low energy orbitals. Upon applica-
tion of light corresponding to the absorption peak of the PS, the

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 2

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

O2, yielding superoxide anion O
other ROS including the hydroxyl radical (•
peroxide (H2O2).

) which can then go on to form
OH), and hydrogen

•−
2

•

The ROS formed through the Type 1 process have a range
of different reactivities (Ochsner, 1997).
OH, arguably the most
reactive of the three ROS formed, is a strong electrophile that is
able to chemically attack a very wide range of biomolecules. H2O2
•−
is less reactive and O
2 may be
converted to H2O2 and O2 by superoxide dismutase. H2O2 is only
considered truly reactive when it reacts with ferrous iron in what
is known as the Fenton reaction.

is least reactive. Nonetheless, O

•−
2

H2O2 + Fe2 + → OH - + •

OH + Fe3 +

FIGURE 1 | Schematic illustration of photodynamic therapy including
the Jablonski diagram. The PS initially absorbs a photon that excites it to
the ﬁrst excited singlet state and this can relax to the more long lived triplet
state. This triplet PS can interact with molecular oxygen in two pathways,
type I and type II, leading to the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
and singlet oxygen respectively.

electron in the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the
PS is excited to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO),
exciting the PS to an unstable, and short lived excited singlet state.
In this state, several processes may rapidly occur (Foote, 1991).
The most important of these to the PDT process is the reversal of
the excited electron’s spin, known as intersystem crossing to give
the triplet state of the PS. This triplet state is less energetic than the
excited singlet state, but has a much longer lifetime (microseconds
as opposed to nanoseconds), as the excited electron, now with a
spin parallel to its former paired electron, may not immediately
revert to a lower energy level according to the Pauli Exclusion
Principle. Accordingly, the excited electron in the PS triplet state
may change its spin orientation (a relatively slow process) and
emit its energy as phosphorescence, or alternatively the triplet PS
may interact with molecules abundant in its immediate environ-
ment. Because of the selection rules that specify that triplet–triplet
interactions are spin-allowed while triplet–singlet interactions are
spin-forbidden, the PS triplet can react readily with molecular oxy-
gen that is one of the few molecules that are a triplet in the ground
state (Figure 1).

THE PHOTOCHEMICAL GENERATION OF OXIDIZING SPECIES
The ability of PDT to produce ROS needs the presence of molecu-
lar oxygen (O2; Foote, 1991; Tanielian et al., 2000). As mentioned
above, the ground electronic state of oxygen is a triplet, whereby
the two outermost orbitals are unpaired but spin parallel and this
triplet can undergo energy transfer upon collision with the excited
PS triplet. This Type II process involves “ﬂipping the spin” of the
outermost O2 electron and shifting it into the orbital containing
the other electron, which in turn leaves one orbital entirely unoc-
cupied (a violation of Hund’s rule). Termed singlet oxygen (1O2),
this form of oxygen (not considered a radical as its electrons are
spin paired) is extremely short lived and reactive, owing to its
electron conﬁguration instability. An alternative photochemical
mechanism is termed the Type I when the PS triplet directly trans-
fers an electron, sometimes in concert with proton donation to

•

which results in the homolytic ﬁssion of the oxygen–oxygen bond
in H2O2 to yield a hydroxide ion and
OH via the oxidation of
ferrous iron to ferric iron (Valko et al., 2005). H2O2 is removed
through catalase, forming water, and oxygen gas. Although
OH
is not broken down by an enzymatic reaction, it may be quenched
by antioxidants, including antioxidant peptides (e.g., glutathione)
or by antioxidant vitamins (e.g., ascorbic acid).

•

Because 1O2 is not a radical, it reacts with biological molecules
through quite different mechanisms, making the Type II path-
way responsible for different macromolecular reaction pathways.
1O2 tends to favor reacting with double bonds and sulfur moieties
(both of which have high electron densities) and may interact with
aromatic components of macromolecules in Diels–Alder cycload-
ditions (Leach and Houk, 2002; Singleton et al., 2003), 1O2 is
unable to be broken down by enzymes but can be quenched by
antioxidants.

PROPERTIES OF PHOTOSENSITIZERS
Photosensitizer are usually organic delocalized aromatic molecules
consisting of large conjugated systems of double bonds that may
be considered as a central chromophore with auxiliary side chains
attached (auxochromes) which are responsible for further elec-
tron delocalization of the PS, thus altering the absorption spectra
of the PS (Wainwright et al., 2006). Due to extensive electron
delocalization, PS tend to be deeply colored. This means that
the energy required to excite the electrons in the HOMO to the
LUMO is low compared to less delocalized molecules and therefore
the absorption bands are in the longer wavelength (red) spectral
region and are large, reﬂecting the high probability of excitation.
Acridine orange was the ﬁrst photodynamic agent used (Taka-
hashi et al., 1975). Most of the PS that have been employed for
the treatment of cancer and other tissue diseases are based on the
tetrapyrrole nucleus, which were initially porphyrins. Due to the
unfavorable absorption spectrum of porphyrins (low peaks in the
630-nm region), emphasis then shifted to other tetrapyrroles such
as chlorins, bacteriochlorins, and phthalocyanines that have much
larger peaks at longer red wavelengths where tissue transmission
of light is maximal. While these tetrapyrroles were initially studied
as antimicrobial PS, their inability to kill pathogens that belonged
to other classes than Gram-positive bacteria led to the proposal
of dyes with different molecular frameworks as antimicrobial PS
(Sharma et al., 2011). Phenothiazinium salts, such as methylene
blue (MB) and new methylene blue (NMB; Figure 2A,B respec-
tively; Harris et al., 2005; Souza et al., 2010) are often used since

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 3

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

FIGURE 2 | Representative chemical structures of PS that have been
reported to be especially active in the photoinactivation of fungal
cells. (A) Methylene blue, MB, (B), new methylene blue, NMB (Dai et al.,
2011a); (C), selenium Nile blue analog, EtNBSe (Foley et al., 2006); (D),
malachite green oxalate, (E), bis-amino-substituted bacteriochlorin, BC29
(Huang et al., 2010a); (F), tris-N-methyl-pyrrolidinium fullerene, BB6 (Tegos
et al., 2005); (G), hexakis-cationic fullerene BB24 (Huang et al., 2010b);

(H). Conjugate between polyethylenimine and chlorine (e6), PEI-ce6 (Tegos
et al., 2006); (I), BF2 Chelate of N-(4-(4-Bromo-2-
(4-bromo-3-(4-((diethyl(methyl)-ammonio)methyl)phenyl)-5-(4-
methoxyphenyl)-1H-pyrrol-2-ylimino)-5-(4-methoxyphenyl)-2H-pyrrol-3-
yl)benzyl)-N-ethyl-N-methylethanaminium iodide (Frimannsson et al.,
2010); (J), 1,3-bis(dimethylamino)-2-propoxy-methoxy silicon
phthalocyanine, BAM-SiPc (So et al., 2010).

they were the ﬁrst antimicrobial PS to be tested and are clinically
approved for human use. Although there has been a wide range
of antimicrobial PS reported, it is becoming clear that the opti-
mal structures for inactivating bacterial cells and the optimum
structure for fungal cells may in fact be subtly different from
those used for cancer. Some structures such as protease-stable

polycationic (PS) conjugates between polyethyleneimine and chlo-
rin(e6), PEI-ce6, (Figure 2H; Tegos et al., 2006), tris-cationic
substituted fullerenes (BB6; Figure 2F), hexakis-cationic fullerenes
(BB24; Figure 2G), the cationic porphyrin TriP[4], (Lambrechts
et al., 2005), and the selenium analog of benzophenothiazinium
salt (EtNBSe; Figure 2C) may be equally potent to mediate photo

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 4

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

killing of bacteria and fungi. However other structures, includ-
ing PS that are usually considered to be speciﬁc for killing cancer
cells, have also been reported to be effective in killing fungal cells
(mainly C. albicans). This applies to PS such as Photofrin (Bliss
et al., 2004), Al(III)-tetrasulfonated phthalocyanine (Bertoloni
et al., 1992; Lazarova, 1993; Bliss et al., 2004), and PC4 silicon
phthalocyanine (Lam et al., 2011). Moreover some PS that are
highly effective in killing Gram-positive and Gram-negative bac-
teria are not very effective in killing fungal cells. It appears that
having a large number of cationic charges is important for efﬁ-
cient photodynamic inactivation (PDI) of Gram-negative bacteria
and to a lesser extent Gram-positive bacteria, but this structural
feature does not provide good binding or penetration into fungal
cells. Rather, more lipophilic structures with a lower amount of
cationic charge seem to be better for fungal cells. An example of
this latter class is the bacteriochlorin (BC29; Figure 2E) that was
effective at killing Candida cells, while analogs with more cationic
charges were better at killing bacteria (Huang et al., 2010a). The
list of PS targeting exclusively C. albicans is expanding and include
malachite green (Figure 2D; Souza et al., 2010) an unsymmetrical
bis-amino phthalocyanine bis-amino silicon (IV) phthalocyanine
(BAM-SiPc; Figure 2J; So et al., 2010). A brominated boron diﬂu-
oride (BF2) chelated tetraarylazadipyrromethene photosensitizer
(Figure 2I; Frimannsson et al., 2010) reduced in combination
with light the viability of yeast cells [5.7 log (10)]. Photodit-
hazine, a glucosamine salt of chlorin e6, enhanced the inactivation
of C. guilliermondii cells by visible light (Strakhovskaia et al.,
2002).

As microorganisms produce and accumulate porphyrins, the
appealing hypothesis of endogenous photosensitization is also an
alternative pathway of photoinactivation (Oriel and Nitzan, 2010).
In this approach a small non-dye aminoacid (5-aminolevulinic
acid, ALA) is administered as it has been shown that exoge-
nously supplied ALA enters into the microbial heme biosyn-
thetic pathway and results in an accumulation of excess pro-
toporphyrin IX than can act as a moderately effective PS. In
an alternative approach, extracts from Alternanthera maritima
(seaside joyweed) with an absorption range at 650–700 nm can
effectively photoinactivate Candida dubliniensis. The chemical
compositions of the extracts were determined by chromato-
graphic and spectroscopic techniques. The results suggest inhi-
bition of the growth of C. dubliniensis after being irradiated
with a 685-nm diode laser irradiation alone or crude extracts
at 25 mg/ml did not signiﬁcantly reduce the number of colony
forming units (CFU) per milliliter. Steroids, triterpenes, and
ﬂavonoids were identiﬁed in the analyzed extracts (Gasparetto
et al., 2010).

BYPASSING THE PERMEABILITY BARRIER
Bypassing the permeability barrier is a common and challeng-
ing theme in antimicrobial drug discovery. Yeasts and fungal
pathogens are variable in their cell envelopes, possessing outer
wall mixtures of glucans, mannan, and chitin polymers. This fea-
ture makes them inherently more permeable to external substances
than Gram-negative bacteria. In one of the ﬁrst reports for antifun-
gal PDI, Toluidine blue (TBO) was tested against Kluyveromyces
marxianus (Paardekooper et al., 1992). Apart from ability of the

PS to eradicate a microbial population the inﬂuence of PDI on
the barrier properties of the plasma membrane was studied. TBO
mediated PDI-induced a permeability change proceeding in an
“all-or-none” fashion which was reﬂected in potassium ions and
E260-absorbing material efﬂux, reduction of the cell volume,
and vacuole integrity. Finally, it was observed that the loss of
cell viability was not induced by the all-or-none loss of barrier
properties (Paardekooper et al., 1992). A recent study claims that
MB-mediated PDI increases membrane permeability in C. albicans
(Giroldo et al., 2009).

The combination of the anionic PS rose bengal (RB) with glu-
tathione was effective in killing C. albicans. Although the key
hypothesis was enhancement of PDI involving stimulation of
the singlet oxygen generation, the effect of glutathione on the
permeability barrier of eukaryotic cells is well established. Alterna-
tively, compounds that create pores within the fungal membrane
have shown increased inﬂux of PS compounds that are other-
wise unable to enter the cytosol. Phytoalexins of the saponin
family are able to bind to the fungal sterol ergosterol, creating
pores in the membrane resulting in cellular leakage (Simons et al.,
2006). Pretreatment of C. albicans cells with a sub inhibitory
concentration of a saponin signiﬁcantly increased the uptake of
the PS molecules RB and chlorin (e6), and was able to decrease
the survival fraction after exposure with the correct wavelength
of a low-intensity light (Coleman et al., 2010). The degree of
C. albicans killing was 2–5 logs greater in the presence of the
saponin when compared to the PS molecules alone. Pretreat-
ment of the saponin did not result in any signiﬁcant increase
in C. albicans killing when PEI-ce6 was used as the PS, pre-
sumably because of the high permeability of the conjugated PS
molecule. Confocal microscopy revealed that ce6 resulted in min-
imal cellular uptake in C. albicans, however co-incubation of the
PS and the saponin for 1 h resulted in a visible increase of PS
within the C. albicans cytosol (Figure 3). Collectively, this study
suggests in addition to saponins, other compounds with fun-
gal pore-forming properties could be used in conjunction with
a PS molecule, and compounds with antifungal efﬁcacy derived
by pore-forming ability such as the polyenes (amphotericin B
and nystatin) may be a potent treatment strategy for fungal
infections.

FIGURE 3 | Confocal laser scanning microscopy of C. albicans cells
treated with ce6 after 24 h. Left panel – Yeast cells treated with 100 μM
ce6 alone. Right panel – Yeast cells treated with ce6 and 4 μg/ml of a
saponin. Scale bar represents 20 μm.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 5

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

PDI FOR AZOLE AND ANTIFUNGAL RESISTANT PHENOTYPES
There is documented evidence that PDI is equipotent against both
antimicrobial-resistant and susceptible microorganisms (St. Denis
et al., 2011a). This may be observed in azole-resistant and suscep-
tible Candida spp. PDI employing Photogem® as a PS with a light
emitting diode had a signiﬁcant effect against ﬂuconazole-resistant
C. albicans and Candida glabrata (Dovigo et al., 2011a). A set of
clinical isolates from adult HIV patients, including strains highly
resistant and sensitive to ﬂuconazole and amphotericin B, were
subjected to Photofrin® mediated PDI using a 630 nm laser and
the appropriate time to deliver 45–135 J/cm2. There was not sub-
stantial difference in the survival fractions between resistant and
sensitive isolates (Mang et al., 2010).

However, early stationary phase yeast forms of C. albicans and
C. glabrata were not adversely affected by treatment. Respiratory-
deﬁcient (RD) strains of C. albicans and C. glabrata display a
pleiotropic resistance pattern, including resistance to azole anti-
fungals, the salivary antimicrobial peptides histatins, and certain
types of toxic stresses. The cationic porphyrin PS meso-tetra (N -
methyl-4-pyridyl) porphine tetra tosylate (TMP-1363) is effective
in PDT against yeast forms of C. albicans and C. glabrata. In con-
trast to this pattern, RD mutants of both C. albicans and C. glabrata
were signiﬁcantly more sensitive to PDI compared to parental
strains. These data suggest that intact mitochondrial function may
provide a basal level of antioxidant defense against PDI-induced
phototoxicity in Candida spp., and reveals pathways of resistance
to oxidative stress that can potentially be targeted to increase the
antifungal efﬁcacy of PDT (Chabrier-Roselló et al., 2008). Cur-
cumin, a naturally occurring pigment with a maximum absorption
peak in the short wavelength range between 408 and 430 nm has
been recently used for successful PDI in clinical isolates of Candida
spp. (Dovigo et al., 2011b).

INACTIVATION OF CRYPTOCOCCUS AND OTHER FUNGAL
PATHOGENS
Recent studies have revealed a substantial PDT effect both in Cryp-
tococcus spp. as well as a variety of fungal pathogens. These include
both mechanistic and conceptual PDI studies. Stress sensors detect
ROS and the cell wall elicits a response noted by the activation
of Slt2 for Saccharomyces cerevisiae or Mpk1 for C. neoformans
(Vilella et al., 2005; Gerik et al., 2008). In C. neoformans PKC1 is
essential for defense against oxidative stress, both in the form of
hydrogen peroxide and the thiol oxidizing agent, diamide (Gerik
et al., 2008).

For the C. neoformans cell wall defective strain KN99α rom2,
the PS PEI-ce6 exhibited an increased association with KN99α
rom2, which was observed to penetrate the cell (Fuchs et al., 2007b;
Figure 4). Rom2 is a guanyl nucleotide exchange factor in the
cell wall integrity pathway, relaying the activation of the sensors
by extracellular stressor to the signaling cascade that initiates the
phosphorylation events of the mitogen activated protein kinase
(MAPK) cascade (Ozaki et al., 1996; Philip and Levin, 2001). The
association and ability of the PS to penetrate and collect within
the cell was likely due to defects in the cell that prevent the PS
from being excluded. The rom2 mutant is characterized by a 35%
reduction in the amount of β-glucan and physical disparities in
the cell wall observable through transmission electron microscopy

FIGURE 4 | Microscopy was used to visualize location of the PEI-ce6 in
association with C. neoformans. Cells were grown at 37˚C, exposed to
PEI-ce6 for 10 min and then washed with PBS. Arrows indicate localization
of the PEI-ce6 at the cell wall perimeter. Arrowheads mark the localization
of PEI-ce6 within the interior of the cell. With wild-type cells (KN99α), the
dye was conﬁned to the surface of the cells. However, with the KN99α
rom2 mutant, the dye was able to penetrate the cell surface.

(TEM). Cell wall defects are enhanced at the high temperature
growth condition 37˚C, a stress condition for the cell (Fuchs et al.,
2007a). The lack of a stable cell wall structure is likely associated
with the actin and microtubule defects, cytoskeletal components
needed to transport structural components to the cell wall and
maintain a rigid conﬁguration and uniform shape. The result
of the culmination of defects was an increase in cell death upon
application of the activated PS.

Interestingly, cell death was enhanced with the addition of
the antifungal caspofungin. While caspofungin is effective against
other fungal pathogens, including C. albicans, it fails to exhibit
fungicidal effects against C. neoformans, for reasons that have not
yet been fully elucidated (Abruzzo et al., 1997; Espinel-Ingroff,
1998). As a member of the echinocandin class of drugs, caspofun-
gin targets the glucan synthase Fks1p. In this case, the inclusion of
caspofungin enhanced the killing of the activated PS. Even though
it does not kill C. neoformans, caspofungin is known to affect the
β-glucan linkages (Feldmesser et al., 2000). It is suspected that
the combination of the two cell wall targeted compounds dually
damaged the cell enough to lead to cell death or that caspofungin
weakened the cell to allow for greater penetration of the PS that led
to cell death. The results suggest that external sources of ROS can
be applied as a means to inhibit fungi. Potentially, it could enhance
the fungicidal activity of compounds that target or weaken the cell
wall.

A second study tested the effectiveness of TBO employing C.
gattii strains with distinct susceptibility proﬁle to amphotericin
B and azoles. The concept of equipotent PDI between susceptible
and resistant isolates was re-conﬁrmed. A more detailed mecha-
nistic study was attempted including determination of ROS and
reactive nitrogen species (RNS, e.g., peroxynitrite) production and
the catalase and peroxidase activities were measured (Soares et al.,
2011).

A variety of reports tested the use of different PS and explored
optimal conditions and the morphological changes observed upon
PDI of the dermatophyte Trichophyton rubrum (Kamp et al., 2005;
Smijs et al., 2007, 2008; Smijs and Pavel, 2011). The list of PDI-
inactivated fungal species has been increasing exponentially. Tri-
chophyton mentagrophytes, Trichophyton tonsurans, Microsporum

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 6

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

cookei, Microsporum gypseum, Microsporum canis, Epidermophyton
ﬂoccosum, Nannizia cajetani, Metarhizium anisopliae, Aspergillus
nidulans, A. fumigatus, and Fusarium sp., have been tested with a
variety of different PS, offering a new avenue for antifungal thera-
pies (Friedberg et al., 2001; Calzavara-Pinton et al., 2005; Gonzales
et al., 2010).

FUNGAL EFFLUX SYSTEMS AS A PDI TARGET
There are two main types of fungal drug efﬂux systems (Can-
non et al., 2009). (1) The major facilitator superfamily (MFS)
transporters use the electrochemical gradient across the plasma
membrane to expel drugs from cells, and (2) ATP binding cassette
(ABC) transporters, in contrast, use ATP binding and hydroly-
sis to efﬂux drugs. Although fungal cells contain many genes for
both types of systems, clinical azole resistance is most often asso-
ciated with overexpression of ABC transporters (Holmes et al.,
2008; Cannon et al., 2009). There are several classes of fungal
ABC transporters, and the pleiotropic drug resistance (PDR) fam-
ily is often responsible for fungal drug resistance (Lamping et al.,
2010). Clinically important PDR transporters include C. albicans
Cdr1p (CaCdr1p) and CaCdr2p, which are homologs of the Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae Pdr5p (ScPdr5p) and mammalian G-type
ABC transporters (Holmes et al., 2006, 2008; Cannon et al., 2009).
Fungal PDR efﬂux systems have relatively promiscuous substrate
speciﬁcities that are presumably deﬁned by their transmembrane
domains. These speciﬁcities often partially overlap among fam-
ily members in a particular organism and thus provide broad-
spectrum protection against xenobiotic threats, including those
posed by the widely used and well-tolerated azole and triazole
drugs.

The role of multidrug efﬂux in antimicrobial PDT resistance
has only recently come under scientiﬁc investigation. Phenoth-
iazinium dyes MB and TBO are amphipathic cations and physic-
ochemically similar to the antibacterial alkaloid berberine, a well-
characterized substrate of MFS efﬂux systems in Gram-positive
bacteria (Tegos et al., 2002). This similarity raised the possibil-
ity that phenothiazinium PS could also be substrates of microbial
efﬂux systems. Recent experimental evidence indicated that phe-
nothiaziniums were NorA (MFS) substrates in S. aureus and possi-
bly MexAB resistance nodulation (cell) division (RND) substrates
in P. aeruginosa (Tegos and Hamblin, 2006). The observation that
ABC transporters and not MFS affect MB-mediated antimicro-
bial PDI (APDI) in the pathogenic yeast C. albicans is perplexing
(Tegos and Hamblin, 2006; Prates et al., 2011). Prates et al. tested
this hypothesis by comparing MB-PDI for two pairs of isogenic
C. albicans strains (i) YEM 12 and YEM 13 mutant overexpressing
MDR1 MFS; and (ii) YEM 14 and YEM 15 mutant overexpressing
CDR1/CDR2 (Figure 5). Since efﬂux systems affect APDI of MB in
C. albicans, a logical strategy was to explore whether efﬂux pump
inhibitors (EPIs) could potentiate APDI with MB. They used two
well-documented EPIs, one for each corresponding efﬂux system,

INF271 (targeting MFS) and verapamil (+; targeting ABCs both in

yeast and mammalian systems) and the reference C. albicans strain
DAY185. Pre exposure to INF271 followed by MB-mediated PDI,
resulted in a paradoxical protection rather than enhancement of
phototoxicity. On the other hand, pre exposure of C. albicans cells
to verapamil (+) and subsequent MB-mediated APDI led to an

increase of phototoxicity when compared with the PDI efﬁcacy
of MB in the absence of EPIs. In addition, pre exposure of the
CDR1/CDR2 overexpressing mutant YEM 15 in verapamil (+)
and subsequent APDI revealed 2 logs of cell reduction in the pres-
ence of the EPI, in comparison with virtually no effect in the
absence of the ABC pump blocker. The authors demonstrated that
ABC pumps are directly implicated in MB efﬂux from the cell
cytoplasm. Both the inﬂux and the efﬂux of MB may be regulated
by MFS systems and blocking this gate before incubation with
MB can decrease the uptake and APDI effects. An ABC inhibitor
could be usefully combined with MB-APDT for treating C. albicans
infections.

This interaction seems to be less obvious for different PS
chemotypes. The participation of efﬂux systems in porphyrin
mediated PDI has been implied in mammalian ABC transporter
systems (Morgan et al., 2010).

BIOFILM ERADICATION
Microorganisms in nature thrive through adherence to both liv-
ing and inanimate surfaces via bioﬁlm formation (Pﬂumm, 2011).
The dense and protected environment of the bioﬁlm, as well as
the signiﬁcantly different phenotypic properties of bioﬁlm cells
from free-ﬂoating cells of the same species, have been implicated
in giving rise to as much as 1000-fold resistance to antimicro-
bials (Lewis, 2001). Bioﬁlm formation is a critical event in the
development of candidosis, including denture stomatitis (chronic
atrophic candidosis), which can affect up to 65% of edentulous
individuals (Chandra et al., 2001). Despite the use of antifun-
gal drugs to treat denture stomatitis, infection can often become
re-established. By using a [poly(methyl methacrylate), PMMA]
bioﬁlm model, it was demonstrated that C. albicans bioﬁlms are
potentially highly resistant to the currently used antifungal agents.
Drug resistance was also shown to develop with time and corre-
lated with bioﬁlm maturation (Chandra et al., 2001). There is an
expanding body of literature regarding PDT-based bioﬁlm erad-
ication strategies, with emphasis on the use of different PS for
bioﬁlm related phenotypes and microbial species (Biel, 2010).
The eradication of microbial bioﬁlms remains a key challenge
in the antifungal discovery agenda and new efforts are required
to address a number of clinical conditions. The list includes uri-
nary tract infections, catheter infections, middle-ear infections,
formation of dental plaque (Fontana et al., 2009), periodontitis,
(Raghavendra et al., 2009) gingivitis, endodontics, (Soukos et al.,
2006) osteomyelitis (Bisland et al., 2006), infected contact lenses,
endocarditis, and infections of permanent indwelling devices such
as joint prostheses heart valves and implants (Schuckert et al.,
2006).

There is a wealth of literature describing PDT-based anti-
bioﬁlm strategies that focuses mostly on the use of different
PS against a variety of microbial species (Biel, 2010). In con-
trast there are only a limited number of studies exploring the
effects of PDT on phenotypic bioﬁlm elements (e.g., adhesions;
Soares et al., 2008). Moreover, there is no consensus as to which
is the most reliable model for evaluating PDT efﬁcacy against
bioﬁlms. The majority of published reports use methodologies
where bioﬁlms are grown in/on plastic or silicon microtiter plates
and surfaces. These bioassays have been repeatedly criticized for

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 7

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

FIGURE 5 | Effect of efﬂux pumps on photodynamic inactivation
of C. albicans. Confocal microscopy image of YEM strains. Cells
were incubated with 10 μM R123 and 100 μM MB and excited at

488 nm. We present three pictures of the same ﬁeld. Red
corresponds to the ﬂuorescence of MB and green corresponds to the
ﬂuorescence of R123.

lack of robustness and occasionally yield inconsistent results. In
this context it has been demonstrated that C. alibcans bioﬁlms
are sensitive to Photofrin® PDT (Chabrier-Rosello et al., 2005),
C. albicans and C. dubliniensis were susceptible to erythrosine-
mediated PDT, but the bioﬁlms of both Candida spp. were more
resistant than their planktonic counterparts (Costa et al., 201 ).
The combination of erythrosine- and RB-mediated PDT have
some effect in bioﬁlms but also was effective in reducing and
destroying of C. albicans blastoconidia and hyphae (Costa et al.,
201 ). MB-PDT combined with InGaAlP laser (660 nm) exhibited
a modest reduction in bioﬁlm C. albicans species (Pereira et al.,

2

2

2011). In a much more challenging scenario, the combination of
gasiform ozone and MB-mediated PDI were unable to reduce the
viable counts on a multispecies mature oral bioﬁlm assembled by
Actinomyces naeslundii, Veillonella dispar, Fusobacterium nuclea-
tum, Streptococcus sobrinus, S. oralis, and C. albicans (Müller et al.,
2007).

The bulk of cells in bioﬁlms are actually highly susceptible to
killing by antimicrobials and it is indeed only a small fraction of
cells known as persisters that remain alive following antimicrobial
treatments (Lewis, 2010). Persisters represent a subpopulation of
cells that spontaneously go into a dormant, non-dividing state.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 8

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

When a population is treated with a fungicidal antibiotic, reg-
ular cells die but the persisters survive. This persister pheno-
type hypothesis has been proven for C. albicans bioﬁlms using
amphotericin B and chlorhexidine (Laﬂeur et al., 2006) as well
as in patients with long-term oral carriage harbor high-persister
mutants (Laﬂeur et al., 2010). This concept may explain partially
the mechanism of action in the success of miconazole to augment
PDI-mediated by the porphyrin TMP-1363 and MB in C. albicans
(Snell et al., 2011). In this study, a list of antifungals were tested,
miconazole and ketoconazole both stimulated ROS production in
C. albicans, but only miconazole enhanced the killing of C. albicans
and induced prolonged fungistasis in organisms that survived PDI.
Although the data suggested that potentiation of antifungal PDI
by miconazole is likely to be multi-factorial (Snell et al., 2011) and
the models tested were not related with the bioﬁlm phenotypes.

FROM THE ANTIFUNGAL PDI MECHANISM TO THE
QUESTION OF RESISTANCE DEVELOPMENT
The mechanism of photodynamic action have been described as
multi-factorial and non-speciﬁc (Bertoloni et al., 1989; Gonza-
les and Maisch, 2012). It involves the damage of fungal cell wall
and membrane by ROS. Subsequently, the intra cellular oxidiz-
ing species generated by light excitation induce photodamage
to multiple cellular targets. The event list includes inactivation
of enzymes and other proteins, peroxidation of lipids, leading
to the lyses of cell membranes, lysosomes, and mitochondria
and ﬁnally causing cell death (Gonzales and Maisch, 2012). A
recent study employing the PS Pc 4 in planktonic C. albicans
cells highlighted the aforementioned proposed sequence of events.
Furthermore, changes in nuclear morphology characteristic of
apoptosis, which were substantiated by increased externalization
of phosphatidylserine and DNA fragmentation following Pc 4-PDI
suggesting that apoptotic phenomena were related with fungal cell
death (Lam et al., 2011).

Since disruption of electron transport chain (ETC) function
increases intracellular levels of ROS in yeast, interference with ETC
assembly, or function will enhance antifungal PDT. The meta-
bolic inhibitor antimycin A and deﬁned genetic mutants were
used to identify ETC components that contribute to the sensitiv-
ity to TMP-1363-PDT in C. albicans, C. glabrata, and S. cerevisiae
(Chabrier-Roselló et al., 2010).

The studies and reports discussing the potential of microbes
to develop resistance to PDT are scattered, quite controversial,
and with a few exceptions they involve bacterial species. The
non-selective nature of APDI appears as a competitive advan-
tage in the activation of a speciﬁc microbial resistance path-
way. In a conventional biological study of routine stress fol-
lowed by re growth, 5,10,15-tris(1-methylpyridinium-4-yl)-20-
(pentaﬂuorophenyl)-porphyrin triiodide (Tri-Py(+)-Me-PF) was
employed as PS against Vibrio ﬁscheri and E. coli. After ten cycles
of partial inactivation followed by re growth, neither of the bac-
teria developed resistance to the photodynamic process (Tavares
et al., 2010). In a similar study, Giuliani et al. (2010) investi-
gated the potential of phthalocyanine RLP068/Cl mediated PDI
to induce resistance to the Gram-positive S. aureus, the Gram-
negative P. aeruginosa, and C. albicans, using both sensitive and
resistant strains. Its ability, following activation by light, to induce

resistance in these three major human pathogens after 20 daily pas-
sages was studied. Simultaneously for the same strains, the ability
of daily sequential subcultures in sub inhibitory concentrations
of RLP068/Cl to develop resistant mutants without illumination
was evaluated. It was demonstrated that 20 consecutive APDT
treatments with RLP068/Cl did not result in any resistant mutants
and that, in dark conditions, only S. aureus strains had increased
minimally inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of RLP068/Cl. How-
ever, even in this case, the susceptibility of the mutated bacteria
to APDT was not affected by their MIC increase. Ehrenshaft et al.
(1998) showed that the SOR1 (singlet oxygen resistance 1) gene
present in Cercospora fungi plays a role in the resistance to PS
generating singlet oxygen. Studies with SOR1 deﬁcient mutants
resulted in cercosporin and PS sensitivity. However, the func-
tion of the protein encoded by this gene and the mechanisms
involved in Cercospora toxin auto-resistance remain unclear. PDI
with RB in the yeast S. cerevisiae, demonstrated a role of Yap1p and
Skn7p in the defense against singlet oxygen (Brombacher et al.,
2006).

Superoxide dismutase is upregulated following protoporphyrin-
mediated PDI in S. aureus and RB-mediated PDI in S. mutans
induces the bacterial heat shock protein GroEL – responsible for
refolding denatured proteins to native conformations and stabi-
lizing lipid membranes during stress (Nakonieczna et al., 2010).
These observations are in accordance with those of St. Denis et al.
(2011b) who demonstrated that sub-lethal PDI stress increased the
expression of the two major bacterial heat shock proteins GroEL
and Dnak and that exposing E. coli and E. faecalis to heat pretreat-
ment prior to PDI (a positive regulator of GroEL) conferred stress
tolerance, increasing E. coli cell viability by 2 logs and E. faecalis
cell viability by 4 logs.

ANTIMICROBIAL PDT: FROM BENCH TOP TO BED SIDE
With the results from in vitro studies being promising in a wide
array of fungal species, a number of clinical applications for
antimicrobial PDT have been tested and performed in vivo. PDT
has been proposed for many dental applications due to the acces-
sibility of the oral cavity. Nevertheless, the complexity of oral
microﬂora makes this microenvironment quite challenging for
the deployment of novel antimicrobials. An in vivo study using an
immunodeﬁcient murine model with oral azole-resistant candidi-
asis and topical treatment employing 500 mg/ml MB combined
with red light totally inactivated C. albicans in the oral cavity
and even prevented the emergence of resistance (Teichert et al.,
2002). A second study employed immunosuppressed Swiss mice
orally swabbed with C. albicans. Four days after oral inoculation,
PDT was performed on the dorsum of the tongue after topical
administration of Photogem® and followed by illumination with
LED light at 455 or 630 nm. Determination of CFU, histological,
and inﬂammatory response evaluation of the surgically removed
tongues after euthanasia (Mima et al., 2010) revealed effectiveness
of the approach.

The very nature of PDT makes it ideal for the treatment of
skin, wound, and burn infections, all of which are easily acces-
sible for topical application of PS and light. Dai et al. (2011b)
reported PDT using phenothiaziniums for prophylaxis and treat-
ment of cutaneous C. albicans infections in mice. A mouse model

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 9

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

of skin abrasion infected with C. albicans was developed by inoc-
ulating wounds with a luciferase-expressing strain and real-time
monitoring of the extent of infection non-invasively through bio-
luminescence imaging. In vitro PDI studies showed that (NMB;
Figure 2B) was superior to TBO and MB. PDT in vivo initiated
either at 30 min or at 24 h post infection signiﬁcantly reduced
C. albicans burden in the infected mouse skin abrasion wounds
(Figure 6; Dai et al., 2011a).

C. albicans ear pinna infection using a mouse model was treated
with 0.3 mg/ml porphyrin TMP-1363 applied topically in combi-
nation with 90 J/cm2 green light. Additionally, the phototoxicity
of both TMP-1363 and MB against C. albicans was compared
in vitro. TMP-1363 upon irradiation at a ﬁxed ﬂuence of 2.4 J/cm2
caused more than three logs of C. albicans inactivation than MB
at 10 mM incubation concentration for both PS. However, TMP-
1363 was inefﬁciently photo excited, since its peak absorption
did not coincide with the irradiation lamp source, underesti-
mating the PDI efﬁcacy of TMP-1363. On the other hand, MB
absorption peak was compatible with the emission of the lamp
source. Consequently the number of photons absorbed by TMP-
1363 was approximately 10-fold lower than that absorbed by the
equivalent concentration of MB (Mitra et al., 2011) It was con-
cluded that TMP-1363 displayed a more effective microbial killing
than MB due to differences in cellular uptake and/or intracellular
localization.

Photodynamic therapy also has promising potential in the
treatment of superﬁcial fungal skin infections caused by der-
matophytes. T. rubrum is responsible for tinea pedis (athelete’s
foot), fungal
folliculitis, onychomycosis, and dermatophytosis
(tinea or ringworm). Employing an ex vivo infection model of
human stratum corneum of T. rubrum, Smijs et al. (2009) incu-
bated samples with the PS 5,10,15-tris(4-methylpyridinium)-20-
phenyl-(21H,23H)-porphine trichloride (Sylsens B) and deutero-
porphyrin monomethylester. Upon light application, both PS were
shown to be active antifungals. Moreover, 5-aminolevulinic acid
(5-ALA) and red light has an effect in the treatment of ony-
chomycosis (Donnelly et al., 2005; Kumar and Kimball, 2009).
Treatment of refractory ﬁngernail onychomycosis caused by non-
dermatophyte molds with methylaminolevulinate PDT (Gilaberte
et al., 2011).

Chromoblastomycosis is an infection that involves skin and
subcutaneous tissues caused by the traumatic inoculation of
dematiaceous fungi species, being that the most prevalent are
Fonsecaea pedrosoi and Cladophialophora carrionii. A clinical
PDT study employing MB as the PS and a LED device as
light source for the treatment of chromoblastomycosis showed
promising results (Lyon et al., 2011). PDT for distal and lat-
eral subungual toenail onychomycosis caused by T. rubrum
have been evaluated in single-center open trial (Sotiriou et al.,
2010).

FIGURE 6 | (A) Successive bioluminescence images of a representative
mouse skin abrasion infected with 107 CFU C. albicans. (B,C) Representative
periodic acid-Schiff-stained skin biopsy specimen taken from a mouse skin

abrasion infected with 107 CFU C. albicans, showing the presence of yeasts
[(B), arrows], hyphal ﬁlaments [(C), circle], and inﬂammatory inﬁltrate (C).
Biopsy was taken on day 1 postinfection. Bar, 20 μm.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 10

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

An evidence-based review of published literature (MEDLINE,
EMBASE, and Cochrane Library) was searched until March 2010
and evaluated the efﬁcacy and safety of PDT for superﬁcial
mycoses. No randomized clinical trials were found. Seven reports
described the antifungal effect of PDT against 63 superﬁcial
mycoses patients. Eight of 10 (80%) tinea cruris patients and 6
of 10 (60%) tinea pedis were led to mycological cure after one to
three treatments. Four (40%) tinea cruris patients and 3 (30%)
tinea pedis had a persist healing at the 8-week follow-up. Six of
the 9 (66.7%) foot-interdigital mycoses patients recovered clin-
ically and microbiologically after one or four treatments. Only
two patients (22.2%) had a persist healing at the 8-week follow-
up. Eleven of 30 (36.6%) onychomycosis patients were cured for
18 months after treatment, and three onychomycosis patients were
all cured in other two reports. The therapeutic effect of PDT for
one pityriasis versicolor patient was also reported (Qiao et al.,
2010).

Six Korean patients aged 23–47 years with recalcitrant
Malassezia folliculitis were enrolled in a clinical PDT trial employ-
ing methyl 5-aminolevulinic acid (MAL)-PDT. These patients
were offered MAL-PDT as an alternative treatment option due
to inability or nephrotoxicity to tolerate oral antifungals. MAL
was applied locally as a cream to each lesion (located on the
patients’ trunks) and covered with an adhesive occlusive dressing
polyurethane ﬁlm. After 3 h, the cream was wiped off and illumi-
nation was performed immediately thereafter with non-coherent
red light using light emitting diodes (wavelength 630 nm, light
dose 37 J/cm2). Patients underwent three sessions of MAL-PDT at
2-week intervals. One month after the last PDT treatment, patients
returned to the hospital and lesions were photographed (Lee et al.,
2010). After three sessions of MAL-PDT, inﬂammatory lesions had
decreased and improved obviously in four patients, had improved
slightly in one patient, and had not improved in one patient.

Photodynamic therapy has been studied to treat ophthalmo-
logical disease secondary to fungal infection of the eyes. The
efﬁcacy and safety of PDT was evaluated in the long-term control
of subfoveal CNV associated with toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis
(Neri et al., 2010). The records of 13 patients with classic sub-
foveal CNV associated with toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis treated
with PDT were reviewed. All patients were followed up for at
least 48 months. Postoperative visual acuity (VA) was deﬁned as
a gain or loss of two or more lines of best-corrected visual acuity
(BCVA), respectively. Post-treatment CNV size was dichotomized
into “increased” if the major CNV diameter (CMD) had increased
by ≥300 mM, and as “stable/reduced” if it had decreased by
≥300 mM or had not changed by >300 mM. At the 48-month
follow-up, all patients had stable/improved BCVA and a mean
stable/reduced CMD (846± 326.5 mM), with the BCVA having
improved signiﬁcantly (p < 0.0001) from 0.29± 0.19 at baseline to
0.54± 0.16 at 48 months. Finally, a 28-year-old one-eyed woman
with subretinal CNV in the right eye of due to C. endophthalmi-
tis was treated with a combination of PDT and drugs. The CNV
was treated with six PDT sessions with verteporﬁn in associa-
tion with systemic steroid therapy with prednisone (100 mg/day to
reduce) and ﬂuconazole (800 mg/day to reduce). VA was assessed
in pre-PDT conditions and after six PDT treatments (24 months
of follow-up; Tedeschi et al., 2007).

FORMULATION OF NEW CONCEPTS, CONCLUSION
Advances in microbial physiology continue to shed light on a
series of pathways, components, and phenotypes that may serve
as potential alternative and attractive targets for antimicrobial
drug discovery. These approaches have revealed novel molecular
mechanisms responsible for cooperation among cells and deﬁne
new roles of population structure for the evolution of cooperative
interactions. This knowledge of interaction parameters is chang-
ing the view of microbial processes, and suggests new ways to ﬁght
infection by exploiting social interaction (Xavier, 2011). Targeting
bacterial virulence factors is also a novel approach under inves-
tigation for the development of new antimicrobials that can be
used to disarm pathogens in the host (Lee et al., 2003). The broad-
spectrum activity and the non-speciﬁc action of APDI should be
further explored to address these biological phenomena. There is
no documented evidence whether PDT can disrupt these sophis-
ticated microbial defensive lines. We have to take into account
that PDI is able to eradicate microorganisms without discrim-
inating resistant isolates, both planktonic and bioﬁlm species.
This is in concert with the potential of localized photooxidative
stress to inactivate virulence factors (Kömerik et al., 2000; Tubby
et al., 2009) and virulence determinants (Zolfaghari et al., 2009;
Hamblin et al., 2011; Sharma et al., 2011) in the absence of any
documented conventional resistance mechanism. The possibility
of active efﬂux seems to be related with some but not all the
molecular classes of PS although improved delivery methods may
overcome this barrier. A summary of promising, state of the art,
powerful PDI-based combinations is provided in Table 1.

Nanoparticles can be engineered as sophisticated drug delivery
vehicles to carry various therapeutic or diagnostic agents and are
potentially useful for medical applications including targeted drug
delivery, gene therapy, and cell labeling (Kim et al., 2010). PDT has
also attracted the interest of nanotechnology as the effectiveness
of the treatment can be greatly enhanced by the use of nanopar-
ticles. In the last decade, different approaches to the combination
of nanoparticles and PDT have been investigated in relation to
the antimicrobial applications of the technique. One use of the
nanoparticles is to improve the delivery of PS to bacteria; others
use the nanoparticles to improve the inactivation kinetics (Perni
et al., 2011). Many of the PS being studied for PDI of bacteria are
based on the tetrapyrrole nucleus are lipophilic and readily aggre-
gate in aqueous solution, resulting in the loss of photosensitizing
activity (Sibani et al., 2008; Engelhardt et al., 2010). To overcome
this problem, suitable PS carriers were designed to deliver PS,
e.g., liposomes, (Ferro et al., 2006; Bombelli et al., 2008; Engel-
hardt et al., 2010) micelles, (Tsai et al., 2009), and nanoparticles
(Schwiertz et al., 2009; Guo et al., 2010). Amongst these systems,
liposomes are most commonly employed to incorporate lipophilic
PS, and have been proved to enhance the APDI of various PS,
not only because liposomes increase the solubility and stability
of PS, but also because they can facilitate the penetration of PS
into bacteria by means of fusion processes or disturbing the cell
walls (Jia et al., 2010). However, these reported liposomal formula-
tions mainly aimed to deliver PS passively, while little research was
done to apply actively targeted liposomes in the PDI of bacteria or
fungi (Mccarron et al., 2007). An interesting application describes
the use of a patch as a mucoadhesive drug delivery TBO system

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 11

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

Table 1 | Photodynamic therapy-based combinations: potential antifungal countermeasures.

PDT-combinations

Polycationic conjugates of chlorin

Synergist

Visible light

Methylene blue (MB), tolouidine blue (TBO)
MB
Functionalized C60-fullerene
PEI-ce6
PEI-ce6

Visible light, EPIs
Visible light, azoles
Visible light
Saponins visible light
Caspofungin-visible light

Fungal species

Target(s)

Reference

C. albicans

C. albicans
C. albicans
C. albicans
C. albicans
C. neoformans

non-speciﬁc reactive
oxygen species (ROS)
ROS
ROS
ROS
ROS
Membrane

Tegos et al. (2006)

Prates et al. (2011)
Snell et al. (2011)
Lu et al. (2010)
Coleman et al. (2010)
Fuchs et al. (2007b)

(Donnelly et al., 2007). However, the concentrations of TBO in
the receiver compartments separated from patches by membranes
intended to mimic bioﬁlm structures were an order of magnitude
below those inducing high levels of kill, even after 6 h release.

Photodynamic therapy is not a conventional drug discovery
platform since three elements (PS, visible light, and oxygen) are
essential for successful deployment. As infection involves both
the pathogen and the host, it is important to exploit this addi-
tional complexity in PDT ventures. The evaluation of the naturally
occurring pigment curcumin (Martins et al., 2009) against C. albi-
cans provides an example. Planktonic, bioﬁlm cells as well as
macrophages were submitted to the same photodynamic condi-
tions to investigate whether the treatment could be toxic to micro-
bial as well as mammalian cells and identify a therapeutic window
for preclinical development. On the other hand, antimicrobial
PDT treatment has been shown to be potently and functionally
inactivated by IL-1 beta and TNF-alpha (Braham et al., 2009).

Researchers have bypassed some of the difﬁculties associ-
ated with new antimicrobial development by developing tractable
whole-animal screens that utilize the well-studied nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans, the great wax moth Galleria mellonella,
and the fruit ﬂy Drosophila melanogaster as model hosts to
identify and develop new classes of antimicrobial agents with
antivirulence or immunomodulatory efﬁcacy and evaluate tox-
icity or efﬁcacy. The amenability of these non-vertebrate hosts
to large screens has made these model hosts useful to identify
or develop active compounds against either bacterial or fungal
pathogens (Apidianakis et al., 2007, 2011; Fuchs et al., 2010).
Therefore, the design of host–pathogen studies exploring the
ability of PDT to interfere with virulence determinants requires
sophisticated tools and approaches. The recent example of a
host–parasite model to assess intracellular targeting speciﬁcity
of novel phthalocyanines (Dutta et al., 2011) will inspire similar
explorations.

A brief comparison between antibacterial and antifungal PDT,
reveals that the latter require higher concentrations of PS (1 μM
minimum and generally higher) for substantial fungal PDI. This
fact translates into the need to use considerably higher PS con-
centrations for potential in vivo antifungal applications. It should
also be noted that fungal BSI often arise from local infections that
spread systemically. PDT has the particular advantage of rapidly
reducing numbers of viable fungal cells allowing antifungal drugs
time to work. This notion supports the argument that PDT is ideal
for localized infections but it also may be prophylactic to prevent
the development of BSI or may be extremely useful in combina-
torial implementation with antifungals. This therapeutic concept
has been demonstrated in practice by employing PDT combined
with antibiotics in animal models of localized infections caused by
Gram-negative bacteria (Lu et al., 2010).

Further clinical trials are needed to evaluate the efﬁcacy of PDT
to treat superﬁcial mycoses. It is also important to optimize treat-
ment protocols in order to cope with recurrence. PDT may be
an effective treatment option for patients with recalcitrant fun-
gal infections. However, the available clinical data are still limited,
and additional controlled trials including multiple patients will be
necessary to verify the results of the promising pilot studies.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
George P. Tegos is supported by the NIH (grant 5U54MH084690-
02). Research conducted in the Hamblin Laboratory was sup-
ported by NIH (RO1 AI050875 to MRH) and US Air Force
MFEL Program (FA9550-04-1-0079). Research conducted in the
Mylonakis Laboratory was supported by NIH (RO1 AI050875 to
Eleftherios Mylonakis) and. Tianhong Dai was partially supported
by a Bullock-Wellman Fellowship Award and an Airlift Research
Foundation Extremity Trauma Research Grant (grant 109421).
Research conducted by Tyler G. St. Denis is supported by the
Columbia University I. I. Rabi Fellows Program.

REFERENCES
Abruzzo , G., Flattery, A. M., Gill, C. J.,
Kong, L., Smith, J. G., Pikounis, V.
B., Balkovec, J. M., Bouffard, A. F.,
Dropinski, J. F., Rosen, H, Kropp, H,
and Bartizal, K. (1997). Evaluation
of
echinocandin antifungal
MK-0991 (L-743,872): efﬁcaecies
in mouse models of disseminanted
aspergillosis, candidiasis and cryp-
tococcosis.
Antimicrob.
Agents
Chemother. 41, 2333–2338.

the

Alanio, A., Desnos-Ollivier, M., and
Dromer, F. (2011). Dynamics of
Cryptococcus neoformans-macrop-
hage interactions reveal that fun-
gal background inﬂuences out-
come during cryptococcal menin-
goencephalitis in humans. MBio 2,
e00158-11.

Ameen, M. A. R. (2009). Develop-
ments in the management of myce-
tomas. Clin. Exp. Dermatolol. 32,
1–7.

Apidianakis, Y., Mindrinos, M. N., Xiao,
W., Tegos, G. P., Papisov, M. I., Ham-
blin, M. R., Davis, R. W., Tomp-
kins, R. G., and Rahme, L. G.
(2007). Involvement of skeletal mus-
cle gene regulatory network in sus-
ceptibility to wound infection fol-
lowing trauma. PLoS ONE 2, e1356.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0001356

Apidianakis, Y., Que, Y.-A., Xu, W.,
Tegos, G. P., Zimniak, P., Ham-
blin, M. R., Tompkins, R. G., Xiao,

W., and Rahme, L. G.
(2011).
Down-regulation of glutathione S-
transferase alpha 4 (hGSTA4) in the
muscle of thermally injured patients
is indicative of susceptibility to bac-
terial infection. FASEB J. 2, 730–737.
E., Gatta,
and Jori, G.
M., Burlini, C.,
(1989). Factors
the
haematoporphyrin-sensitized pho-
toinactivation of Candida albicans.
J. Gen. Microbiol. 135, 957–966.

inﬂuencing

Bertoloni, G., Reddi,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 12

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

Bertoloni, G., Rossi, F., Valduga, G.,
Jori, G., Ali, H., and Van Lier, J. E.
(1992). Photosensitizing activity of
water- and lipid-soluble phthalocya-
nines on prokaryotic and eukaryotic
microbial cells. Microbios 71, 33–46.
Biel, M. (2010). Photodynamic ther-
apy of bacterial and fungal bioﬁlm
infections. Methods Mol. Biol. 635,
175–194.

Bisland, S., Chien, C., Wilson, B. C.,
and Burch, S. (2006). Pre-clinical
in vitro and in vivo studies to exam-
ine the potential use of photody-
namic therapy in the treatment of
osteomyelitis. Photochem. Photobiol.
Sci. 5, 31–38.

Bliss, J. M., Bigelow, C. E., Foster, T.
H., and Haidaris, C. G. (2004). Sus-
ceptibility of Candida species to
photodynamic effects of photofrin.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 48,
2000–2006.

Bombelli, C., Bordi, F., Ferro, S.,
Giansanti, L., Jori, G., Mancini, G.,
Mazzuca, C., Monti, D., Ricchelli, F.,
Sennato, S., and Venanzi, M. (2008).
New cationic liposomes as vehicles
of mtetrahydroxyphenylchlorin in
photodynamic therapy of infectious
diseases. Mol. Pharm. 5, 672–679.

Braham, P., Herron, C., Street, C., and
Darveau, R. (2009). Antimicrobial
photodynamic therapy may pro-
mote periodontal healing through
multiple mechanisms. J. Periodontol.
80, 1790–1798.

Brizendine, K. P., and Pappas, P. G.
(2010). Cryptococcal meningitis: cur-
rent approaches to management in
patients with and without AIDS.
Curr. Infect. Dis. Rep. 12, 299–305.

Brombacher, K., Fischer, B. B., Rüfe-
nacht, K., and Eggen, R. I. (2006).
The role of Yap1p and Skn7p-
mediated oxidative stress response in
the defence of Saccharomyces cere-
visiae against singlet oxygen. Yeast
23, 741–750.

Calzavara-Pinton, P. G., Venturini, M.,
and Sala, R. (2005). A comprehen-
sive overview of photodynamic ther-
apy in the treatment of superﬁ-
cial fungal infections of the skin.
J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 78,
1–6.

Cannon, R. D., Lamping, E., Holmes, A.
R., Niimi, K., Baret, P. V., Keniya, M.
V., Tanabe, K., Niimi, M., Goffeau,
A., and Monk, B. C. (2009). Efﬂux-
mediated antifungal drug resis-
tance. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 22,
291–321.

Caston-Osorio, J. A., Rivero, A., and
Torre-Cisneros, J. (2008). Epidemi-
ology of invasive fungal infection.
Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 32(Suppl.
2), S103–S109.

Chabrier-Roselló,Y., Foster, T. H., Mitra,
S., and Haidaris, C. G. (2008). Respi-
ratory deﬁciency enhances the sen-
sitivity of
the pathogenic fungus
Candida to photodynamic treat-
ment. Photochem. Photobiol. 84,
1141–1148.

Chabrier-Rosello,Y., Foster, T. H., Perez-
Nazario, N., Mitra, S., and Haidaris,
C. G. (2005). Sensitivity of Candida
albicans germ tubes and bioﬁlms
to photofrin-mediated phototoxic-
ity. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
49, 4288–4295.

Chabrier-Roselló, Y., Giesselman, B. R.,
De Jesús-Andino, F. J., Foster, T.
H., Mitra, S., and Haidaris, C. G.
(2010). Inhibition of electron trans-
port chain assembly and function
promotes photodynamic killing of
Candida. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B
Biol. 99, 117–125.

Chandra, J., Kuhn, D. M., Mukherjee, P.
K., Hoyer, L. L., Mccormick, T., and
Ghannoum, M. A. (2001). Bioﬁlm
formation by the fungal pathogen
Candida
development,
architecture, and drug resistance. J.
Bacteriol. 183, 5385–5394.

albicans:

Coleman, J., Okoli, I., Tegos, G. P., Hol-
son, E. B., Wagner, F. F., Hamblin,
M. R., and Mylonakis, E. (2010).
Characterization of plant-derived
saponin natural products against
Candida albicans. ACS Chem. Biol.
5, 321–332.

Costa, A., De Campos Rasteiro, V. M.,
Pereira, C. A., Da Silva Hashimoto,
E. S, Beltrame, M. Jr., Junqueira, J.
C., and Jorge, A. O. (2011). Suscepti-
bility of Candida albicans and Can-
dida dubliniensis to erythrosine- and
LED-mediated photodynamic ther-
apy. Arch. Oral Biol. 56, 1299–1305.
Costa, A., Rasteiro, V. M., Pereira, C.
A., Rossoni, R. D., Junqueira, J. C.,
and Jorge, A. O. (2012). The effects
of rose bengal- and erythrosine-
mediated photodynamic
therapy
on Candida albicans. Mycoses 55,
56–63.

Crump, J., and Collignon, P. J. (2000).
Intravascular
catheter-associated
infections. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol.
Infect. Dis. 19, 1–8.

Dai, T., Bil, D. E., Arce, V.

J.,
Tegos, G. P., and Hamblin, M. R.
(2011a). Blue dye and red light, a
dynamic combination for prophy-
laxis and treatment of cutaneous
Candida albicans infections in mice.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 55,
5710–5717.

Dai, T., Kharkwal, G. B., Tanaka, M.,
Huang, Y. Y., Bil De Arce, V. J., and
Hamblin, M. R. (2011b). Animal
models of external traumatic wound
infections. Virulence 2, 296–315.

Donnelly, R., Mccarron, P. A., Tun-
ney, M. M., and David Woolfson, A.
(2007). Potential of photodynamic
therapy in treatment of fungal infec-
tions of
the mouth. Design and
characterisation of a mucoadhesive
patch containing toluidine blue O.
J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 86,
59–69.

Donnelly, R. F., Mccarron, P. A.,
Lightowler, J. M., and Woolfson, A.
D. (2005). Bioadhesive patch-based
delivery of 5-aminolevulinic acid to
the nail for photodynamic therapy
of onychomycosis. J. Control Release.
103, 381–392.

Dovigo, L., Pavarina, A. C., Mima, E.
G., Giampaolo, E. T., Vergani, C. E.,
and Bagnato, V. S. (2011a). Fungici-
dal effect of photodynamic therapy
against ﬂuconazole-resistant Can-
dida albicans and Candida glabrata.
Mycoses 54, 123–130.

Dovigo, L., Pavarina, A. C., Carmello,
J. C., Machado, A. L., Brunetti,
I. L., and Bagnato, V. S. (2011b).
Susceptibility of clinical isolates of
Candida to photodynamic effects
of curcumin. Lasers Surg. Med. 43,
927–934.

D’Souza, C., Kronstad, J. W., Taylor, G.,
Warren, R., Yuen, M., Hu, G., Jung,
W. H., Sham, A., Kidd, S. E., Tangen,
K., Lee, N., Zeilmaker, T., Sawkins,
J., Mcvicker, G., Shah, S., Gnerre,
S., Griggs, A., Zeng, Q., Bartlett,
K., Li, W., Wang, X., Heitman, J.,
Stajich, J. E., Fraser, J. A., Meyer,
W., Carter, D., Schein, J., Krzywin-
ski, M., Kwon-Chung, K. J., Varma,
A., Wang, J., Brunham, R., Fyfe, M.,
Ouellette, B. F., Siddiqui, A., Marra,
M., Jones, S., Holt, R., Birren, B. W.,
Galagan, J. E., and Cuomo, C. A.
(2011). Genome variation in Crypto-
coccus gattii, an emerging pathogen
of immunocompetent hosts. MBio 2,
e00342.

Dutta, S., Ongarora, B. G., Li, H.,Vicente
Mda, G., Kolli, B. K., and Chang,
K. P. (2011). Intracellular targeting
speciﬁcity of novel phthalocyanines
assessed in a host-parasite model for
developing potential photodynamic
medicine. PLoS ONE 6, e20786.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0020786

Ehrenshaft, M., Jenns, A. E., Chung, K.
R., and Daub, M. E. (1998). SOR1,
a gene required for photosensitizer
and singlet oxygen resistance in Cer-
cospora fungi, is highly conserved
in divergent organisms. Mol. Cell 1,
603–609.

Engelhardt, V., Krammer, B., and Plaet-
zer, K. (2010). Antibacterial pho-
todynamic therapy using water-
soluble formulations of hypericin or
mTHPC is effective in inactivation

of Staphylococcus aureus. Photochem.
Photobiol. Sci. 9, 365–369.

Espinel-Ingroff, A. (1998). Comparison
of in vitro activities of the new tria-
zole SCH56592 and the echinocan-
dins MK-0991 (L743, 872) and
LY303366 against opportunistic ﬁl-
amentous and dimorphic
fungi
and yeasts. J. Clin. Microbiol. 36,
2950–2956.

Feldmesser, M., Kress, Y., Mednick, A.,
and Casadevall, A. (2000). The effect
of the echinocandin analogue caspo-
fungin on cell wall glucan synthesis
by Cryptococcus neoformans. J. Infect.
Dis. 182, 1791–1795.

Ferro, S., Ricchelli, F., Mancini, G.,
Tognon, G., and Jori, G. (2006).
Inactivation of methicillin resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) by
liposome-delivered photosensitising
agents. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B
Biol. 83, 98–104.

Foley, J. W., Song, X., Demidova, T.
N., Jalil, F., and Hamblin, M. R.
(2006). Synthesis and properties of
benzo[a]phenoxazinium chalcogen
analogues as novel broad-spectrum
antimicrobial photosensitizers.
J.
Med. Chem. 49, 5291–5299.

Fontana, C., Abernethy, A. D., Som,
S., Ruggiero, K., Doucette, S., Mar-
cantonio, R. C., Boussios, C. I.,
Kent, R., Goodson, J. M., Tanner, A.
C., and Soukos, N. S. (2009). The
antibacterial effect of photodynamic
therapy in dental plaque-derived
bioﬁlms.
J. Periodont. Res. 44,
751–759.

Friedberg,

Foote, C. S. (1991). Deﬁnition of type
I and type II photosensitized oxida-
tion. Photochem. Photobiol. 54, 659.
J., Skema, C., Baum, E.
D., Burdick, J., Vinogradov, S. A.,
Wilson, D. F., Horan, A. D., and
Nachamkin,
In vitro
effects of photodynamic therapy on
Aspergillus fumigatus. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 48, 105–107.

(2001).

I.

Frimannsson, D. O., Grossi, M.,
Murtagh, J., Paradisi, F., and O’Shea,
D. F. (2010). Light induced antimi-
crobial properties of a brominated
boron diﬂuoride (BF(2)) chelated
tetraarylazadipyrromethene
pho-
J. Med. Chem. 53,
tosensitizer.
7337–7343.

Fuchs, B., O’Brien, E., Khoury, J. B., and
Mylonakis, E. (2010). Methods for
using Galleria mellonella as a model
host to study fungal pathogenesis.
Virulence 1, 475–482.

Fuchs, B., Tang, R. J., and Mylonakis, E.
(2007a). The temperature-sensitive
role of Cryptococcus neoformans
ROM2 in cell morphogenesis. PLoS
ONE 2, e368. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0000368

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 13

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

Fuchs, B., Tegos, G. P., Hamblin, M.
R., and Mylonakis, E. (2007b). Sus-
ceptibility of Cryptococcus neofor-
mans to photodynamic inactivation
is associated with cell wall integrity.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 51,
2929–2936.

Gasparetto, A., Lapinski, T. F., Zamuner,
S. R., Khouri, S., Alves, L. P.,
Munin, E., and Salvador, M.
J.
(2010). Extracts from Alternanthera
maritima as natural photosensi-
tizers in photodynamic antimicro-
bial chemotherapy (PACT). J. Pho-
tochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 99, 15–20.
Gavalda, J., Len, O., San Juan, R.,
Aguado, J., Fortun, J., Lumbreras,
C., Moreno, A., Munoz, P., Blanes,
M., Ramos, A., Ruﬁ, G., Gurgui,
M., Torre-Cisneros, T., Montejo,
M., Cuenca-Estrella, M., Rodriguez-
Tudela, J., Pahissa, A., and RESI-
TRA (Spanish Network for Research
on Infection in Transplantation).
(2005). Risk factors for invasive
aspergillosis in solid-organ trans-
plant
case-control
study. Clin. Infect. Dis. 41, 52–59.

recipients:

a

Gerik, K., Bhimireddy, S. R., Ryerse, J.
S., Specht, C. A., and Lodge, J. K.
(2008). PKC1 is essential for pro-
tection against both oxidative and
nitrosative stresses, cell integrity, and
normal manifestation of virulence
factors in the pathogenic fungus
Cryptococcus neoformans. Eukaryot.
Cell 7, 1685–1698.

Gilaberte, Y., Aspiroz, C., Martes, M.
P., Alcalde, V., Espinel-Ingroff, A.,
and Rezusta, A. (2011). Treatment
of refractory ﬁngernail onychomy-
cosis caused by nondermatophyte
molds with methylaminolevulinate
photodynamic therapy. J. Am. Acad.
Dermatol. 65, 669–671.

Giroldo, L., Felipe, M. P., De Oliveira,
M. A., Munin, E., Alves, L. P.,
and Costa, M. S. (2009). Photo-
dynamic antimicrobial chemother-
apy (PACT) with methylene blue
increases membrane permeability in
Candida albicans. Lasers Med. Sci. 24,
109–112.

Giuliani, F., Martinelli, M., Cocchi, A.,
Arbia, D., Fantetti, L., and Roncucci,
G. (2010). In vitro resistance selec-
tion studies of RLP068/Cl, a new
Zn(II) phthalocyanine suitable for
antimicrobial photodynamic ther-
apy. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
54, 637–642.

Gonzales, F., Da Silva, S. H., Roberts, D.
W., and Braga, G. U. (2010). Pho-
todynamic inactivation of conidia
of the fungi Metarhizium anisopliae
and Aspergillus nidulans with meth-
ylene blue and toluidine blue. Pho-
tochem. Photobiol. 86, 653–661.

Gonzales, F., and Maisch, T. (2012).
Photodynamic inactivation for con-
trolling Candida albicans infections.
Fungal Biol. 116, 1–10.

Gudlaugsson, O., Gillespie, S., Lee,
K., Vande, Berg, J., Hu, J., Messer,
S., Herwaldt, L., Pfaller, M., and
Diekema, D. (2003). Attributable
mortality
can-
didemia, revisited. Clin. Infect. Dis.
37, 1172–1177.

nosocomial

of

Guo, Y., Rogelj, S., and Zhang, P.
(2010). Rose bengal-decorated silica
nanoparticles as photosensitizers for
inactivation of Gram-positive bacte-
ria. Nanotechnology 21, 065102.

Hamblin, M., Tegos, G. P., St. Denis,
T., and Huang, L. (2011). Antimi-
crobial photodynamic therapy: can
resistance develop? Photodiagnosis
Photodyn. Ther. 8, 178.

Harris, F., Chatﬁeld, L. K., and Phoenix,
D. A.
(2005). Phenothiazinium
based photosensitisers – photody-
namic agents with a multiplic-
ity of cellular targets and clinical
applications. Curr. Drug Targets 6,
615–627.

Holmes, A. R., Lin, Y. H., Niimi, K.,
Lamping, E., Keniya, M., Niimi,
M., Tanabe, K., Monk, B. C., and
Cannon, R. D. (2008). ABC trans-
porter Cdr1p contributes more than
Cdr2p does to ﬂuconazole efﬂux in
ﬂuconazole-resistant Candida albi-
cans clinical
isolates. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 52, 3851–3862.

Holmes, A. R., Tsao, S., Ong, S. W.,
Lamping, E., Niimi, K., Monk, B.
C., Niimi, M., Kaneko, A., Holland,
B. R., Schmid, J., and Cannon, R.
D. (2006). Heterozygosity and func-
tional allelic variation in the Can-
dida albicans efﬂux pump genes
CDR1 and CDR2. Mol. Microbiol. 62,
170–186.

Horn, D., Neofytos, D., Anaissie, E.,
Fishman, J., Steinbach, W., Olyaei,
A., Marr, K., Pfaller, M., and Chang,
C., and Webster, K. (2009). Epi-
demiology and outcomes of can-
didemia in 2019 patients: data from
the prospective antifungal therapy
alliance registry. Clin. Infect. Dis. 48,
1695–1703.

Huang, L., Huang, Y. Y., Mroz, P., Tegos,
G. P., Zhiyentayev, T., Sharma, S. K.,
Lu, Z., Balasubramanian, T., Krayer,
M., Ruzie, C.,Yang, E., Kee, H. L., Kir-
maier, C., Diers, J. R., Bocian, D. F.,
Holten, D., Lindsey, J. S., and Ham-
blin, M. R. (2010a). Stable synthetic
cationic bacteriochlorins as selec-
tive antimicrobial photosensitizers.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54,
3834–3841.

Huang, L., Terakawa, M., Zhiyentayev,
T., Huang, Y. Y., Sawayama, Y.,

Jahnke, A., Tegos, G. P., Wharton, T.,
and Hamblin, M. R. (2010b). Inno-
vative cationic fullerenes as broad-
spectrum light-activated antimicro-
bials. Nanomedicine 6, 442–452.

Hunt, D. W. (2002). Rostaporﬁn (Mira-
vant Medical Technologies). Idrugs
5, 180–186.

Jia, Y., Joly, H., and Omri, A. (2010).
the interac-
Characterization of
tion between liposomal
formula-
tions and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
J. Liposome Res. 20, 134–146.

Kamp, H., Tietz, H. J., Lutz, M., Piazena,
H., Sowyrda, P., Lademann, J., and
Blume-Peytavi, U.
(2005). Anti-
fungal effect of 5-aminolevulinic
acid PDT in Trichophyton rubrum.
Mycoses 48, 101–107.

Kim, B., Rutka, J. T., and Wchan, W. C.
W. (2010). Nanomedicine. New Engl.
J. Med. 363, 2434–2443.

Kömerik, N., Wilson, M., and Poole, S.
(2000). The effect of photodynamic
action on two virulence factors of
Gram-negative bacteria. Photochem.
Photobiol. 72, 676–680.

Kronstad, J. W., Attarian, R., Cadieux,
B., Choi, J., D’Souza, C. A., Grif-
ﬁths, E. J., Geddes, J. M., Hu, G.,
Jung, W. H., Kretschmer, M., Saikia,
S., and Wang, J. (2011). Expand-
ing fungal pathogenesis: Cryptococ-
cus breaks out of the opportunis-
tic box. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 9,
193–203.

Kumar, S., and Kimball, A. B. (2009).
New antifungal therapies for the
treatment of onychomycosis. Expert
Opin. Investig. Drugs 18, 727–734.

Laﬂeur, M., Kumamoto, C. A., and
Lewis, K. (2006). Candida albi-
cans bioﬁlms produce antifungal-
tolerant persister cells. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 50, 3839–3846.

Laﬂeur, M., Qi, Q., and Lewis, K. (2010).
Patients with long-term oral carriage
harbor high-persister mutants of
Candida albicans. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 54, 39–44.

Lam, M., Jou, P. C., Lattif, A. A., Lee,
Y., Malbasa, C. L., Mukherjee, P. K.,
Oleinick, N. L., Ghannoum, M. A.,
Cooper, K. D., and Baron, E. D.
(2011). Photodynamic therapy with
Pc 4 induces apoptosis of Candida
albicans. Photochem. Photobiol. 87,
904–909.

Lambrechts, S., Aalders, M. C., and
Van Marle, J. (2005). Mechanistic
study of the photodynamic inac-
tivation of Candida albicans by
a cationic porphyrin. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 49, 2026–2034.

Lamping, E., Baret, P. V., Holmes, A. R.,
Monk, B. C., Goffeau, A., and Can-
non, R. D. (2010). Fungal PDR trans-
porters: phylogeny, topology, motifs

and function. Fungal Genet. Biol. 47,
127–142.

Lazarova, G. (1993). Effect of glu-
tathione on rose bengal photosen-
sitized yeast damage. Microbios 75,
39–43.

Leach, A. G., and Houk, K. N.
(2002). Diels-Alder and ene reac-
tions of singlet oxygen, nitroso com-
pounds and triazolinediones: tran-
sition states and mechanisms from
contemporary theory. Chem. Com-
mun. (Camb.) 21, 1243–1255.

Lee, J., Kim, B. J., and Kim, M. N.
(2010). Photodynamic therapy: new
treatment for recalcitrant Malassezia
folliculitis. Lasers Surg. Med. 42,
192–196.

Lee, Y., Almqvist, F., and Hultgren, S.
J. (2003). Targeting virulence for
antimicrobial chemotherapy. Curr.
Opin. Pharmacol. 3, 513–519.

Lewis, K. (2001). Riddle of bioﬁlm
Agents

resistance.
Antimicrob.
Chemother. 45, 999–1007.

Lewis, K. (2010). Persister cells. Annu.

Rev. Microbiol. 64, 357–372.

Lu, Z., Dai, T., Huang, L., Kurup, D.
B., Tegos, G. P., Jahnke, A., Whar-
ton, T., and mHamblin, M. R.
(2010). Photodynamic therapy with
a cationic functionalized fullerene
rescues mice from fatal wound
infections. Nanomedicine (Lond.) 5,
1525–1533.

Lyon,

J., Pedroso E Silva Azevedo
Cde, M., Moreira, L. M., De Lima,
C.
J., and De Resende, M. A.
(2011). Photodynamic antifungal
therapy against chromoblastomyco-
sis. Mycopathologia 172, 293–297.

Mang, T., Mikulski, L., and Hall, R.
E. (2010). Photodynamic inactiva-
tion of normal and antifungal resis-
tant Candida species. Photodiagnosis
Photodyn. Ther. 7, 98–105.

Martins, C., Da Silva, D. L., Neres, A.
T., Magalhães, T. F., Watanabe, G.
A., Modolo, L. V., Sabino, A. A.,
De Fátima, A., and De Resende, M.
A. (2009). Curcumin as a promis-
ing antifungal of clinical interest. J.
Antimicrob. Chemother. 63, 337–339.
F.,
Marouf, W,
and Calvert, D.
E.
and
antifungal activities of surfactant-
coated
poly(ethylcyanoacrylate)
nanoparticles. Int. J. Pharm. 340,
182–190.

(2007). Anti-adherent

P., Donnelly,

Mccarron,

R.

Mima, E., Pavarina, A. C., Dovigo, L. N.,
Vergani, C. E., Costa, C. A., Kurachi,
C., Bagnato,V. S. (2010). Susceptibil-
ity of Candida albicans to photody-
namic therapy in a murine model of
oral candidosis. Oral Surg. Oral Med.
Oral Pathol. Oral Radiol. Endod. 109,
392–401.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 14

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

Mitra, S., Haidaris, C. G., Snell, S.
B., Giesselman, B. R., Hupcher, S.
M., and Foster, T. H. (2011). Effec-
tive photosensitization and selec-
tivity in vivo of Candida albicans
by meso-tetra (N-methyl-4-pyridyl)
porphine tetra tosylate. Lasers Surg.
Med. 43, 324–332.

Mitton, D., and Ackroyd, R. (2008).
A brief overview of photodynamic
therapy in Europe. Photodiagnosis
Photodyn. Ther. 5, 103–111.

Morgan, J. J. J., Zheng, X., Pandey,
S. K., and Pandey, R. K. (2010).
Substrate afﬁnity of photosensitiz-
ers derived from chlorophyll-a: the
ABCG2 transporter affects the pho-
totoxic response of side population
stem cell-like cancer cells to pho-
todynamic therapy. Mol. Pharm. 5,
1789–1804.

Müller, P., Guggenheim, B.,

and
Schmidlin, P. R. (2007). Efﬁcacy of
gasiform ozone and photodynamic
therapy on a multispecies oral
bioﬁlm in vitro. Eur. J. Oral Sci. 115,
77–80.

Nakonieczna, J., Michta, E., Rybicka, M.,
Grinholc, M., Gwizdek-Wi´sniewska,
A., and Bielawski, K. P. (2010).
Superoxide dismutase
is upreg-
ulated in Staphylococcus aureus
following protoporphyrin-mediated
photodynamic
and
does not directly inﬂuence the
response to photodynamic treat-
ment. BMC Microbiol. 10, 323.
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-10-323

inactivation

Neofytos, D., Horn, D., Anaissie, E.,
Steinbach, W., Olyaei, A., Fish-
man,
J., Pfaller, M., Chang, C.,
and Webster, K., and Marr, K.
(2009). Epidemiology and outcome
of invasive fungal infection in adult
hematopoietic stem cell transplant
recipients: analysis of multicen-
ter prospective antifungal therapy
(PATH) alliance registry. Clin. Infect.
Dis. 48, 265–273.

Neri, P., Mercanti, L., Mariotti, C.,
Salvolini, S., and Giovannini, A.
of
(2010).
choroidal
in
quiescent
toxoplasma
retinochoroiditis with photody-
namic therapy: 4-year results. Int.
Ophthalmol. 30, 51–56.

Long-term control
neovascularization
congenital

and Ehrenberg, B.

Nitzan, Y., Gutterman, M., Malik,
(1992).
Z.,
Inactivation
of Gram-negative
bacteria by photosensitized por-
phyrins. Photochem. Photobiol. 55,
89–96.

Ochsner, M. (1997). Photophysical and
photobiological processes
in the
photodynamic therapy of tumours.
J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 39,
1–18.

Oriel, S., and Nitzan,Y. (2010). Photoin-
activation of Candida albicans by its
own endogenous porphyrins. Curr.
Microbiol. 60, 117–123.

Ostrosky-Zeichner, L., Casadevall, A.,
Galgiani, J., Odds, F., and Rex, J.
(2010). An insight into the antifun-
gal pipeline: selected new molecules
and beyond. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.
9, 719–727.

Ozaki, K., Tanaka, K., Imamura, H.,
Hihara, T., Kameyama, T., Non-
aka, H., Hirano, H., Matsuura, Y.,
and Takai, Y. (1996). Rom1p and
Rom2p are GDP/GTP exchange pro-
teins (GEPs) for Rho1p small GTP
binding proteins in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. EMBO J. 15, 2196–2207.
Paardekooper, M., Van Den Broek, P.
J., De Bruijne, A. W., Elferink, J.
G., Dubbelman, T. M., and Van
Steveninck, J. (1992). Photodynamic
treatment of yeast cells with the dye
toluidine blue: all-or-none loss of
plasma membrane barrier proper-
ties. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1108,
86–90.

Pappas, P., Kauffman, C., Andes, D.,
Jr, Calandra, T.,
Benjamin, D.
Edwards, J. Jr, Filler, S., Fisher, J.,
Kullberg, B., Ostrosky-Zeichner, L.,
Reboli, A., Rex, J., Walsh, T., Sobel,
J., and Infectious Diseases Society
of America. (2009). Clinical prac-
tice guidelines for the management
of candidiasis: 2009 update by the
Infectious Diseases Society of Amer-
ica. Clin. Infect. Dis. 48, 503–535.

Park, B., Wannemuehler, K. A., Marston,
B. J., Govender, N., Pappas, P. G.,
and Chiller, T. M. (2009). Estima-
tion of the current global burden of
cryptococcal meningitis among per-
sons living with HIV/AIDS. AIDS
23, 525–530.

Pereira, C., Romeiro, R. L., Costa, A. C.,
Machado, A. K., Junqueira, J. C., and
Jorge, A. O. (2011). Susceptibility
of Candida albicans, Staphylococcus
aureus, and Streptococcus mutans
bioﬁlms to photodynamic inactiva-
tion: an in vitro study. Lasers Med.
Sci. 26, 341–348.

Perni, S., Prokopovich, P., Pratten,
J., Parkin, I. P., and Wilson, M.
(2011). Nanoparticles: their poten-
tial use in antibacterial photody-
namic therapy. Photochem. Photo-
biol. Sci. 10, 712–720.

Pfaller, M., Andes, D., Diekema, D.,
Espinel-Ingroff, A., Sheehan, D.,
and The Clsi Subcommittee for
Antifungal Susceptibility Testing.
(2010). Wild-type MIC distribu-
tions, epidemiological cutoff values
and species-speciﬁc clinical break-
points for ﬂuconazole and Candida:
time for harmonization of CLSI and

EUCAST broth microdilution meth-
ods. Drug Resist. Updat. 13, 180–195.
Pﬂumm, M. (2011). Caught on ﬁlm.

Nat. Med. 17, 650–653.

Philip, B., and Levin, D. E. (2001). Wsc1
and Mid2 are cell surface sensors for
cell wall integrity signaling that act
through Rom2, a guanine nucleotide
exchange factor for Rho1. Mol. Cell.
Biol. 21, 271–280.

Prates, R., Kato, I. T., Ribeiro, M. S.,
Tegos, G. P., and Hamblin, M. R.
R. (2011). Inﬂuence of multidrug
efﬂux systems on methylene blue-
mediated photodynamic inactiva-
tion of Candida albicans. J. Antimi-
crob. Chemother. 66, 1525–1532.

Qiao, J., Li, R., Ding, Y., and Fang,
H. (2010). Photodynamic therapy in
the treatment of superﬁcial mycoses:
an evidence-based evaluation. Myco-
pathologia 170, 339–343.

Raab, O. (1900). Ueber diewirkung ﬂu-
oreszierender stoffe auf infusori. Z.
Biol. 39, 524–536.

Raghavendra, M., Koregol, A., and
Bhola, S.
(2009). Photodynamic
therapy: a targeted therapy in peri-
odontics. Aust. Dent. J. 54(Suppl. 1),
S102–S109.

Rentz, A., Halpern, M. T., and Bow-
den, R. (1998). The impact of can-
didemia on length of hospital stay,
outcome, and overall cost of illness.
Clin. Infect. Dis. 27, 781–788.

Schuckert, K., Jopp, S., and Muller,
U. (2006). De novo grown bone
on exposed implant surfaces using
photodynamic therapy and recom-
binant human bone morphogenetic
protein-2: case report. Implant Dent.
15, 361–365.

Schwiertz, J., Wiehe, A., Grafe, S., Gitter,
B., and Epple, M. (2009). Calcium
phosphate nanoparticles as efﬁcient
carriers for photodynamic therapy
against cells and bacteria. Biomate-
rials 30, 3324–3331.

Sharma, S., Dai, T., Kharkwal, G. B.,
Huang, Y. Y., Huang, L., De Arce, V.
J., Tegos, G. P., and Hamblin, M. R.
(2011). Drug discovery of antimi-
crobial photosensitizers using ani-
mal models. Curr. Pharm. Des. 17,
1303–1319.

Sibani, S., Mccarron, P. A., Woolfson,
A. D., and Donnelly, R. F. (2008).
Photosensitiser delivery for photo-
dynamic therapy. Part 2: systemic
carrier platforms. Expert Opin. Drug
Deliv. 5, 1241–1254.

Simons, V., Morrissey, J. P., Latijnhouw-
ers, M., Csukai, M., Cleaver, A.,
Yarrow, C., and Osbourn, A. (2006).
Dual effects of plant steroidal alka-
loids on Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 50,
2732–2740.

Singleton, D. A., Hang, C., Szymanski,
M. J., Meyer, M. P., Leach, A. G.,
Kuwata, K. T., Chen, J. S., Greer,
A., Foote, C. S., and Houk, K. N.
(2003). Mechanism of ene reac-
tions of singlet oxygen. A two-step
no-intermediate mechanism. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 125, 1319–1328.

Smijs, T., Bouwstra, J. A., Talebi, M.,
and Pavel, S. (2007). Investigation
of conditions involved in the sus-
ceptibility of the dermatophyte Tri-
chophyton rubrum to photodynamic
treatment. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
60, 750–759.

Smijs, T., Mulder, A. A., Pavel, S., Onder-
water, J. J., Koerten, H. K., and
Bouwstra, J. A. (2008). Morpholog-
ical changes of the dermatophyte
Trichophyton rubrum after photody-
namic treatment: a scanning elec-
tron microscopy study. Med. Mycol.
46, 315–325.

Smijs, T.,

S.

and Pavel,

(2011).
The
susceptibility of dermato-
phytes to photodynamic treatment
with special focus on Trichophyton
rubrum. Photochem. Photobiol. 87,
2–13.

J.

and

Bouwstra,

Smijs, T. G., Pavel,

S., Talebi,
A.
M.,
(2009). Preclinical
studies with
5,10,15-tris(4-methylpyridinium)-
20-phenyl-[21H,23H]-porphine
trichloride for the photodynamic
treatment of
superﬁcial mycoses
caused by Trichophyton rubrum.
Photochem. Photobiol. 85, 733–739.
Snell, S., Foster, T. H., and Haidaris,
C. G. (2011). miconazole induces
fungistasis and increases killing
of Candida albicans subjected to
photodynamic therapy. Photochem.
Photobiol. doi:10.1111/j.1751-1097.
2011.01039.x [Epub ahead of print].
So, C., Tsang, P. W., Lo, P. C., Senevi-
ratne, C. J., Samaranayake, L. P., and
Fong, W. P. (2010). Photodynamic
inactivation of Candida albicans by
BAM-SiPc. Mycoses 53, 215–220.

Soares, B., Alves, O. A., Ferreira, M.
V., Amorim, J. C., Sousa, G. R., Sil-
veira Lde, B., Prates, R. A., Avila,
T. V., Baltazar Lde, M., De Souza
Dda, G., Santos, D. A., Modolo, L.
V., Cisalpino, P. S., and Pinotti, M.
(2011). Cryptococcus gattii: in vitro
susceptibility to photodynamic inac-
tivation. Photochem. Photobiol. 87,
357–364.

Soares, B., Da Silva, D. L., Sousa, G.
R., Amorim, J. C., De Resende, M.
A., Pinott, I. M., and Cisalpino, P. S.
(2008). In vitro photodynamic inac-
tivation of Candida spp. growth and
adhesion to buccal epithelial cells.
J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 94,
65–70.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 15

Dai et al.

Antifungal photodynamic therapy

Sobel, J. (2007). Vulvovaginal candido-

sis. Lancet 369, 1961–1971.

Sotiriou, E., Koussidou-Eremonti, T.,
Chaidemenos, G., Apalla, Z., and
Ioannides, D. (2010). Photodynamic
therapy for distal and lateral subun-
gual toenail onychomycosis caused
by Trichophyton rubrum: prelim-
inary results of a single-centre
open trial. Acta Derm. Venereol. 90,
216–217.

Soukos, N., Chen, P. S., Morris, J.
T., Ruggiero, K., Abernethy, A. D.,
Som, S., Foschi, F., Doucette, S.,
Bammann, L. L., Fontana, C. R.,
Doukas, A. G., and Stashenko, P. P.
(2006). Photodynamic therapy for
endodontic disinfection. J. Endod.
32, 979–984.

Souza, R., Junqueira, J. C., Rossoni, R.
D., Pereira, C. A., Munin, E., and
Jorge, A. O. (2010). Comparison of
the photodynamic fungicidal efﬁ-
cacy of methylene blue, toluidine
blue, malachite green and low-power
laser irradiation alone against Can-
dida albicans. Lasers Med. Sci. 25,
385–389.

St. Denis, T., Dai, T.,

Izikson, L.,
Astrakas, C., Anderson, R. R., Ham-
blin, M. R., and Tegos, G. P. (2011a).
All you need is light: antimicro-
bial photoinactivation as an evolv-
ing and emerging discovery strategy
against infectious disease. Virulence
2, 6.

St. Denis, T., Huang, L., Dai, T., and
Hamblin, M. R. (2011b). Analysis
of the bacterial heat shock response
to photodynamic therapy-mediated
oxidative stress. Photochem. Photo-
biol. 87, 707–713.

Strakhovskaia, M., Belenikina, N. S.,
Ivanova, E. V., Chemeris, I. U. K., and
Stranadko, E. F. (2002). The pho-
todynamic inactivation of Candida
guilliermondii
in the presence of
photodithazine. Mikrobiologiia 71,
349–353.

Takahashi, P., Toups, H. J., Greenberg, D.
B., Dimopoullos, G. T., and Rusoff, L.
L. (1975). Irradiation of Escherichia
coli
in the visible spectrum with
a tunable organic-dye laser energy
source. Appl. Microbiol. 29, 63–67.

Tanielian, C., Mechin, R., Seghrouchni,
R., and Schweitzer, C. (2000). Mech-
anistic and kinetic aspects of pho-
tosensitization in the presence of
oxygen. Photochem. Photobiol. 71,
12–19.

Tavares, A., Carvalho, C. M., Faustino,
M. A., Neves, M. G., Tomé,
J.
P., Tomé, A. C., Cavaleiro, J. A.,
Cunha, A., Gomes, N. C., Alves, E.,
and Almeida, A. (2010). Antimicro-
bial photodynamic therapy: study
of bacterial recovery viability and
potential development of resistance
after
treatment. Mar. Drugs 8,
91–105.

Tedeschi, M., Varano, M., Schiano
Lomoriello, D., Scassa, C., and
(2007). Photodynamic
Parisi, V.
therapy outcomes
in a case of
macular choroidal neovasculariza-
tion secondary to Candida endoph-
thalmitis. Eur. J. Ophthalmol. 17,
124–127.

Tegos, G., Anbe, M., Yang, C., Demi-
dova, T. N., Satti, M., Mroz, P.,
Janjua, S., Gad, F., and Hamblin,
M. R. (2006). Protease-stable poly-
cationic photosensitizer conjugates
between
and
broad-spectrum
chlorin(e6)
antimicrobial
photoinactivation.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 50,
1402–1410.

polyethyleneimine

for

Tegos, G.,

and Hamblin, M. R.
(2006). Phenothiazinium antimi-
crobial photosensitizers are sub-
strates of bacterial multidrug resis-
tance pumps. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 50, 196–203.

Tegos, G., Stermitz, F. R., Lomovskaya,
O., and Lewis, K. (2002). Mul-
tidrug pump inhibitors uncover

activity

remarkable
plant
antimicrobials. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 46 3133–3141.

of

Tegos, G. P., Demidova, T. N., Arcila-
Lopez, D., Lee, H., Wharton, T.,
Gali, H., and Hamblin, M. R.
(2005). Cationic fullerenes are effec-
tive and selective antimicrobial pho-
tosensitizers. Chem. Biol. 12, 1127–
1135.

Teichert, M., Jones, J. W., Usacheva, M.
N., and Biel, M. A. (2002). Treatment
of oral candidiasis with methylene
blue-mediated photodynamic ther-
apy in an immunodeﬁcient murine
model. Oral Surg. Oral Med. Oral
Pathol. Oral Radiol. Endod. 93,
155–160.

(2009).

Tsai, T., Yang, Y. T., Wang, T.
and Chen,
H., Chien, H. F.,
Improved photo-
C. T.
dynamic
inactivation of Gram-
positive bacteria using hematopor-
phyrin encapsulated in liposomes
and micelles. Lasers Surg. Med. 41,
316–322.

Tubby, S., Wilson, M., and Nair, S.
P. (2009). Inactivation of staphy-
lococcal virulence
factors using
a
antimicrobial
light-activated
agent. BMC Microbiol. 9, 211.
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-9-211

Valko, M., Morris, H., and Cronin, M. T.
(2005). Metals, toxicity and oxida-
tive stress. Curr. Med. Chem. 12,
1161–1208.

Vermout, S., Tabart,

J., Baldo, A.,
Mathy, A., Losson, B., and Mignon,
B.
(2008). Pathogenesis of der-
matophytosis. Mycopathologia 166,
267–275.

Vilella, F., Herrero, E., Torres, J., and De
La Torre-Ruiz, M. A. (2005). Pkc1
and the upstream elements of the
cell wall integrity pathway in Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae, Rom2 and Mlt1,
are required for cellular responses
to oxide stress. J. Biol. Chem. 280,
9149–9159.

Wainwright, M., Byrne, M. N.,
and Gattrell, M. A.
(2006).
Phenothiazinium-based
photo-
bactericidal materials. J. Photochem.
Photobiol. B Biol. 84, 227–230.

Xavier,

J. (2011). Social

interaction
in synthetic and natural micro-
bial communities Mol. Syst. Biol. 7,
483.

Zolfaghari, P., Packer, S., Singer, M.,
Nair, S. P., Bennett, J., Street, C.,
and Wilson, M. (2009). In vivo
killing of Staphylococcus aureus
using a light-activated antimicro-
bial agent. BMC Microbiol. 9, 27.
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-9-2

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 15 January 2012; paper pending
published: 03 February 2012; accepted: 13
March 2012; published online: 10 April
2012.
Citation: Dai T, Fuchs BB, Coleman
JJ, Prates RA, Astrakas C, St. Denis
TG, Ribeiro MS, Mylonakis E, Ham-
blin MR and Tegos GP (2012) Concepts
and principles of photodynamic therapy
as an alternative antifungal discovery
platform. Front. Microbio. 3:120. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00120
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Fungi and Their Interactions, a specialty
of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Dai, Fuchs, Cole-
man, Prates, Astrakas, St. Denis, Ribeiro,
Mylonakis, Hamblin and Tegos. This is
an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attri-
bution Non Commercial License, which
permits non-commercial use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in other forums,
provided the original authors and source
are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 120 | 16

