ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 31 May 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00197

Microbial iron(II) oxidation in littoral freshwater lake
sediment: the potential for competition between
phototrophic vs. nitrate-reducing iron(II)-oxidizers

E. D. Melton, C. Schmidt and A. Kappler *

Geomicrobiology, Centre for Applied Geosciences, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

Edited by:
David Emerson, Bigelow Laboratory
for Ocean Sciences, USA
Reviewed by:
Evgenya Shelobolina, University of
Wisconsin–Madison, USA
Sean Crowe, University of Southern
Denmark, Denmark
*Correspondence:
A. Kappler , Geomicrobiology, Center
for Applied Geosciences, University
of Tübingen, Sigwartstraße 10,
D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.
e-mail: andreas.kappler@
uni-tuebingen.de

The distribution of neutrophilic microbial
iron oxidation is mainly determined by local
gradients of oxygen, light, nitrate and ferrous iron. In the anoxic top part of littoral fresh-
water lake sediment, nitrate-reducing and phototrophic Fe(II)-oxidizers compete for the
same e− donor; reduced iron. It is not yet understood how these microbes co-exist in
the sediment and what role they play in the Fe cycle. We show that both metabolic
types of anaerobic Fe(II)-oxidizing microorganisms are present in the same sediment layer
directly beneath the oxic-anoxic sediment interface. The photoferrotrophic most probable
number counted 3.4·105 cells g−1 and the autotrophic and mixotrophic nitrate-reducing
·
and 4.5·104 cells·g−1 dry weight sediment, respectively. To
Fe(II)-oxidizers totaled 1.8·104
distinguish between the two microbial Fe(II) oxidation processes and assess their individual
contribution to the sedimentary Fe cycle, littoral lake sediment was incubated in micro-
cosm experiments. Nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria exhibited a higher maximum
Fe(II) oxidation rate per cell, in both pure cultures and microcosms, than photoferrotrophs.
In microcosms, photoferrotrophs instantly started oxidizing Fe(II), whilst nitrate-reducing
Fe(II)-oxidizers showed a signiﬁcant lag-phase during which they probably use organics as
e− donor before initiating Fe(II) oxidation. This suggests that they will be outcompeted by
phototrophic Fe(II)-oxidizers during optimal light conditions; as phototrophs deplete Fe(II)
before nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers start Fe(II) oxidation. Thus, the co-existence of the
two anaerobic Fe(II)-oxidizers may be possible due to a niche space separation in time
by the day-night cycle, where nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers oxidize Fe(II) during darkness
and phototrophs play a dominant role in Fe(II) oxidation during daylight. Furthermore, meta-
bolic ﬂexibility of Fe(II)-oxidizing microbes may play a paramount role in the conservation
of the sedimentary Fe cycle.

Keywords: photoferrotrophs, nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers,
competition

freshwater

littoral sediment, microcosms,

INTRODUCTION
Iron is a ubiquitously abundant redox active transition metal in
sedimentary systems (Froelich et al., 1979; Canﬁeld et al., 1993).
Not only is it required for integral components in cellular processes
in many eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms, but it can also
serve as an electron donor or acceptor to many prokaryotes (Kap-
pler and Straub, 2005; Weber et al., 2006a; Konhauser et al., 2011).
Particularly, in freshwater lakes with low sulfate concentrations,
microbial Fe(III) reduction is an important process in the anaero-
bic degradation of organic matter (Thamdrup, 2000; Lovley et al.,
2004). Freshwater lakes cover approximately 0.8% of the Earth’s
surface (Dudgeon et al., 2006) and their iron rich redox stratiﬁed
sediment provides the ideal habitat for Fe-metabolizing bacteria.
Fe(III) and other oxidants in the pore water of the sediment
are consumed by bacterial processes in a hierarchical order of
decreasing energy production per mole of organic carbon oxi-
dized (Froelich et al., 1979; Canﬁeld and Thamdrup, 2009). This
creates a chemical gradient within the sediment column, which

describes a deﬁned sequence of redox zones in these sediments
that are individually characterized by the dominantly consumed
electron acceptor. The dominant electron acceptor in the ﬁrst
layer is oxygen, which is deﬁned as the oxic zone (Froelich et al.,
1979; Canﬁeld and Thamdrup, 2009). Once oxygen is depleted,
and the redox potential is driven low enough, the next most
advantageous oxidants will take over. Following the depth pro-
ﬁle: nitrate is followed by manganese, next by ferric iron, then
sulfate, and ﬁnally by carbon dioxide (Froelich et al., 1979). This
sequence remains unchanged throughout profundal and littoral
lake sediment. However, exposure to light of the littoral sediment
stimulates photosynthesis and O2 production and thus creates a
downward shift, or broadening, in the spatial positioning of the
redox zones (Gerhardt et al., 2005, 2010).

In contrast to electron acceptors such as oxygen, nitrate, or
sulfate, ferric iron is poorly soluble, and swiftly precipitates
into iron(III) (oxyhydr)oxides (Cornell and Schwertmann, 2003)
which can subsequently either be reduced through chemical

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 197 | 1

Melton et al.

Iron(II) oxidation in lake sediments

reactions (Canﬁeld, 1989) or by microbes through organic mat-
ter or dihydrogen oxidation (Lovley and Phillips, 1988; Bonneville
et al., 2004; Macdonald et al., 2011). The produced ferrous iron
is more soluble (Cornell and Schwertmann, 2003) and diffuses
upward through the pore water toward the oxic zone, serv-
ing as a proﬁtable electron donor to Fe(II)-oxidizing microbial
communities.

Iron(II)-oxidizing bacteria have been found in high numbers
in many freshwater lakes and sediments (Straub and Buchholz-
Cleven, 1998; Diez et al., 2007). Three types of neutrophilic bac-
teria complete the oxidation part of the freshwater sedimentary
iron redox cycle: microaerophiles (Emerson and Moyer, 1997),
nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers (Straub et al., 1996), and photo-
ferrotrophs (Widdel et al., 1993; Ehrenreich and Widdel, 1994).
As microbial iron oxidation products have been found to suit-
ably serve as substrate for iron(III)-reducing bacteria (Emerson
and Moyer, 1997; Straub and Buchholz-Cleven, 1998; Bloethe
and Roden, 2009a), it is feasible that these oxidizing and reduc-
ing communities successfully support a sedimentary iron redox
cycle. Their close physical proximity and co-existence in the redox
zones of the sediment further supports the presence of a microbial
iron redox cycle (Sobolev and Roden, 2002; Bruun et al., 2010),
which has also evoked the formulation of a conceptual model
for the spatial niche separation for iron metabolizers in the iron
cycle (Schmidt et al., 2010). Furthermore, artiﬁcial Fe redox cycles
in laboratory settings have been successfully achieved at neutral
pH through co-cultures of Fe(III)-reducing and Fe(II)-oxidizing
bacteria (Straub et al., 2004; Coby et al., 2011).

Neutrophilic nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers have been found
in high numbers in many freshwater lakes and sediments (Hauck
et al., 2001; Muehe et al., 2009) and produce poorly crystalline
Fe(III) hydroxides (ferrihydrite) or more crystalline Fe(III) oxyhy-
droxides (goethite, lepidocrocite) as their Fe(II) oxidation product
(Straub et al., 2004; Kappler et al., 2005b; Larese-Casanova et al.,
2010). Their metabolism adheres to the following stoichiometric
+24H2O → 10Fe(OH)3+N2+18H
equation: 10Fe2 + +2NO
−
+
3
(Straub et al., 1996). Whilst the existence of autotrophic nitrate-
reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers has been suggested, to date, a true
autotrophic nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizer that can be success-
fully transferred without an organic co-substrate over many gen-
erations has not been isolated. The enrichment of a co-culture
named KS has been achieved (Straub et al., 1996; Bloethe and
Roden, 2009b) but so far, all pure nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing
isolates adhere to a mixotrophic metabolism, requiring the need
of an organic co-substrate for Fe(II) oxidation (Straub et al.,
1996; Kappler et al., 2005b; Muehe et al., 2009; Chakraborty et al.,
2011). This metabolism is widespread within the denitrifying pro-
teobacteria (Straub et al., 1996, 2004). In fact, addition of iron(II)
to a denitrifying population enhances their cell growth, imply-
ing that iron(II) oxidation is truly a beneﬁcial metabolism and
Fe(III) is not simply a byproduct from another minor reaction
mechanism (Muehe et al., 2009; Chakraborty et al., 2011). More-
over, in addition to Fe(II) oxidation, many denitrifying bacteria
are also capable of switching to microaerophilic Fe(II) oxidation
(Benz et al., 1998; Edwards et al., 2003). It is thus conceivable that
although nitrate-reducing Fe(II) oxidation is an anaerobic metab-
olism, the organisms catalyzing this process may also be able to

oxidize Fe(II) at oxygen levels up to 50 μM, like other known
microaerophilic Fe(II)-oxidizers (Druschel et al., 2008).

Photosynthetic Fe(II) oxidation can only take place during
daylight hours, as starlight and even a full moon fail to provide
adequate light to support photosynthetic microbial growth (Raven
and Cockell, 2006). During daylight hours, light has been shown
to penetrate through sediment up until a depth of at least 5–6 mm
(Kuehl et al., 1994). As well as being reﬂected by reﬂective parti-
cles, light is scavenged in the sediment, dramatically decreasing its
intensity with depth toward an asymptotic value, posing a potential
problem for photoferrotrophs living beneath the oxygen penetra-
tion depth (Kuehl et al., 1994). Nevertheless, photoferrotrophs are
reasonably widespread in freshwater systems, having been found in
freshwater lakes (Straub and Buchholz-Cleven, 1998), and isolated
from numerous freshwater sediments (Widdel et al., 1993; Ehren-
reich and Widdel, 1994; Heising et al., 1999). Photoferrotrophy is
an anaerobic process which requires both light and bicarbonate:
−
HCO
(Widdel
3
et al., 1993). Thus, photoferrotrophs are most probably spatially
restricted by the sedimentary chemocline, the light penetration
depth and upward Fe(II) diffusion from the deeper sediment lay-
ers. Only dissolved ferrous iron is susceptible to phototrophic
Fe(II) oxidation and the oxidation products are poorly crystalline
Fe(III) oxides (Kappler and Newman, 2004). The genetic heritage
of anoxygenic phototrophs has been traced back to the oldest pho-
tosynthetic lineage (Xiong et al., 2000), and photoferrotrophs are
able to thrive in archaean ocean analogs (Crowe et al., 2008). Thus,
it has been proposed that anoxygenic photoferrotrophy played a
paramount role in the deposition of Precambrian banded iron for-
mations (Konhauser et al., 2002; Kappler et al., 2005a; Crowe et al.,
2008; Posth et al., 2008).

+ 4Fe2+ + 10H2O hv−→ CH2O+ 4Fe(OH)3 + 7H

+

As both photoferrotrophic and nitrate-reducing Fe(II) oxida-
tion are anaerobic metabolisms, the habitat of the microorganisms
catalyzing these processes is likely to be restricted to the same top
anoxic part of the sediment where incidentally the local geochem-
ical gradients of Fe(II), oxygen, nitrate and sunlight provide opti-
mal living conditions for both. This means that their growth, and
co-existence, depends on their successful competition for reduced
iron. Many previous studies focus either solely on one of the
iron(II)-oxidizing processes (Straub and Buchholz-Cleven, 1998;
Jiao et al., 2005; Muehe et al., 2009; Poulain and Newman, 2009)
or on the co-existence of Fe(II)-oxidizers and Fe(III)-reducers in
cycling systems (Straub et al., 2004; Coby et al., 2011). So far,
the spatial distribution and positioning in relation to each other
speciﬁcally of phototrophic and nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers
has not yet been studied. As their habitats probably overlap signif-
icantly, they are expected to exhibit ﬁerce competition for Fe(II).
However, the individual contributions of photoferrotrophs and
nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers to iron(II) oxidation, and hence
their competition for ferrous iron has also not been previously
studied. Therefore, the objectives of this study were ﬁrstly: to
determine whether both phototrophic and nitrate-reducing anaer-
obic Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria are present in the same sediment
layer directly beneath the oxic-anoxic boundary, and secondly:
what their individual contribution is to sedimentary Fe(III) for-
mation. We also explored geochemical factors that could limit
iron(II) oxidation by the two anaerobic Fe(II)-oxidizing groups,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 197 | 2

Melton et al.

Iron(II) oxidation in lake sediments

and how they compete with one another for ferrous iron. These
experiments combine microbial and geochemical techniques to
provide key information needed not only to determine the contri-
bution of microbial activity to the overall iron oxidation budget
and their spatial distribution, but also to deﬁne the role of geo-
/photochemical iron conversion rates and its general importance
in littoral freshwater lake sediment.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
SAMPLING SITE AND INITIAL SAMPLE TREATMENT
Littoral sediment and water samples were taken in February 2011
from Lake Constance, a freshwater lake in southern Germany, at
a location in the north-western arm known as the Überlingersee,
near the island of Mainau at 47˚41
E. The
samples were transported to the laboratory at 4˚C and the sedi-
ment was processed immediately for microelectrode analysis, most
probable number (MPN) studies and microcosm incubations.

N and 9˚11

42.63

40.29

(cid:3)(cid:3)

(cid:3)(cid:3)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

A high-resolution oxygen microelectrode proﬁle was taken
from an intact push-core immediately upon arrival in the labora-
tory (within 2 h of sampling during which time it was stored under
darkness) with a Unisense Clark-type oxygen microelectrode with
a tip diameter of 100 μm. The electrode was two-point calibrated
in air-saturated water and anoxic water. The detection limit was
0.3 μmol·L
−1. Measurements were taken with a micromanipulator
at depth intervals of 500 μm.

The water content of littoral sediment was determined in tripli-
cate by weighing portions of wet sediment, drying them for 4 days
at 95˚C, and subsequently determining the dry weight. Dried sam-
ples were pulverized to ﬁne powder from which the percentage
of iron by weight was determined using X-ray ﬂuorescence analy-
sis (XRF) employing a Bruker AXS S4 Pioneer X-ray ﬂuorescence
spectrometer. The dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and total inor-
ganic carbon (TIC) content of the pore water were determined
from a centrifuged portion of wet sediment, of which the super-
natant was subsequently ﬁltered with a 0.45 μm ﬁlter (mixed esters
of cellulose nitrate and acetate membrane). DOC and TIC of
the water overlying the surface of the sediment was determined
from ﬁltrated water (0.45 μm, mixed esters of cellulose nitrate
and acetate membrane). Samples were then analyzed in a High
TOC Elementar instrument. The aqueous ferrous iron concen-
tration (μmoles·L
−1) was measured from the pore water by the
spectrophotometric ferrozine assay (Stookey, 1970) in a Flashscan
550 microplate reader,Analytik Jena AG, Germany with a 5% error.

for

SET-UP OF MICROCOSM INCUBATIONS
the microcosm experiments was purged
Lake water
with N2 gas
for 1 h and buffered with 20 mM 3-(N -
morpholino)propanesulfonic acid (MOPS) buffer, with the excep-
tion of set-ups with bicarbonate amendment which were buffered
with 10 mM bicarbonate buffer, and ﬁltered sterilely (0.22 μm,
mixed ester cellulose membrane) under a N2 atmosphere in a
glovebox. The pH of the water was adjusted with sterile anoxic
1 M HCl to 7.20, which was the pH measured in the natural lake
water before purging.

Hundred milliliter serum bottles were ﬁlled with 1 g of wet sed-
iment and 50 mL lake water (natural water, not medium, to stay as
close as possible to in situ conditions), sealed with a butyl rubber

and 10 mM HCO

or 10 mM Fe2+

stopper and crimped. The headspace was replaced by N2/CO2
(90:10) gas. One set-up contained only pure sediment and water,
whilst the other set-ups contained an amendment including: 4 mM
−
−
3 or 10 mM Fe2+
NO
3 . Addi-
tionally, each set-up included a sterile set of duplicates by anoxic
NaN3 addition (the ﬁnal concentration was 160 mM). All micro-
cosms were set-up in duplicate at 23˚C, of which one set was incu-
bated under constant light (True Light 15 W/5500 K) and the other
in constant darkness, for 30 days. The light incubations facilitated
both phototrophic and nitrate-reducing iron(II)-oxidizers whilst
the dark incubation only permitted nitrate-reducing iron(II)-
oxidizers to oxidize Fe(II). This allows a distinction between the
two microbial anaerobic iron(II) oxidation processes.

ANALYSIS OF MICROCOSM INCUBATIONS
Two milliliters were sampled from each microcosm at each sam-
pling point under a constant N2 atmosphere in an anoxic glovebox,
without opening the bottles, with a sterile anoxic syringe and
needle (inner diameter of 0.80 mm). These 2 mL samples were
centrifuged for 5 min at 15.4 g. Part of the supernatant was stabi-
lized in 1 M HCl and used for the spectrophotometric ferrozine
assay (Stookey, 1970) to quantify dissolved Fe(II)/Fe(total) in
μmoles·L
−1 which was then recalculated to the absolute amount
per microcosm; another part was frozen anoxically at −20˚C and
−
preserved for dissolved NO
2 measurement by a ﬂow injec-
tion analysis (FIA) system (3-QuAAtro, Bran&Lübbe, Norderstedt,
Germany) which exhibited an error of 3.6·10
−1. The
sediment pellet was further incubated anoxically for 1 h on a hor-
izontal shaker at 150 rpm with 0.5 M HCl in order to extract the
poorly crystalline Fe(II)/Fe(total) fraction, which was quantiﬁed
from the supernatant by the spectrophotometric ferrozine assay
(Stookey, 1970) in μmoles·L
−1 which was then recalculated to the
absolute amount per microcosm.

−3 mol·N·L

/NO

−
3

MOST PROBABLE NUMBER QUANTIFICATION OF Fe(II)-OXIDIZING
MICROORGANISMS
The 3 mm sediment layer right below the oxic/anoxic boundary,
deﬁned by microelectrode measurements, was sampled under air
using a subcore slicer (Gerhardt et al., 2005) and homogenized
inside an anoxic glovebox. The subcore slicer allows sampling at a
resolution of 1 mm by pushing the sediment out of the plexiglass
core in 1-mm steps. From this homogenized wet sediment 1 mL
was inoculated anoxically into a tube containing 9 mL of 22 mM
bicarbonate buffered non-amended freshwater medium with a pH
of 7.17 (modiﬁed from Hegler et al., 2008; Ehrenreich and Widdel,
1994 containing 0.6 g·L
−1 NH3Cl, 0.5 g·L
−1
−1 CaCl2·2H2O). From this a 10-fold dilu-
MgSO4·H2O, 0.1 g·L
tion series into subsequent medium tubes was prepared anoxically
−12) and inoculated into deep well plates containing
(10
medium targeting speciﬁcally: photoferrotrophic (22 mM bicar-
bonate buffered 10 mM Fe2+
(before ﬁltration) ﬁltered freshwater
medium), mixotrophic nitrate-reducing iron-oxidizing (22 mM
bicarbonate buffered freshwater medium with 10 mM Fe2+
, 4 mM
−
NO
3 and 0.5 mM acetate) and autotrophic nitrate-reducing iron-
oxidizing (22 mM bicarbonate buffered freshwater medium with
−
10 mM Fe2+
3 ) bacterial groups. Deep well plates
were incubated anoxically at 23˚C for 8 weeks. Positive wells were

−1 KH2PO4, 0.3 g·L

−1 to 10

and 4 mM NO

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 197 | 3

Melton et al.

Iron(II) oxidation in lake sediments

signiﬁcantly optically darker than negative wells. Results were
analyzed using the KLEE software program (Klee, 1993). Three
portions from the remaining sediment were weighed and dried for
4 days at 95˚C and weighed again for pore water determination.

Fe(II) OXIDATION RATE CALCULATIONS
The maximum Fe(II) oxidation rates (νmax) in pure cultures were
determined from different literature studies (Jiao et al., 2005;
Hegler et al., 2008; Muehe et al., 2009) by subtracting the min-
imum Fe(II) concentration at the end of Fe(II) oxidation, from
the maximum Fe(II) concentration, i.e., the concentration of iron
before the initiation of Fe(II) oxidation, thus obtaining the total
amount of Fe(II) that was oxidized [ΔFe(II)]. This was divided
by the number of days during which maximum Fe(II) oxidation
took place (Δt ) and then further divided by the number of cells
present at the inﬂection point of maximum Fe(II) oxidation:

Table 1 | Geochemical parameters of littoral Lake Constance sediment
(6–9 mm).

Sediment characteristics

Porewater pH
Pore water content
Total Fe(solid phase)
Fe(II)(aq)
DOCsediment porewater
DOCwater overlying the sediment
TICsediment porewater
TICwater overlying the sediment
NO
NO

−
3(aq), porewater+ overlying water
−
2(aq), porewater+ overlying water

7.17–7.20
41%
1.19%
9.8 μM
0.39 mM
0.15 mM
6.26 mM
2.45 mM
0.10 μM
0.056 μM

(±1%)
(±2.8 μM)
(±4.2·10−3 mM)
(±3.3·10−3 mM)
(±2.3·10−2 mM)
(±3.3·10−3 mM)
(±0.008 μM)
(±0.001 μM)

νmax =

ΔFe(II)

Δt

cells inﬂection point

The maximum Fe(II) oxidation rates per cell in the microcosm
studies were determined by dividing the fastest initial Fe(II) oxida-
tion rate by the cell numbers determined from the MPN studies.
The number of cells present at the inﬂection point were not deter-
mined, thus for simplicity the MPN values of the cell numbers in
the original sediment were used, probably slightly overestimating
the oxidation rate per cell at the inﬂection point.

νmax = ΔFe(II)

Δt

MPN value

RESULTS
SEDIMENT CHARACTERISTICS
Lake Constance littoral sediment was of a sandy nature without
any coarse clumps or large organic material. The DOC content
of the water overlying the sediment was 0.15 mM, and the TIC
content was 2.45 mM. The pore water content of the sediment at
a depth of 6–9 mm was 41% and had a circumneutral pH rang-
ing between 7.17–7.20. The DOC of the pore water was 0.39 mM
and the TIC was 6.26 mM. The dissolved nitrate concentration in
the pore water was 0.10 μM, and the nitrite concentration was
0.056 μM. The total iron content of the dry weight sediment
was 1.19%, as measured by XRF. The sediment pore water con-
tained 9.8 μM Fe(II). A summary of all the measured geochemical
parameters of the sediment can be found in Table 1.

MICROSENSOR OXYGEN PROFILE AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF
Fe(II)-OXIDIZING MICROORGANISMS
The oxygen distribution in the top 6 mm of the littoral Lake
Constance sediment showed a stepwise decrease in 2 mm incre-
ments until it reached the maximum penetration depth at 6 mm
(Figure 1A). As anaerobic iron(II)-oxidizing bacteria depend
on anoxic conditions, their habitat may be restricted by the
overlaying oxygen boundary zone. Therefore, the 3 mm of sed-
iment directly beneath the oxygen penetration depth was inoc-
ulated in a MPN study. We found that both nitrate-reducing
iron(II)-oxidizers and photoferrotrophs were present in the same

FIGURE 1 | Anaerobic Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria were quantiﬁed beneath
the oxic-anoxic boundary zone in littoral Lake Constance sediments.
(A) An oxygen microelectrode proﬁle indicating the oxygen penetration
depth in the littoral sediment. (B) Most probable number (MPN) study
quantifying phototrophic and nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers in the anoxic
part of the littoral sediment. Total bacterial cells were quantiﬁed by qPCR
(Rahalkar et al., 2009).

3 mm segment of anoxic sediment (Figure 1B). The photofer-
rotrophs were slightly more abundant than the nitrate-reducing
iron(II)-oxidizers at 2.0·105 cells·mL
−1 sediment. As the sedi-
ment had a pore water concentration of 41% (Table 1), this
cell number corresponds to 3.4·105 cells·g
−1 dry weight sedi-
ment. The mixotrophic nitrate-reducing iron(II)-oxidizers were
slightly more abundant than the autotrophic nitrate-reducing
iron(II)-oxidizers at 2.7·104 and 1.9·104 cells·mL
−1, respectively,
which corresponds to 4.5·104 and 1.8·104 cells·g
−1 dry weight
sediment.

MICROBIAL Fe(II) OXIDATION IN LITTORAL LAKE CONSTANCE
SEDIMENT
No detectable iron(II) oxidation took place in non-amended sedi-
ment microcosms incubated in the dark, neither in the microbially
active nor in the sterilized set-up (Figure 2A). However, when the

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 197 | 4

Melton et al.

Iron(II) oxidation in lake sediments

) represent biotic set-ups whilst open circles (

FIGURE 2 | Poorly crystalline Fe(III) formation in microcosm
incubations (y -axis shows total Fe(III) content per microcosm set-up)
over a period of 33 days in dark and light set-ups at 23˚C. Closed circles
(
(160 mM NaN3 addition). (A) Non-amended sediment incubated in the dark,
(B) Non-amended sediment incubated in the light. (C) 4 mM nitrate
amended sediment incubated in the dark, (D) 4 mM nitrate amended
sediment incubated in the light. The dashed and solid lines indicate
modeled trendlines. Error bars indicate minimum and maximum Fe(III)
values from duplicates.

) signify sterile set-ups

−6 μmol Fe(II)/cell·day

−6 μmol Fe(II)/cell·day

same set-up was incubated under light conditions, instant oxida-
tion occurred in non-sterile microcosms with an initial oxidation
rate of 5.4·10
−1 which leveled off after
approximately 8 days (Figure 2B). Sterile set-ups with light did not
exhibit signiﬁcant Fe(II) oxidation. When nitrate was added to the
non-sterile sediment followed by incubation in the dark, iron(II)
oxidation occurred after 8 days of incubation and ceased after
around the 12th day of incubation (Figure 2C). The maximum
iron(II) oxidation rate in these set-ups between days 8 and 12 was
7.1·10
−1. Nitrate addition to the sediment
and incubation under light conditions resulted in an instant onset
of Fe(II) oxidation at a rate of 3.7·10
−6 μmol Fe(II)/cell·day
−1
which plateaued after approximately 8 days (Figure 2D). Fe(II)
oxidation in dark microcosms with addition of Fe(II) or Fe(II)
and bicarbonate (but without nitrate addition) resulted in no sig-
niﬁcant Fe(II) oxidation in neither the microbially active nor in the
sterilized set-up (Figures 3A,B). In light set-ups amended exclu-
sively with ferrous iron, the initial Fe(II)-oxidation rate and extent
were practically equivalent to that amended with ferrous iron and
supplementary bicarbonate addition (Figure 3C).

MAXIMUM Fe(II) OXIDATION RATES CALCULATED FROM PURE
CULTURES AND MICROCOSMS
Several growth experiments in the literature with different pure
culture strains were investigated to calculate the maximum
Fe(II) oxidation rate of several pure strains of anaerobic Fe(II)-
oxidizers. Strain BoFeN1 is a nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing

) represent biotic set-ups

) represent parallel

) represent biotic set-ups with 10 mM Fe(II) and 10 mM HCO

FIGURE 3 | Poorly crystalline Fe(III) formation in microcosm
incubations (y -axis shows total Fe(III) content per microcosm set-up)
over a period of 4 days at 23˚C. Closed circles (
with 10 mM Fe(II) amendment whilst open circles (
sterile set-ups (160 mM NaN3 addition) with the same amendment. Closed
−
triangles (
3
amendment and open triangles (
(160 mM NaN3 addition) with the same amendments. (A) Comparison of
microbially active dark set-up of solely Fe(II) amendment with Fe(II) and
supplementary HCO
of solely Fe(II) amendment with Fe(II) and supplementary HCO
amendments. (C) Comparison of microbially active and sterile light set-ups
of solely Fe(II) amendment with Fe(II) and supplementary HCO
amendments. Error bars indicate minimum and maximum Fe(III) values
from duplicates.

−
3 amendments. (B) Comparison of sterile dark set-up

) represent parallel sterile set-ups

−
3

−
3

β-proteobacterium from the Acidovorax genus isolated from lit-
toral Lake Constance sediment (Kappler et al., 2005b). Growth
experiments with this strain in which cell numbers and Fe(II)
concentration were monitored over time (Muehe et al., 2009) pro-
vided data that allowed the maximum rate calculation for this
species. Two individual photoferrotrophic strains were investi-
gated for their maximum iron oxidation rate. The ﬁrst was iso-
lated from School Street Marsh in Woods Hole Massachusetts;
Rhodopseudomonas palustris, or strain TIE-1 (Jiao et al., 2005).
The second, Rhodobacter ferrooxidans sp. SW2 (Ehrenreich and
Widdel, 1994) was isolated from a pond near Hanover, Germany.
Growth experiments with this strain (Hegler et al., 2008) allowed
the rate calculations to be made. The results are summarized
in Table 2 and show an Fe(II) oxidation rate of 1.0·10
−8 μmol
Fe(II)/cell·day
−1 for the nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing strain
BoFeN1 and 4.4·10
−9 μmol Fe(II)/cell·day
−1 for
the photoferrotrophs SW2 and TIE-1, respectively.

−10 and 6.6·10

DISCUSSION
SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF ANAEROBIC Fe(II)-OXIDIZERS IN
FRESHWATER LAKE SEDIMENT
In the littoral zone, where water levels ﬂuctuate according to waves
and wind shearing, the top layer of the sediment is subjected to
irregular mechanical mixing and light irradiation (Chubarenko
et al., 2003). This causes the oxygen penetration depth to vary
according to these external forces exerted on the sediment and
overlying water (Gerhardt et al., 2005). The oxygen penetration
depth is also inﬂuenced by the ambient temperature, as the disso-
lution of oxygen in pore water is facilitated at lower temperatures.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 197 | 5

Melton et al.

Iron(II) oxidation in lake sediments

Table 2 | Maximum Fe(II) oxidation rates per cell measured in pure
cultures and in littoral freshwater lake sediment from microcosm
experiments.

a metabolism that employs O2 as electron acceptor, or have devel-
oped a way to move together with the oxygen penetration depth,
thus avoiding exposure to oxygen.

Species/group

Acidovorax strain BoFeN1[1]
Rhodobacter ferrooxidans sp. SW2[2]
Rhodopseudomonas palustris, strain TIE-1[3]
Microcosm photoferrotrophs[4]
Microcosm NO

−
3 -reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers[4]

Maximum Fe(II) oxidation
rate (μmol Fe(II)/
cell·day−1)
1.0·10−8
4.4·10−10
6.6·10−9
5.4·10−6
7.1·10−6

[1]Kappler et al. (2005b).
[2]Hegler et al. (2008).
[3]Jiao et al. (2005).
[4]This study, the maximum Fe(II) oxidation rate was determined from the micro-
cosm incubations; the cell numbers used for the calculation stem from the MPN
quantiﬁcation.

Additionally, phototrophic oxygen production causes day/night
ﬂuctuations to the littoral oxygen penetration depth (Gerhardt
et al., 2005) and to the nitrate-reducing redox zone (Gerhardt et al.,
2010). As ferrous iron is readily oxidized to ferric iron by molecu-
lar oxygen (Davison and Seed, 1983), the variable intensity of the
oxygen concentration indubitably causes a variation in the ferrous
iron concentration, which diffuses upward from deeper sediment
layers. During daylight hours, light has been shown to penetrate
through sediment up unto a depth of at least 5–6 mm (Kuehl et al.,
1994). However, the sediment investigated in that study exhibited
a grain size toward the lower range of that of the Lake Constance
sediment. As light penetration depends on the grain size, it is
conceivable that light could reach a depth beyond 6 mm in Lake
Constance littoral sediment. This is conﬁrmed by the observation
that light exposure of the Lake Constance littoral sediment causes
an increase in ferrous iron oxidation up until an approximate
depth of 7.5 mm (Gerhardt et al., 2005). Thus, the light penetration
depth intersects both the oxic and the denitriﬁcation zone. In this
case, the denitriﬁcation zone provides ideal conditions for both
anaerobic photoferrotrophs and nitrate-reducing iron-oxidizing
bacteria. Indeed, the geochemical oxygen proﬁle in combination
with the MPN data in a littoral sediment core clearly demonstrated
that the photoferrotrophic and nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers
co-exist below the sedimentary chemocline in the topmost anoxic
segment of the sediment (Figure 1). Although this method is
restricted in the sense that it cannot directly assess their activ-
ity, their presence is an indication that they could be active in this
sediment layer. Sharing a habitat poses some serious constraints on
their shared substrate requirement and creates a situation where
the potential exists for these two groups of bacteria to individually
adapt to compete for the limited ferrous iron supply. Consider-
ing the variability of the oxygen penetration depth in littoral lake
sediment, the microbes catalyzing these anaerobic processes must
have developed a way to overcome the spatial changeability of
their anoxic habitat beneath the sedimentary chemocline. This can
mean a number of things, for instance they could be more tolerant
to oxygen than previously considered and possibly even switch to

Abundance of anaerobic Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria
Phototrophic Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria have not previously been
enumerated in freshwater lake sediments at circumneutral pH.
There are many variables that could inﬂuence the degree of photo-
ferrotrophic abundance, such as Fe(II) supply and light irradi-
ation. Previously published data only include an MPN study of
Fe(II)-oxidizing phototrophic bacteria in a freshwater town ditch
and a freshwater pond. They report numbers between 1.1·102
and 3.9·103 cells·g
−1 dry weight sediment (Straub and Buchholz-
Cleven, 1998), which are lower than the results from this study
(Figure 1) by approximately two orders of magnitude. An expla-
nation for this discrepancy could simply be that Lake Constance
is a more suitable environment for the photoferrotrophs to thrive
in, since it is a more stable environment than the small ditch or
pond investigated in the other studies and therefore allows the
photoferrotrophs to establish themselves more successfully.

Multiple studies have been conducted on quantifying nitrate-
reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria in environmental samples
(Straub and Buchholz-Cleven, 1998; Hauck et al., 2001; Weber
et al., 2006a; Muehe et al., 2009). In Lake Constance, their abun-
dance was quantiﬁed in both profundal (1.0·104–5.8·105 cells/mL;
Hauck et al., 2001) and littoral sediment (at 5 mm depth;
8·103 cells/mL; Muehe et al., 2009). In the current study we
counted 2.7·104 cells/mL which lies neatly within range of the
previous studies.

Thus, though the littoral Lake Constance photoferrotrophic
abundance is slightly higher than measured in previous studies of
other environments, nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing microor-
ganisms fall within the range of previously quantiﬁed cell num-
bers. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study which has detected
and quantiﬁed both groups of bacterial iron oxidation metabo-
lisms in the same sediment layer.

LIMITATIONS OF ANAEROBIC Fe(II) OXIDATION IN ANOXIC SEDIMENTS
Phototrophic and nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing microorgan-
isms have been formerly studied and cultured in pure cultures
(Ehrenreich and Widdel, 1994; Muehe et al., 2009) and enrich-
ments (Straub and Buchholz-Cleven, 1998) but their collective
in situ behavior has not previously been monitored in the context
of microcosms. Microcosm studies are well suited to investigate
substrate limitations imposed on Fe(II)-oxidizers and thereby the
environmental competition pressure for their substrate require-
ments which control the abundance and activity of the different
groups of Fe(II)-oxidizers. Such studies have so far not yet been
performed for Fe(II)-oxidizers. Consequently, there is little known
about the limitations the natural environment imposes on their
habitat and diet.

Nitrate limitations
The DOC and aqueous Fe(II) concentration in the pore water of
littoral Lake Constance sediment (Table 1) were used to calculate
their electron donating capacity, and thus the amount of nitrate
that could in theory be reduced. Following this, conclusions were

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 197 | 6

Melton et al.

Iron(II) oxidation in lake sediments

drawn on the excess or limitation of nitrate in the natural sediment
assuming the following equation applies to all nitrate-reducing
iron(II)-oxidizing bacteria:
10Fe2+ + 2NO

+ 24H2O → 10Fe(OH)3 + N2 + 18H

+

−
3

(Straub et al., 1996)

The measured dissolved ferrous iron concentration in the pore
water of the sediment was 9.8 μM (Table 1). As 10 mol of iron
can reduce 2 mol of nitrate, this amount of iron can reduce
1.96 μM nitrate in the sediment. Additional to Fe(II) oxidation,
heterotrophic denitriﬁcation is a common process in sedimentary
systems which adheres to the following equation:

−
3

2NO

+ 10 e

− + 12H

+ → N2 + 6H2O

A concentration of 0.39 mM DOC (Table 1) was mea-
sured in the pore water of the lake sediment. As each car-
bon atom in organic matter/biomass has the capacity to donate
approximately four electrons in reduction reactions, the DOC
has a theoretical electron donating capacity of 1.56 mM elec-
trons. These electrons can reduce 0.31 mM nitrate to dinitrogen
through the process of denitriﬁcation. Adding the amount of
nitrate that can be reduced through Fe(II) oxidation and deni-
triﬁcation, 1.96·10
−3 + 0.31 mM respectively, a total amount of
3.12·10
−1 mM nitrate could be reduced. As the dissolved nitrate
concentration in the sediment pore water is 0.1 μM (Table 1),
this suggests that the littoral Lake Constance sediment is severely
nitrate limited. Considering that probably only a fraction of the
DOC is bioavailable, the more than 100-fold excess of electrons
from DOC compared to electrons available from Fe(II) suggests
that the reduction of nitrate using electrons from organic mat-
ter oxidation is more important in this environment than the
oxidation of Fe(II) coupled to nitrate reduction.

If the sediment is indeed limited in nitrate, the metabolism
of the nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers might be compromised,
which would mean they might not be able to optimally oxidize
ferrous iron in natural non-amended sediment. In fact, natural
sediment incubated in the dark did not reveal any detectable Fe(II)
oxidation over time (Figure 2A), however, when the sediment was
amended with 4 mM nitrate the cells did start to oxidize iron, but
only after a lag-phase period of 8 days (Figure 2C). This lack of oxi-
dation in absence of supplementary nitrate addition endorses the
hypothesis that the sediment is nitrate limited, as predicted from
the previous calculations. This gives phototrophic Fe(II)-oxidizers
a substantial advantage during daylight hours, as adding light to
natural sediment evoked an immediate instigation of microbial
Fe(II) oxidation (Figure 2B).

It has previously been reported that most nitrate-reducing
Fe(II)-oxidizers are capable of pure denitriﬁcation (Straub et al.,
1996, 2004; Muehe et al., 2009), utilizing organic carbon as elec-
tron donor. It is possible that the nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers
employ this system of denitriﬁcation in non-amended sediment,
thus explaining the lack of Fe(II) oxidation (Figure 2A). In
nitrate amended sediment microcosms incubated under dark-
ness, Fe(II) oxidation was only initiated after an 8 day lag-phase

(Figure 2C). This suggests that initially denitriﬁcation is cou-
pled to the oxidation of organic matter before switching to the
oxidation of ferrous iron. It has been shown that the model nitrate-
reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing strain BoFeN1 oxidizes acetate before it
utilizes ferrous iron (Kappler et al., 2005b; Chakraborty et al.,
2011). When coupling this observation to the results from this
study, this suggests that the reduction of nitrate is controlled by
a sequential depletion of preferential substrates led by the oxi-
dation of DOC. Furthermore, DOC may be harvested from the
environment and stored in internal storage compartments for use
during periods of substrate limitation. Such storage compartments
have recently been described in the cytoplasm of model organism
BoFeN1 (Miot et al., 2011).

Though mixotrophic iron(II)-oxidizers are known to favor
a denitrifying metabolism which couples nitrate reduction to
organic matter oxidation, addition of ferrous iron to their environ-
ment increases their growth yield (Muehe et al., 2009; Chakraborty
et al., 2011), thus making mixotrophic iron(II) oxidation a ben-
eﬁcial lifestyle. Apart from mixotrophic iron(II) oxidation, it has
been suggested that autotrophic iron(II) oxidation may also be a
feasible metabolism. So far, only an autotrophic nitrate-reducing
Fe(II)-oxidizing co-culture has been successfully enriched (Straub
et al., 1996; Bloethe and Roden, 2009b) and an isolate is yet to
be obtained. As these autotrophic Fe(II)-oxidizers do not require
an organic co-substrate for Fe(II)-oxidation, they theoretically
should be able to initiate Fe(II) oxidation immediately upon incu-
bation for their growth and survival in nitrate amended sediment
(Figure 2C). As this did not occur and an isolate has so far not
yet been attained and cultured for several generations, this begs
the question whether they truly play a signiﬁcant role in Fe(II)
oxidation at all.

Additionally to being capable of denitriﬁcation, some nitrate-
reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing strains are also capable of switching to
a microaerophilic metabolism (Benz et al., 1998; Edwards et al.,
2003). Though it is still speculative, it is feasible that the nitrate-
reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria in littoral lake sediments are
able to adapt to a microaerophilic Fe(II) oxidation metabolism
during daylight hours in order to successfully compete with the
phototrophic Fe(II)-oxidizers for ferrous iron. However, as the
microcosm incubation experiments in our study were set-up anox-
ically, microaerophilic Fe(II) oxidation could not occur. Studying
the competition between microaerophilic, nitrate-reducing, and
phototrophic Fe(II)-oxidizers in a stratiﬁed system during the
day-night cycle will be an interesting topic of research in future
studies.

The capability to switch to an alternative metabolism is also
known for other strains instrumental to the Fe cycle. For instance,
Geobacter strains are capable of switching between nitrate-
reducing Fe(II) oxidation and Fe(III) reduction (Weber et al.,
2006b; Coby et al., 2011) though a lag-phase resulting from the
necessity to synthesize proteins for an alternative metabolism has
not yet been described in Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria and it is hith-
erto unknown if and how this lag-phase manifests itself in the
natural environment. The ability to switch between metabolisms
may be more widespread and more frequently engaged than pre-
viously thought, to maintain a dynamic Fe cycle in environments
subjected to constantly changing geochemical parameters.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 197 | 7

Melton et al.

Iron(II) oxidation in lake sediments

Co-substrate limitations
Many nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers require an organic co-
substrate to maintain optimum iron(II) oxidation rates and for
continuous growth over several generations (Straub et al., 1996).
Many growth experiments necessitate acetate addition to Fe(II)
saturated systems ranging between 0.5 and 2.0 mM acetate per
4–8 mM Fe(II) (Straub et al., 1996, 2004; Kappler et al., 2005b;
Muehe et al., 2009). The littoral Lake Constance sediments contain
0.39 mM DOC and 9.8 μM Fe(II) (Table 1). Hence, the sediment
contains more organic carbon than Fe(II), which means nitrate-
reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria are most probably not limited
in the availability of an organic co-substrate required for Fe(II)
oxidation. Consequentially, there is no objection for denitriﬁca-
tion to be coupled to organic carbon oxidation which explains
why there is a lack of Fe(II) oxidation in non-amended sediments
incubated under darkness (Figure 2A) and why there is an initial
lag-phase before Fe(II) oxidation in dark nitrate amended sedi-
ments (Figure 2C). Photoferrotrophs do not require an organic
co-substrate since they use CO2 as electron acceptor, therefore they
would not be affected by an organic carbon limitation.

Bicarbonate limitations
To investigate whether phototrophic Fe(II)-oxidizers are subjected
to inorganic carbon limitations, set-ups containing either only
10 mM ferrous iron, or 10 mM ferrous iron and 10 mM bicar-
bonate amendments were set-up (Figure 3). Using the TIC con-
centration measured in the pore water (Table 1) the amount of
bicarbonate in the sediments could be estimated to be 6.26 mM.
This means that the bicarbonate amended sediments contain
roughly three times more bicarbonate than the non-amended
sediments. In light set-ups containing ferrous iron amendment,
the Fe(II) oxidation extent was independent from bicarbonate
addition. This suggests that photoferrotrophic Fe(II) oxidation
is not restricted by the supply of bicarbonate in the sediments,
which further suggests that as soon as there is Fe(II) and light
available, phototrophic Fe(II) oxidation will commence immedi-
ately, giving them a seemingly unprecedented advantage over the
nitrate-reducing iron(II)-oxidizers. Consequently, phototrophic
iron oxidation may be of paramount importance to the iron cycle
in these littoral freshwater sediments.

THE POTENTIAL FOR COMPETITION BETWEEN NITRATE-REDUCING
AND PHOTOTROPHIC Fe(II)-OXIDIZERS
By quantifying the Fe(II) oxidation rate per cell per day from pure
culture studies and environmentally relevant microcosms, the rel-
ative contribution efﬁciency of the two different metabolic groups
of anaerobic Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria to overall environmental
Fe(III) formation could be assessed. Additionally, by comparing
these oxidation rates and extent of Fe(III) formation, conclusions
on the competition between these two co-existing groups could
be evaluated, which has hitherto remained an un-investigated
research topic.

Maximum Fe(II) oxidation rates
It can be expected that the Fe(II) oxidation rate attained by bacte-
ria cultivated in pure cultures is higher than the rate obtained in
environmental systems. In a controlled and optimized laboratory

setting they have unlimited access to the nutrients and living space
they require to thrive. However, the maximum Fe(II) oxidation
rates calculated from pure culture studies were signiﬁcantly lower,
by two to four orders of magnitude, than those observed in the
microcosms with littoral sediments (Table 2). This may be due to
an underestimation of the environmental cell numbers owing to
limitations afﬁliated with the MPN method (Cochran, 1950). As a
consequence, the Fe(II) oxidation rate would have been calculated
with too few cells, thus obtaining a higher Fe(II)-oxidation rate
per cell than is actually achieved. Also, the broader microbial com-
munity in the sediment may have a beneﬁcial effect on the Fe(II)
oxidation rates which cannot be obtained by a pure culture; as the
littoral sediment has a pore water concentration of 41% (Table 1),
it is conceivable that the cells may achieve interspecies commu-
nication networks via quorum sensing. The sediments contain
mixed interspecies colonies and bioﬁlms of associated microbes
that can interact and thus potentially lead to higher Fe(II) oxida-
tion rates than single species can obtain in pure cultures. Moreover,
the natural sediment may provide additional micronutrients and
vitamins that are central to their growth and survival that are
not mimicked in the artiﬁcial medium in laboratory experiments
with pure cultures. Overall, the nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing
bacteria seem to exhibit a faster oxidation rate than the photofer-
rotrophic bacteria in both the pure cultures and the microcosms
(Table 2).

Competition dynamics
Assuming that the light set-up with the original sediment speciﬁ-
cally selects the phototrophic Fe(II)-oxidizers (Figure 2B), whilst
the nitrate amended dark sediment set-up solely selects the nitrate-
reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers (Figure 2C), the two curves, modeled
based on trendlines, in these separate set-ups exclusively repre-
sent these particular anaerobic Fe(II)-oxidizing groups. The set-up
that contains both light and nitrate hosts a combination of both
the phototrophic and nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing groups
(Figure 2D). Thus, the superposition of the modeled iron(II) oxi-
dation curves from each individual bacterial group on the Fe(II)
oxidation in this particular coupled set-up allows us to draw con-
clusions on the contribution of each group to the total iron(III)
formation (Figure 4). This overlay of the separate roles anaer-
obic phototrophic and nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria
play in Fe(III) formation, shows that the phototrophic model cor-
responds closely to the Fe(III) formation over time when both
processes can simultaneously take place. The Fe(II) oxidation
capacity of the photoferrotrophic microorganisms in littoral fresh-
water lake sediment is 1.08 μmol Fe(II) per day. This could be
calculated from the photoferrotrophic Fe(II) oxidation rate in lit-
toral sediments (Table 2), and the number of photoferrotrophs in
the sediment (Figure 1). As the Fe(II) concentration in the sed-
iment is 9.8 μM (Table 1), the photoferrotrophs will deplete the
dissolved Fe(II) supply in the sediment within 1 day. Set-ups con-
taining 10 mM Fe(II) as well as 4 mM supplementary nitrate exhib-
ited the same 8 day lag-phase before initiating Fe(II) oxidation in
dark set-ups (data not shown), and they demonstrated the same
instant photoferrotrophic Fe(II) oxidation trend as in sediments
only containing additional nitrate in light set-ups. This suggests
that independent from the supply of Fe(II) from deeper sediment

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 197 | 8

Melton et al.

Iron(II) oxidation in lake sediments

the light penetration depth of the incident light must penetrate
beyond the oxygen penetration depth for the anaerobic photo-
ferrotrophs to harvest the light for energy, which has previously
been shown to occur in similar sediments (Kuehl et al., 1994).
When cloud cover and twilight prevent maximum light irradia-
tion, the photoferrotrophs could possibly survive by converting to
chemoheterotrophic growth when organics are present in excess,
which has been reported to be possible for at least one photofer-
rotrophic strain (Jiao et al., 2005). This provides nitrate-reducing
Fe(II)-oxidizers with the upper hand, as they have the opportu-
nity to utilize all the available Fe(II) after they have consumed the
bioavailable carbon, provided this period of heterotrophic nitrate
reduction does not take longer than the night and that they are not
limited in nitrate. When the sun comes up, the photoferrotrophs
immediately take over the dominant role in Fe(II) oxidation. As
many nitrate-reducing Fe(II) oxidizers are able to switch to a pure
denitrifying metabolism (Straub et al., 1996, 2004; Muehe et al.,
2009) this leaves the nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers to survive
on pure denitriﬁcation, as long as organic matter and nitrate are
simultaneously available. This means that although there is poten-
tial for the two Fe(II)-oxidizing groups to directly compete for
ferrous iron during optimal light conditions, they are prevented
from doing so because their functions are not separated in space
as in conventional niche separation, but in time by the day-night
cycle. This means that they still fulﬁll the same function: oxidizing
reduced iron(II) beneath the sedimentary oxic-anoxic interface,
but the photoferrotrophs perform this function exclusively dur-
ing the day, whilst nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers mostly have
the opportunity to execute this at night. Alternatively, the nitrate-
reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria may compete with the photo-
ferrotrophs during daylight hours by adopting a microaerophilic
Fe(II)-oxidizing metabolism once they have exhausted the organic
carbon and nitrate supply. By eliminating their nitrate requirement
this would allow them to overcome the nitrate limitation imposed
on their habitat, thus increasing the probability of success when
directly competing with the photoferrotrophs for reduced iron.

When considering all scenarios, a niche separation in time
rather than space and the switching from a nitrate-reducing
Fe(II)-oxidizing metabolism to a microaerophilic one and the
substrate limitations to which the sediment is subjected and com-
bining them altogether, we can speculate on the distribution of
the different metabolisms by the two Fe(II)-oxidizing groups of
bacteria during daylight and night-time hours (Figure 5). Photo-
ferrotrophs outcompete the nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers dur-
ing daylight hours (Figure 4). Therefore, it is conceivable that
the nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers abandon this unfruitful
method of energy sequestration for either denitriﬁcation or
microaerophilia. However, as the sediments are severely limited
in nitrate (Table 1), it is unlikely that denitriﬁcation based on
either organic carbon or Fe(II) oxidation will provide sufﬁcient
energy to sustain a bacterial population. Therefore, it is more
likely that they are able to compete with photoferrotrophs for
Fe(II) by using oxygen as electron acceptor in a microaerophilic
metabolism. At night photoferrotrophic bacteria are unable to
metabolize using a photosynthetic based energy source and the
oxygen penetration depth lies nearer to the surface in the sedi-
ments. The shallowing of the oxygen penetration depth causes an

FIGURE 4 | Superposition of poorly crystalline Fe(III) formation (y -axis
shows total Fe(III) content per microcosm set-up) in littoral lake
sediments by photoferrotrophs (
Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria (
Fe(III) formation (
under constant light at 23˚C. Error bars indicate minimum and maximum
Fe(III) values from duplicates.

) in 4 mM nitrate amended sediments incubated

) onto measured poorly crystalline

) and nitrate-reducing

layers and dissolution of Fe(II)-minerals, even though nitrate-
reducing Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria can start actively respiring iron
after 8 days, there will not be sufﬁcient Fe(II) left for them to
respire as the photoferrotrophs will have depleted the Fe(II) sup-
ply by then. So even though nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers are
able to oxidize iron at a higher rate than their phototrophic com-
petitors (Table 2), they are still outcompeted during optimal light
and temperature conditions due to substrate limitation. How-
ever, even though it is feasible that they should compete with one
another for ferrous iron, denitriﬁers essentially favor the available
organic carbon as electron donor before switching to Fe(II) oxi-
dation. Therefore, they do not necessarily need to compete with
the photoferrotrophs for ferrous iron, because they can also sur-
vive on organic carbon. This suggests that the dynamics of nitrate
dependent Fe(II) oxidation, at least in this sediment, are likely reg-
ulated by the relative availability of organic matter rather than by
the competition with photoferrotrophs for ferrous iron.

Day-night cycle
Despite the fact that nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers are outcom-
peted by photoferrotrophs during optimum light conditions, and
the nitrate-reducers are limited in nitrate, they are still both found
in the upper anoxic sediment layer. Although presence does not
necessarily indicate activity, it provides an indication that they
could be active, in which case they must have developed a mecha-
nism to cope with the substrate limitations they are subjected to.
One possibility is that they are able to co-exist due to the occur-
rence of the day-night cycle. The oxygen penetration depth in the
sediments is heavily inﬂuenced by light (Gerhardt et al., 2005), thus
the upper anoxic sediment layer shifts according to a day-night
rhythm. Additionally, the photoferrotrophs are not able to oxidize
ferrous iron at night, simply due to the lack of light. Furthermore,

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 197 | 9

Melton et al.

Iron(II) oxidation in lake sediments

upward shift in all the subsequent redox zones. Therefore, the den-
itriﬁcation zone essentially migrates into what was previously the
micro-oxic zone (Gerhardt et al., 2010). This provides nitrate to the
microaerophilic bacteria, and deprives them of oxygen, providing
them with the option to switch back to a nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-
oxidizing metabolism as they no longer suffer competition pres-
sure from the photoferrotrophs for ferrous iron. Nevertheless, if
they are able to harbor motility, it is also possible for them to main-
tain microaerophilic Fe(II) oxidation as there is still oxygen present
in the sediment at night, albeit less and higher up in the sediment
than during the day. During the night the photoferrotrophs will
probably switch to a chemoheterotrophic metabolism due to the
lack of light, requiring organic carbon as substrate. Denitriﬁcation
coupled to organic carbon oxidation then becomes an unfavor-
able option for the nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers as they would
need to compete for organic carbon with the photoferrotrophs.
When the sun comes up, the photoferrotrophs are immediately
able to oxidize any Fe(II) present (Figure 2B) and other oxygen-
producing phototrophic processes are able to proceed, deepening
the oxygen penetration depth. This exposes the nitrate-reducing
Fe(II)-oxidizers to substrate competitors and oxygen, forcing them
to switch back to a microaerophilic metabolism in order to sustain
Fe(II)-based growth. Moreover, as the daytime microaerophilic
oxidation zone during the day coincides with that of nitrate reduc-
tion during the night (Figure 5) due to the shifting redox zones,
it would be unnecessary for the bacteria to physically move to a
different redox zone if they switch their anaerobic metabolism to
a microaerophilic one. In fact, bacteria are unable to swim great
distances due to buffeting by Brownian motion and their motion
path is not straight but curved resulting from a rotating ﬂagel-
lum (Armitage, 1999), reinforcing the hypothesis that switching
between metabolisms is a feasible option. Alternatively, they can
adopt a denitrifying metabolism, oxidizing organic carbon. This
implies that not only their niche for Fe(II) oxidation is organized
in a day-night rhythm, their metabolisms are staggered to alternate
between organic carbon and ferrous iron oxidation as a strategy
to overcome direct competition pressure. Hence, our results sug-
gest that the two iron(II) oxidation processes indeed probably do
not need to compete directly with each other, as they are tempo-
rally separated by the day-night cycle and due to the fact that the
nitrate-reducers preferentially use organic carbon before Fe(II) as
their electron donor.

Seasonal dynamics
If these two metabolic groups of anaerobic Fe(II)-oxidizers indeed
rely on the day-night cycle, then they are also inﬂuenced by sea-
sonal oscillations which create longer days as summer progresses,
and shorter ones as the winter comes around. Additionally, the
light intensity affects the primary productivity of the overall sed-
imentary microbial community (Overmann and Tilzer, 1989).
Previous studies have reported that the ferrous iron concentra-
tion also varied throughout the year, being lowest in winter and
highest at the end of the summer (Gerhardt et al., 2005). More-
over, Lake Constance hosts an annual spring phytoplankton bloom
which generates a large inﬂux of organic carbon into the sediments
(Peeters et al., 2007), possibly facilitating the nitrate-reducing
Fe(II)-oxidizing communities in the sediments by blocking direct

FIGURE 5 | Schematic diagram illustrating the shifting distribution of
Fe(II)-oxidizing metabolisms (i.e., varying electron acceptors for
ferrous iron oxidation) and the typical depth distribution of oxygen,
nitrate, and light during the day/night cycle in littoral freshwater lake
sediments. Sediment depth is typically on a mm scale. During the daytime
there are three possible Fe(II)-oxidizing metabolisms active in the sediment
column: microaerophiles, photoferrotrophs, and nitrate-reducing
Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria. During the night, Fe(II) can only be oxidized through
microaerophilic and nitrate-reducing Fe(II) oxidation.

sunlight in the water column, and providing organic co-substrates
to the sediment. Another central variable is temperature, which
not only affects biotic activity, but also geochemical parameters
such as the solubility of oxygen. It has been reported that photo-
ferrotrophic cultures of KoFox and SW2 are able to oxidize ferrous
iron over a wide temperature scale ranging from 5˚C to 30˚C, with
their optimum lying around the 25˚C (Hegler et al., 2008). This
suggests that they might be able to oxidize iron more efﬁciently
during summer when the temperature is higher. As the sediment
used in the present study was sampled in winter, it is conceivable
that the nitrate and carbon limitations may only be of signiﬁcant
importance during winter. The fact that the variables affecting
substrate availability for anaerobic Fe(II) oxidation are controlled
by seasonal forcing suggests that seasonal dynamics may play a
large role in the co-existence of the microorganisms catalyzing
these processes.

CONCLUSION
Anaerobic nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers and photoferrotrophs
co-exist in littoral freshwater lake sediments in the topmost anoxic
sediment layer directly below the oxygen penetration depth. They
share a common ferrous iron substrate requirement that is only
present in limited supply, thus creating a situation in which they
ought to compete for Fe(II). However, the results showed that this
is not necessarily the case and their ability to co-exist may be attrib-
uted to the day-night cycle. Lake Constance’s littoral sediments
are limited in nitrate, which poses a challenge for nitrate-reducing

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 197 | 10

Melton et al.

Iron(II) oxidation in lake sediments

iron(II)-oxidizing bacteria. Nevertheless, nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-
oxidizers exhibit a faster Fe(II) oxidation rate both in pure cultures
and in the environmental systems (microcosms) than photofer-
rotrophs. However, during optimal light and substrate conditions
they are outcompeted by photoferrotrophic bacteria. Thus, their
co-existence may be possible due to a niche separation in time
by the day-night cycle, where nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-oxidizers
oxidize ferrous iron during darkness and phototrophs play a dom-
inant role in ferrous iron oxidation during daylight. Furthermore,
metabolic ﬂexibility of Fe(II)-oxidizing microbes may play a para-
mount role in the conservation of the sedimentary iron cycle, as
the dynamics of nitrate dependent Fe(II) oxidation, at least in this
sediment, are likely regulated by the relative availability of organic
matter rather than by the competition with photoferrotrophs for
ferrous iron.

Many open questions remain that invite the opportunity to
explore the previously un-investigated co-existence of these two
groups of anaerobic Fe(II)-oxidizers. Future studies will moni-
tor nitrate ﬂuctuations in the sediments and elucidate the role of
microaerophilic Fe(II) oxidation in the sedimentary Fe(II) acqui-
sition simultaneous with photoferrotrophy and nitrate-reducing
Fe(II) oxidation during light conditions. The possibility and

associated lag-phases of the interchanging nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-
oxidizing or organic carbon-oxidizing and microaerophilic Fe(II)-
oxidizing metabolisms will also be investigated by surveying and
comparing Fe(II) and DOC oxidation rates. Additionally, knowl-
edge on Fe (II) oxidation in microcosms which are switched
between day and night conditions will pose a valuable contribu-
tion to getting closer to in situ environmental conditions. Further
studies, including seasonality and light iridescence effects, will cer-
tainly shed more light on these unknown factors in this fascinating
sedimentary system.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was funded by a DFG grant to A. Kappler (KA1736/16-
1), a Marie Curie ERG grant to C. Schmidt (PERF04-GA-2008-
239252), and a Landesgraduiertenförderung fellowship to E. D.
Melton (Gz l 1.2_7631.2/Melton). Many thanks to Ellen Struve
for the TIC and DOC measurements. Thanks to Dr. Heinrich
Taubald (University of Tübingen) for XRF analysis of the sedi-
ment and Dr. Reiner Ruser (University of Hohenheim) for mea-
−
−
suring dissolved NO
2 concentrations. Last, but not
3 and NO
least, we would like to thank the two reviewers for improving
the manuscript.

REFERENCES
Armitage, J. P. (1999). Bacterial tactic
responses. Adv. Microb. Physiol. 41,
229–289.

Benz, M., Brune, A., and Schink, B.
(1998). Anaerobic and aerobic oxi-
dation of
ferrous iron at neutral
pH by chemoheterotrophic nitrate-
reducing bacteria. Arch. Microbiol.
169, 159–165.

Bloethe, M., and Roden, E. E. (2009a).
Microbial
iron redox cycling in
a circumneutral-pH groundwater
seep. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75,
468–473.

and

activity

Bloethe, M., and Roden, E. E. (2009b).
of
Composition
an autotrophic
Fe(II)-oxidizing,
nitrate-reducing enrichment cul-
ture. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75,
6937–6940.

Bonneville, S., Van Cappellen, P.,
and Behrends, T. (2004). Micro-
bial reduction of iron(III) oxyhy-
droxides: effects of mineral solubil-
ity and availability. Chem. Geol. 212,
255–268.

Bruun,A. M., Finster, K., Gunnlaugsson,
H. P., Nornberg, P., and Friedrich, M.
W. (2010). A comprehensive investi-
gation on iron cycling in a freshwa-
ter seep including microscopy, cul-
tivation and molecular community
analysis. Geomicrobiol. J. 27, 15–34.
Canﬁeld, D. E. (1989). Reactive iron
in marine sediments. Geochim. Cos-
mochim. Acta 53, 619–632.

Canﬁeld, D. E., and Thamdrup, B.
(2009). Towards a consistent classiﬁ-
cation scheme for geochemical envi-
ronments, or, why we wish the term

“suboxic” would go away. Geobiology
7, 385–392.

Canﬁeld, D. E., Thamdrup, B., and
Hansen, J. W. (1993). The anaer-
obic degradation of organic-matter
in danish coastal sediments – iron
reduction, manganese
reduction,
and sulfate reduction. Geochim. Cos-
mochim. Acta 57, 3867–3883.

Chakraborty, A., Roden, E. E., Schieber,
J., and Picardal, F. (2011). Enhanced
growth of Acidovorax sp. strain 2AN
during nitrate-dependent Fe(II) oxi-
dation in batch and continuous-ﬂow
systems. Appl. Enviorn. Microbiol. 77,
8548–8556.

Chubarenko,

I., Chubarenko, B.,
Bauerle, E., Wang, Y., and Hutter, K.
(2003). Autumn physical limnolog-
ical experimental campaign in the
Island Mainau littoral zone of Lake
Constance. J. Limnol. 62, 115–119.

Coby, A. J., Picardal, F., Shelobolina, E.,
Xu, H., and Roden, E. E. (2011).
Repeated anaerobic microbial redox
cycling of iron. Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 77, 6036–6042.

Cochran, W. G. (1950). Estimation of
bacterial densities by means of the
“most probable number.” Biometrics
6, 105–116.

Cornell, R. M., and Schwertmann,
U. (2003). The Iron Oxides, Struc-
ture, Properties, Reactions, Occur-
rences and Uses. Weinheim: Wiley-
VCH.

Crowe, S. A., Jones, C., Katsev, S.,
Magen, C., O’Neill, A. H., Sturm,
A., Canﬁeld, D. E., Haffner, G. D.,
Mucci, A., Sundby, B., and Fowle, D.
A. (2008). Photoferrotrophs thrive

in an Archean Ocean analogue.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
15938–15943.

the oxidation of

Davison, W., and Seed, G. (1983). The
kinetics of
fer-
rous iron in synthetic and natural
waters. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta
47, 67–79.

Diez, S., Noonan, G. O., Macfarlane,
J. K., and Gschwend, P. M. (2007).
Ferrous
in
the pycnocline of a permanently
stratiﬁed lake. Chemosphere 66,
1561–1570.

iron oxidation rates

Druschel, G. K., Emerson, D., Sutka,
R., Suchecki, P., and Luther, G. W.
(2008). Low-oxygen and chemical
kinetic constraints on the geochem-
ical niche of neutrophilic iron(II)
oxidizing microorganisms. Geochim.
Cosmochim. Acta 72, 3358–3370.

Dudgeon, D., Arthington, A. H., Gess-
ner, M. O., Kawabata, Z. I., Knowler,
D.
J., Leveque, C., Naiman, R.
J., Prieur-Richard, A.-H., Soto, D.,
Stiassny, M. L.
J., and Sullivan,
C. A. (2006). Freshwater biodiver-
sity: importance, threats, status and
conservation challenges. Biol. Rev.
Camb. Philos. Soc. 81, 163–182.

Edwards, K. J., Rogers, D. R., Wirsen, C.
O., and McCollom, T. M. (2003). Iso-
lation and characterization of novel
psychrophilic,
Fe-
oxidizing,
chemolithoautotrophic
alpha- and, gamma-Proteobacteria
from the deep sea. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 69, 2906–2913.

neutrophilic,

Ehrenreich, A., and Widdel, F. (1994).
Anaerobic oxidation of ferrous iron
by purple bacteria, a new-type

of phototrophic metabolism. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 60, 4517–4526.

novel

and
iron-oxidizing

Emerson, D., and Moyer, C. (1997).
characterization
Isolation
of
bacte-
ria that grow at circumneutral
pH. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63,
4784–4792.

Froelich, P. N., Klinkhammer, G. P., Ben-
der, M. L., Luedtke, N. A., Heath, G.
R., Cullen, D., Dauphin, P., Ham-
mond, D., Hartman, B., and May-
nard, V. (1979). Early oxidation of
organic matter in pleagic sediments
of
the eastern equatorial atlantic
suboxic diagenesis. Geochim. Cos-
mochim. Acta 43, 1075–1090.

Gerhardt, S., Boos, K., and Schink, B.
(2010). Uptake and release of phos-
phate by littoral sediment of a fresh-
water lake under the inﬂuence of
light or mechanical perturbation. J.
Limnol. 69, 54–63.

Gerhardt, S., Brune, A., and Schink, B.
(2005). Dynamics of redox changes
of iron caused by light-dark vari-
ations in littoral sediment of a
freshwater lake. Biogeochemistry 74,
323–339.

Hauck, S., Benz, M., Brune, A., and
Schink, B. (2001). Ferrous iron oxi-
dation by denitrifying bacteria in
profundal sediments of a deep lake
(Lake Constance). FEMS Microbiol.
Ecol. 37, 127–134.

Hegler, F., Kappler, A., Posth, N. R., and
Jiang, J. (2008). Physiology of pho-
totrophic iron(II)-oxidizing bacte-
ria:
implications for modern and
ancient environments. FEMS Micro-
biol. Ecol. 66, 250–260.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 197 | 11

Melton et al.

Iron(II) oxidation in lake sediments

Heising, S., Richter, L., Ludwig, W., and
Schink, B. (1999). Chlorobium fer-
rooxidans sp nov., a phototrophic
green sulfur bacterium that oxi-
dizes ferrous iron in coculture with
a “Geospirillum” sp strain. Arch.
Microbiol. 172, 116–124.

and

Jiao, Y., Kappler, A., Croal, L. R.,
(2005).
and Newman, D. K.
characterization
Isolation
a genetically traceable pho-
of
Fe(II)-oxidizing
toautotrophic
Rhodopseudomonas
bacterium,
palustris strain TIE-1. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 71, 4487–4496.

Kappler, A., and Newman, D. K. (2004).
Formation of Fe(III)-minerals by
Fe(II)-oxidizing photoautotrophic
bacteria. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta
68, 1217–1226.

Kappler, A., Pasquero, C., Konhauser,
K. O., and Newman, D. K. (2005a).
Deposition of banded iron forma-
tions by anoxygenic phototrophic
Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria. Geology
33, 865–868.

Kappler, A., Schink, B., and New-
man, D. K. (2005b). Fe(III) min-
eral formation and cell encrusta-
tion by the nitrate-dependent Fe(II)-
oxidizer strain BoFeN1. Geobiology
3, 235–245.

Kappler, A., and Straub, K. L. (2005).
Geomicrobiological cycling of iron.
Rev. Mineral. Geochem. 59, 85–108.
Klee, A. J. (1993). A computer-program
for the determination of most prob-
able number and its conﬁdence-
limits.
J. Microbiol. Methods 18,
91–98.

Konhauser, K. O., Hamade, T., Raiswell,
R., Morris, R. C., Ferris, F. G.,
Southam, G., and Canﬁeld, D.
E.
(2002). Could bacteria have
formed the Precambrian banded
iron
30,
1079–1082.

formations? Geology

Konhauser, K. O., Kappler, A., and
Roden, E. E. (2011). Iron in micro-
bial metabolisms. Elements 7, 89–93.
Kuehl, M., Lassen, C., and Jorgensen,
B. B. (1994). Light penetration and
light intensity in sandy marine sedi-
ments measured with irradiance and
scalar irradiance ﬁber-optic micro-
probes. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 105,
139–148.

Larese-Casanova, P., Haderlein, S. B.,
and Kappler, A. (2010). Biomin-
eralization of
lepidocrocite and
goethite by nitrate-reducing Fe(II)-
oxidizing bacteria: effect of pH,
bicarbonate, phosphate, and humic
acids. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 74,
3721–3734.

Lovley, D. R., Holmes, D. E., and Nevin,
K. P. (2004). Dissimilatory Fe(III)
and Mn(IV) reduction. Adv. Microb.
Physiol. 49, 219–286.

Lovley, D. R., and Phillips, E. J. P. (1988).
Novel mode of microbial energy-
metabolism – organic-carbon oxida-
tion coupled to dissimilatory reduc-
tion of Iron or Manganese. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 54, 1472–1480.

Macdonald, L. H., Moon, H. S., and
Jaffe, P. R. (2011). The role of
biomass, electron shuttles, and fer-
rous iron in the kinetics of Geobac-
ter
sulfurreducens-mediated ferri-
hydrite reduction. Water Res. 45,
1049–1062.

Miot, J., Maclellan, K., Benzerera, K.,
and Boisset, N. (2011). Preservation
of protein globules and peptidogly-
can in the mineralized cell wall of
nitrate-reducing, iron(II)-oxidizing
bacteria: a cryo-electron microscopy
study. Geobiology 9, 459–470.

Muehe, E. M., Gerhardt, S., and Kap-
pler, A., and Schink, B. (2009). Eco-
physiology and the energetic beneﬁt
of mixotrophic Fe(II) oxidation by
various strains of nitrate-reducing
bacteria. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 70,
335–343.

Overmann, J., and Tilzer, M. M. (1989).
Control of primary and the signiﬁ-
cance of photosynthetic bacteria in
a meromictic kettle lake Mittlerer
Buchensee, West-Germany. Aquat.
Sci. 51, 261–278.

Peeters, F., Straile, D., Lorke, A.,
and Ollinger, D. (2007). Turbu-
lent mixing and phytoplankton
spring bloom development
in a
deep lake. Limnol. Oceanogr. 52,
286–298.

Posth, N. R., Hegler, F., Konhauser, K.
O., and Kappler, A. (2008). Alter-
nating Si and Fe deposition caused
by temperature ﬂuctuations in Pre-
cambrian oceans. Nat. Geosci. 1,
703–708.

Poulain, A. J., and Newman, D. K.
(2009). Rhodobacter capsulatus cat-
alyzes light-dependent Fe(II) oxi-
dation under anaerobic conditions
as a potential detoxiﬁcation mech-
anism. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75,
6639–6646.

Rahalkar, M., Deutzmann, J., Schink,
B., and Bussmann, I. (2009). Abun-
dance and activity of methan-
otrophic bacteria in littoral and pro-
fundal sediments of Lake Constance
(Germany). Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 75, 119–126.

Raven,

J. A., and Cockell, C. S.
(2006). Inﬂuence on photosynthe-
sis of starlight, moonlight, planet-
light, and light pollution (reﬂections
on photosynthetically active radia-
tion in the universe). Astrobiology 6,
668–675.

Schmidt, C., Behrens, S., and Kappler, A.
(2010). Ecosystem functioning from
a geomicrobiological perspective –
a conceptual
framework for bio-
geochemical iron cycling. Environ.
Chem. 7, 399–405.

Sobolev, D., and Roden, E. E. (2002).
Evidence for rapid microscale bacte-
rial redox cycling of iron in circum-
neutral environments. Antonie Van
Leeuwenhoek 81, 587–597.

Stookey, L. L. (1970). Ferrozine-a new
spectrophotometric reagent for iron.
Anal. Chem. 42, 779–781.

Straub, K. L., Benz, M., Schink, B.,
and Widdel, F. (1996). Anaerobic,
nitrate-dependent microbial oxida-
tion of ferrous iron. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 62, 1458–1460.

Straub, K. L., and Buchholz-Cleven,
B. E. E. (1998). Enumeration and
detection of anaerobic ferrous iron-
oxidizing, nitrate-reducing bacte-
ria from diverse European sedi-
ments. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64,
4846–4856.

Straub, K.

of

L.,

Schoenhuber, W.
A., Buchholz-Cleven, B. E. E.,
and Schink, B.
(2004). Diver-
sity
iron-oxidizing,
ferrous
nitrate-reducing bacteria and their
involvement in oxygen-independent
iron cycling. Geomicrobiol. J. 21,
371–378.

Thamdrup, B. (2000). Bacterial man-
ganese and iron reduction in aquatic

sediments. Adv. Microb. Ecol. 16,
41–84.

Weber, K. A., Pollock,

J., Cole, K.
A., O’Connor, S. M., Achenbach,
L. A., and Coates, J. D. (2006a).
Anaerobic
nitrate-dependent
iron(II) bio-oxidation by a novel
lithoautotrophic
betaproteobac-
terium, strain 2002. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 72, 686–694.

Weber, K. A., Urrutia, M. M., Churchill,
P. F., Kukkadapu, R. K.,
and
Roden, E. E. (2006b). Anaerobic
redox cycling of iron by freshwater
sediment microorganisms. Environ.
Microbiol. 8, 100–113.

Widdel, F., Schnell, S., Heising, S.,
Ehrenreich, A., Assmus, B., and
Schink, B. (1993). Ferrous iron oxi-
dation by anoxygenic phototrophic
bacteria. Nature 362, 834–836.

Xiong, J., Fischer, W. M., Inoue, K.,
Nakahara, M., and Bauer, C. E.
(2000). Molecular evidence for the
early evolution of photosynthesis.
Science 289, 1724–1730.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

between

the potential

lake sediment:

nitrate-reducing

Received: 14 November 2011; accepted:
14 May 2012; published online: 31 May
2012.
Citation: Melton ED,
Schmidt C
and Kappler A (2012) Microbial
freshwa-
iron(II) oxidation in littoral
for
ter
phototrophic
competition
iron(II)-
vs.
3:197.
Front. Microbio.
oxidizers.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00197
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Microbiological Chemistry, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Melton, Schmidt and
Kappler. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution Non Com-
mercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 197 | 12

