ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 22 March 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00104

Population dynamics of Borrelia burgdorferi in Lyme
disease

Sebastian C. Binder 1, Arndt Telschow 2 and Michael Meyer-Hermann1,3*

1 Department of Systems Immunology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany
2 Institute for Evolution and Biodiversity, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Germany
3 Bio Center for Life Sciences, University of Technology Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany

Edited by:
Marc Thilo Figge, Leibniz-Institute for
Natural Product Research and
Infection Biology – Hans-Knoell-
Institute, Germany
Reviewed by:
Franziska Mech, Leibniz-Institute for
Natural Product Research and
Infection Biology – Hans-Knoell-
Institute, Germany
Ute Neugebauer, Institute of Photonic
Technology, Germany
*Correspondence:
Michael Meyer-Hermann, Department
of Systems Immunology, Helmholtz
Centre for Infection Research,
Inhoffenstr. 7, 38124 Braunschweig,
Germany.
e-mail: michael.meyer-hermann@
helmholtz-hzi.de

Many chronic inﬂammatory diseases are known to be caused by persistent bacterial or
viral infections. A well-studied example is the tick-borne infection by the gram-negative
spirochaetes of the genus Borrelia in humans and other mammals, causing severe symp-
toms of chronic inﬂammation and subsequent tissue damage (Lyme Disease), particularly
in large joints and the central nervous system, but also in the heart and other tissues of
untreated patients. Although killed efﬁciently by human phagocytic cells in vitro, Borrelia
exhibits a remarkably high infectivity in mice and men. In experimentally infected mice, the
ﬁrst immune response almost clears the infection. However, approximately 1 week post
infection, the bacterial population recovers and reaches an even larger size before entering
the chronic phase.We developed a mathematical model describing the bacterial growth and
the immune response against Borrelia burgdorferi in the C3H mouse strain that has been
established as an experimental model for Lyme disease.The peculiar dynamics of the infec-
tion exclude two possible mechanistic explanations for the regrowth of the almost cleared
bacteria. Neither the hypothesis of bacterial dissemination to different tissues nor a limi-
tation of phagocytic capacity were compatible with experiment. The mathematical model
predicts that Borrelia recovers from the strong initial immune response by the regrowth
of an immune-resistant sub-population of the bacteria. The chronic phase appears as an
equilibration of bacterial growth and adaptive immunity. This result has major implications
for the development of the chronic phase of Borrelia infections as well as on potential
protective clinical interventions.

Keywords: Borrelia burgdorferi, Lyme disease, mathematical model, immunology, macrophages, mouse model

INTRODUCTION
Originally described in 1977 (Steere et al., 1977), Lyme disease
is today recognized as the most common vector-borne disease in
the United States and Europe, with approximately 65,000 cases
reported annually in Europe (Rizzoli et al., 2011). Its causative
agent, Borrelia burgdorferi and several closely related species com-
monly referred to asBorrelia burgdorferi sensu lato (sl), is transmit-
ted by hard ticks of the genus Ixodes (Lane et al., 1991). Borrelia
burgdorferi sl (BB) is spreading geographically (Hubalek, 2009),
and the number of reported cases is increasing, although this is
possibly partly due to increased diagnostic sensitivity.

BB belongs to the spirochaetes and shares characteristic traits
of this group, including the spiral shape and a remarkable motility
system enabling them to move efﬁciently through dense material
like connective tissues (Tilly et al., 2008). Their natural reservoir
are mainly small rodents, birds and reptiles that can harbor BB
and transmit them to uninfected ticks feeding on these animals.
The spirochaete is transmitted to humans mainly by Ixodes ricinus
and, to a lesser extent, by I. persulcatus (Lane et al., 1991).

The disease symptoms in humans can be roughly divided into
three infection stages. In most patients, the ﬁrst noticeable symp-
tom consists of a slowly growing, circle-shaped skin rash known
as Erythema migrans (EM) around the tick bite appearing shortly

after infection. This early, localized infection symptom is often
accompanied by mild fever and ﬂu-like symptoms.

Several days to weeks after infection, the bacteria begin to
disseminate to different tissues, where they cause strong inﬂam-
matory reactions and tissue damage. Tissues commonly affected
include the heart, joints and the central and peripheral nervous
system as well as skin tissue where the pathogen can cause mul-
tiple EM lesions. In the U.S., approximately 60% of untreated
patients develop an inﬂammation of the synovial tissue, particu-
larly in the large joints, referred to as Lyme Arthritis (Steere and
Glickstein, 2004). Among other possible routes of infection, e.g.,
along peripheral nerves, hematogenous dissemination of BB seems
to occur frequently at least in patients in the USA (Rupprecht et al.,
2008). This stage of the infection lasts up to 6 months.

If left untreated, symptoms can occur more than 6 month up to
years after disease onset; in fact, some symptoms have been shown
to persist for more than 10 years (Åsbrink and Hovmark, 2009;
Stanek et al., 2011), presumably by persistent infection (Steere and
Glickstein, 2004). At any of these stages, the disease can be treated
by antibiotics with a high degree of success (Nau et al., 2009),
although Lyme Arthritis fails to resolve in a minority of patients
despite apparently effective antibiotic treatment, possibly due to
an autoimmune reaction triggered by the infection (Steere et al.,

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 104 | 1

Binder et al.

Population dynamics of Borrelia burgdorferi

2006). The different origins and exact nature of the chronic disease
are, however, under debate (Feder et al., 2007).

When entering the mammalian host, BB is confronted ﬁrst
with a strong innate immune response. The ﬁrst lines of defense
include the attack of the spirochaetes by the complement system
that opsonizes the spirochaetes and attracts, among other leuko-
cytes, macrophages and neutrophils that have been shown to kill
BB efﬁciently in vitro (Montgomery et al., 2002). When confronted
with three times larger spirochaete concentrations in an in vitro
assay, human polymorphonuclear cells and monocytes were both
shown to ingest and kill the bacteria rapidly: after 60 min, 41–51%
of the spirochaetes were phagocytized, and more than 50% of
the ingested cells were dead within 30 min (Peterson et al., 1984).
Additionally, mice and humans can produce antibodies against
surface proteins of BB (Sadziene and Barbour, 1996).

The fact that despite the strong and effective early immune reac-
tion, mammalian hosts frequently fail to clear the infection and
that BB can often disseminate throughout the body remains strik-
ing. Even more surprising is the large population size that the bac-
teria reach at the infection site after an initial immune response has
almost cleared the infection (see Table 1; Åsbrink and Hovmark,
2009). Given that dissemination of the bacteria has been shown as
early as 2 days after experimental infection in mice (Barthold et al.,
1991), active emigration from the infection site might aid the bac-
teria in escaping the host’s early immune response. Furthermore,
BB has been shown to actively alter the expression of several outer
surface proteins in reaction to immune responses of the host (de
Silva and Fikrig, 1997; Hodzic et al., 2003).

In this study, a deterministic model is developed to understand
the interactions between BB and its mammalian host in the ﬁrst

Table 1 | Spirochaete counts per 106 mouse tissue cells as determined
by qPCR (Pahl et al., 1999).

Time p.i.

Sample no.

Infected foot

Contralateral foot

1 h

3 h

6 h

12 h

24 h

72 h

8 days

15 days

55 days

1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

12,592
751
16,306
12,265
11,999
ND
287
ND
415
642
880
ND
28,000
146,067
6,667
5,429
5,278
8,644

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
513
0
0
343
13,889
2,200
159

Only the development in C3H/HeJ mice is shown here; spirochaete populations
in BALB/c mice develop similarly (Pahl et al., 1999).

stages of the infection. The model is used to elucidate how the bac-
teria evade the immune response, i.e., whether active emigration
from the infection site, limited phagocytic capacity, or molecular
adaptations of BB are critical for surviving the ﬁrst line of defense
by the innate immune response and to allow for a second growth
phase reaching even higher bacterial loads. In this context, the
importance of the adaptive immune system for controlling the
infection is investigated.

RESULTS
Our model is based on a study with mice infected experimentally
with BB by Pahl et al. (1999). The spirochaete burden was mea-
sured using a quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) over
the infection course. To analyze the kinetics of dissemination, two
different mouse strains, disease-resistant BALB/c mice and sus-
ceptible C3H/HeJ mice were infected with BB and the spirochaete
load was quantiﬁed at different tissues. Although the concentra-
tion of spirochaetes reached in these experiments differed between
the two strains, the overall pattern was similar between the two
strains. This modeling approach focuses on bacterial dynamics
in C3H/HeJ mice, as they develop symptoms resembling Lyme
disease in humans and are commonly used as a model organism
for Lyme disease. Table 1 summarizes spirochaete counts per 106
mouse cells as measured by Pahl et al. Out of the six tissue sites
analyzed experimentally, we consider the infection site at the hind
foot and the corresponding tissue site at the contralateral hind foot
that serves as a measure of disseminated infection.

The bacterial populations in C3H/HeJ mice show remarkable
dynamics at the infection site: spirochaetes are present in high
numbers at three and six hours post infection (p.i.), but the pop-
ulation diminishes drastically after 12 h and remains at low levels
at the following days; however, 8 days p.i., the BB population not
only recovers, but reaches very high concentrations far above the
level measured shortly after infection. At the contralateral site, the
bacterial population reaches its maximum later and without the
high intermediate population size observed at the infection site.
Although the bacterial populations in BALB/c mice reach only
lower levels, the dynamics are qualitatively similar. These data can
be interpreted as an immediate immune response that controls
the early infection effectively, but for unknown reasons fails to
clear the infection and is overwhelmed at later time points. In our
mathematical model, we attempt to explain this failure to clear the
infection by three different hypotheses: (1) the immune response
might be effective at the infection site, but dissemination and later
re-migration to the infection site could aid the spirochaetes in
escaping from this immune response, (2) the immune response at
the infection site could be effective only in the very ﬁrst hours and
bacteria might overcome it due to limitations of innate immune
responses, and (3) molecular adaptations of BB might be necessary
to evade the host’s immune response.

HEMATOGENOUS MIGRATION OF BACTERIA
Our ﬁrst model (depicted in Figure 1) attempts to explain the
persistence of the bacteria at the infection site by migration of BB
to different tissues. Hence, we consider two tissue sites potentially
harboring spirochaetes and describe bacterial population dynam-
ics and the immune response at each of these sites. The ﬁrst tissue

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 104 | 2

Binder et al.

Population dynamics of Borrelia burgdorferi

site described by this model is the infection site, i.e., the site at the
hind foot where the mouse has been infected, the second one is a
site at the contralateral hind foot. The bacteria live in the extracel-
lular space where they can actively move through the extracellular
matrix. Additionally, we also include bacterial dynamics in the
blood as a third compartment connecting the two sites.

In each of these three compartments, the spirochaetes replicate
at a maximal growth rate β. They are assumed to grow according
to a logistic growth model with a carrying capacity (per 106 mouse
cells) K. Hence, the growth of a bacterial population Bi in each of
the compartments can be formulated as

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

βBi

1 − Bi
K

(1)

The maximal growth rate of BB in in vitro assays can be
−1 (Barbour, 1983). The maximum bacterial
estimated at 0.06 h
concentration has been estimated at 1–4·108 BB cells per milli-
liter liquid medium in the same study; however, since spirochaete
densities are given per 106 mouse cells and it is difﬁcult to relate
the in vitro result to the in vivo situation in the tissue, we take the
maximal bacterial density measured in the experiments by Pahl
et al. (1999), approximately 1–5·105 cells per 106 mouse cells, as
the bacterial carrying capacity K.

In human patients, hematogenous migration of the bacteria
is associated with disease symptoms and dissemination to tissues
(Wormser et al., 2005). Whereas other routes of dissemination
like the lymph system or direct migration within connective tis-
sues cannot be excluded, their signiﬁcance for the disseminated
infection remains unclear. Hence, it is assumed that BB primar-
ily disseminates hematogenously to the contralateral site and that
bacteria can migrate from each of the tissues to the blood and
vice versa. These migration rates, νi and μi are difﬁcult to measure
experimentally and thus have to be estimated.

Phagocytic cells are considered as an important early immune
response. They are assumed to directly remove the bacteria. How-
ever, since the capacity of a single cell to kill bacteria is limited, we
approximate phagocytosis of bacteria by a function saturable in Bi:

· Mi,

ρBi
Cρ + Bi
where ρ is the maximal rate of phagocytosis, Cρ is the bacterial
number where phagocytosis reaches 50% of its maximum and Mi
is the number of phagocytes in the compartment.

(2)

Bacterial dynamics for the populations at the infection site (B1),
the contralateral hind foot (B2) and the blood (BB) are described
by the ordinary differential equations

dB1
dt
dB2
dt
dBB
dt

(cid:3)
(cid:3)
(cid:3)

(cid:2)
1 − B1
(cid:2)
K
1 − B2
(cid:2)
K
1 − BB
K

= βB1
= βB2
= βBB
− ρBB
Cρ + BB

· MB.

· M1,
− ν1B1 + μ1BB − ρB1
Cρ + B1
− ν2B2 + μ2BB − ρB2
· M2,
Cρ + B2
+ ν1B1 + ν2B2 − (μ1 + μ2)BB

The dynamics of the mice’ phagocytic cells must not be
neglected in this model. First, the production and death of
phagocytic cells have to be considered. Furthermore, since phago-
cytic cells encountering BB produce strong inﬂammatory signals
(Hirschfeld et al., 1999), they are assumed to recruit more phago-
cytic cells to the infected tissue site. Production of phagocytes by
the bone marrow is assumed to occur at a constant rate δ. In
addition to this, an infection-induced leukocyte production that
depends on and is saturable with the bacterial load in the tissues,
can be denoted as

σ (B1 + B2)
Cσ + (B1 + B2)
with σ describing the maximal rate of BB-induced leukocyte pro-
duction. Both processes are assumed to increase the number of
leukocytes in the blood in our model.

(6)

,

Similarly, there is a physiological migration of leukocytes from
the blood to the tissues (φ) and an additional infection-induced
recruitment to the tissues (ψ):

ψBi
Cψ + Bi

MiMB.

(7)

Note that this recruitment also depends on the phagocytic cells
already present in the tissue, because they are assumed to be the
main producers of chemokines, attracting further leukocytes, and
pro-inﬂammatory signals like TNF-α. The average lifetime of all
phagocytes is assumed to be limited by a death rate θ in all three
compartments.

The dynamics of phagocytic cell populations at the infection
site M 1, at the contralateral foot M 2, and in the blood MB are
described by the differential equations

dM1
dt
dM2
dt
dMB
dt

= φMB + ψB1
Cψ + B1
= φMB + ψB2
Cψ + B2
= δ + σ (B1 + B2)
Cσ + (B1 + B2)
− ψB1
Cψ + B1

M1MB − θM1,
M2MB − θM2,

− θMB − 2φMB

M1MB − ψB2
Cψ + B2

M2MB.

(10)

(8)

(9)

Figure 1 gives an overview of this model including both

phagocytosis and bacterial dynamics at all three sites.

Although the host’s immune response to BB is limited by differ-
ent mechanisms in this model and bacterial migration is included
here, it fails to reproduce the bacterial dynamics observed at the
infection site under biologically reasonable conditions. With this
model, the immune control at the infection site can be over-
whelmed due to bacterial migration after a good initial success
in diminishing bacteria that leaves less than 20% of the initial
bacterial population alive (Figure 2). In this simulation the bacte-
rial load saturates on a high level. However, the intermediate peak
of the number of bacteria as found in experiments could not be
reproduced. The bacterial population always approaches the sat-
uration level from below. Very high numbers of bacteria in the

(3)

(4)

(5)

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 104 | 3

Binder et al.

Population dynamics of Borrelia burgdorferi

FIGURE 1 | Overview of the BB infection dynamics model based on the
hematogenous migration of the bacteria. Boxes represent different
compartments of the organism, circles are the considered quantities, and
arrows/bars depict a stimulating/inhibiting inﬂuence of one quantity on
another. The small ﬁlled circles represent death of the phagocytes. B, M:
bacteria and phagocyte populations in the respective compartments, μ, ν:
migration rates between the blood compartment and the two tissue sites, β:

bacterial replication rates, K : carrying capacity for bacteria, ρ: phagocytosis
rate, Cρ: bacterial concentration with half-maximal phagocytosis rate, δ:
physiological phagocyte production rate, σ : phagocyte production in response
to infection, Cσ : bacterial concentration with half-maximal phagocyte
production, φ: physiological phagocyte migration to tissue, ψ: phagocyte
recruitment in response to infection, Cψ : bacterial concentration with
half-maximal phagocyte recruitment, θ: phagocyte death rate.

of many infected patients, this seems unlikely given that the blood
was consistently culture-positive for BB only after day 10 p.i. in
experimentally infected mice (Barthold et al., 1991). Within the
concept of two sites and the blood compartment, no solution to
this contradiction could be identiﬁed. The contradictions turned
out to be a robust property of the model within physiologically
relevant parameter values for bacterial replication and migration
rates.

SINGLE-SITE MODEL WITHOUT MIGRATION AND LIMITED
PHAGOCYTIC CAPACITY
Having dismissed bacterial migration as a likely reason for failure
of early control at the infection site, an alternative explanation
might be a limited killing capacity of the phagocytic cells: uptake
of the bacteria might be faster than clearance, leading to fully occu-
pied phagocytic cells that can take up no more bacteria. For this
model, only the infection site was considered, because the timing
of the infection rules out that the infection of the second infec-
tion site inﬂuences the immune control of the primary infection
site. Early control of the infection at the infection site is crucial
for the later outcome. If the site of the tick bite is excised during
the ﬁrst 48 h, dissemination of the bacteria is not observed (Shih
et al., 1993). Hence, migration processes are ignored in this model.
Figure 3 depicts an overview of this model.

The average natural death of the phagocytic cells is again
described as a rate θ. To describe the limitation of bacterial

FIGURE 2 | Simulation of spirochetal dynamics at the infection site,
the contralateral hind foot and in the blood with a parameter set
leading to an effective early immune response that is overwhelmed
due to bacterial migration later.

blood are required to achieve long-term persistence of bacteria at
both sites, leading to a very high migration rate from the blood
back into the tissue. Although BB can be cultured from the blood

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 104 | 4

Binder et al.

Population dynamics of Borrelia burgdorferi

FIGURE 3 | Model of the bacterial dynamics at the infection site with
limited phagocytic capacity of the immune cells. The phagocyte
population is subdivided into an active Ma and an inactive Mi compartment.
B: bacterial population at the infection site, β: bacterial replication rate, K :
carrying capacity, ρ: phagocytosis rate, φ: physiological phagocyte
migration into infection site, ψ: phagocyte recruitment as infection
response, C: bacterial concentration yielding half-maximal recruitment of
phagocytes, θ: phagocyte death rate, λ: inactivation rate of phagocytes, κ:
rate of re-activation of phagocytes.

uptake, the population of phagocytic cells is subdivided into two
compartments, one population Ma being active and able to phago-
cytose bacteria and the other one, Mi, in a saturated, inactive state,
unable to take up more bacteria. The transition to the inactive state
is modeled proportional to the number of bacteria at the infection
site at a rate λ. Inactive phagocytic cells are allowed to return to
the active state at a rate κ.

Again, bacterial replication is assumed to follow a logistic
growth model with the same parameters used in the previous
approach. However, since a limitation of the phagocytic capac-
ity is modeled explicitly here, the phagocytosis rate is modeled
as simply being proportional to the number of phagocytes and
bacteria in the compartment:

ρBMa,

(11)

where Ma is the number of active phagocytes that are able to take
up more bacteria. Hence, the bacterial dynamics can be described
by the differential equation

− ρBMa.

(12)

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

= βB

dB
dt

1 − B
K

Recruitment of leukocytes is also modeled similarly to the pre-
vious model. A low physiological, bacteria-independent migration
φ into the infection site is combined with a bacteria-dependent
log-sigmoidal recruitment

ψB
C + B

M ,

(13)

with M being the sum of all macrophages. The phagocyte
dynamics in the model can be described by the differential

FIGURE 4 | Simulation of spirochetal dynamics in an infection at a
single-site. In this model, the phagocytic capacity of the phagocytes
limits the immune reaction and prevents control of the infection. B:
bacteria population, Ma: active phagocytes, Mi: inactive phagocytes.

equations

(Ma + Mi ) − λBMa + κMi − θMa,

= φ + ψB
C + B
= λBMa − κMi − θMi.

(14)

(15)

dMa
dt
dMi
dt

Adjustment of the ratio of the phagocytosis rate to the transi-
tion to the inactive state, ρ
λ , regulates the phagocytic capacity of
the immune cells. Figure 3 gives an overview of this second model.
This much simpler model is able to explain the recovery of the
bacterial population between day 3 and day 8 p.i. (Figure 4). How-
ever, it requires that the phagocytic cells are saturated quickly and
return to the active state only very slowly – the phagocytes have to
operate at the very limit of their uptake capability for several days.
The clearance half-time of ingested BB is approximately 20 min
(Montgomery and Malawista, 1996), making limited phagocytic
capacity as an explanation for the failure to clear the early infec-
tion seem unlikely. In addition, as in the hematogenous migration
model, with this model we could not identify any possibility to
reproduce the measured second peak together with the second
reduction of the bacterial load.

SINGLE-SITE MODEL WITH BACTERIAL ADAPTATION AND ADAPTIVE
IMMUNE RESPONSE
In a third model, it is hypothesized that molecular adaptation of
the spirochaetes is critical for BB to survive the ﬁrst days to weeks
of the infection. It is known that BB alters the expression of sev-
eral outer surface proteins in response to immune reactions of its
host and employs a variety of different immune evasion strategies
(Tsao, 2009).

Considering the different mechanisms to hide from the host’s
immune mechanism and the critical role of the innate immune
response early in BB infection, especially the fact that there are

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 104 | 5

Binder et al.

Population dynamics of Borrelia burgdorferi

adaptations to the innate immune response, it seems necessary to
include this in the mathematical model. However, the impact and
exact nature of these molecular adaptations is far less understood.
It is difﬁcult to estimate to what extent a molecular adaptation
protects the bacteria from an immune response. We approximate
this task by assuming that there are two different varieties of
BB: one is infecting the mouse and is susceptible to the innate
immune response (Bt), the second is resistant and is not directly
phagocytosed (Bm; Figure 5).

In this model, we focus again on a single infection site. Bac-
terial growth is described by a logistic growth model using the
same parameters as in the previous models. However, there are
now two different BB compartments. The ﬁrst, Bt, has not seen
the host environment in the mouse and is thus not adapted to the
mammalian immune response. This population is susceptible to
phagocytosis, but adapts to the host environment at a rate α, not
being recognized by the phagocytes after this adaptation. The host
environment is constantly present as a stimulus inducing the tran-
sition from the susceptible to the resistant state. This is reﬂected
in the model by an irreversible transition to the robust state. The
dynamics in the two different BB compartments can be described
by the following differential equations:

(cid:2)
1 − Bt + Bm
(cid:2)
1 − Bt + Bm

K

(cid:3)
− αBt − ρBt M ,
(cid:3)
+ αBt .

K

= βBt
= βBm

dBt
dt
dBm
dt

(16)

(17)

Choosing α appropriately high, a complete transition from the
susceptible to the robust state is achieved. However, with all bacte-
ria now being resistant against the only immune response modeled
so far, it is obvious that the infection cannot be controlled in this
model. C3H mice develop antibody titers to BB as early as 7 days
p.i. (Barthold et al., 1991). Opsonized bacteria can be seen as sus-
ceptible to phagocytosis again. We introduce a new quantity I into
the model, reﬂecting the antibody concentration. As including
antibody production and degradation is far beyond the scope of
this model, we describe the antibody concentration simply as a
time-dependent function reﬂecting the antibody titers measured
in experimentally infected mice:

⎧⎨
⎩0
Imax (t−tig )n
+(t−tig )n
t n
1/2

I (t ) =

t ≤ tig
t > tig

,

(18)

where tig represents the time when the antibody production
starts, t 1/2 denotes the time when the antibody concentration
reaches its half-maximal value and I max is the maximal antibody
concentration reached. As this is a phenomenological description,
parameters have to be estimated based on experimental data. The
antibody production term is based on IgM titers measured by
Barthold et al. (1991). Figure 6 shows the ﬁt of the function I (t ) to
IgM titers against BB normalized to 1. The measured IgM titers, in
contrast to our ﬁt, show a decline at the last measurement >400 h.
However, since IgG antibodies at that time started to show signif-
icant concentrations in the same studies, we do not consider this
decline in our model, as these antibodies complement the IgM
response. To capture the adaptive immune response at this time
more accurately, the model would have to be extended to reﬂect
the difference in diffusibility and efﬁcacy of the different immune
strategies as well as the adaptations of the bacteria to the presence
of IgG antibody, which is beyond the scope of the present study.

FIGURE 5 | Model of the bacterial dynamics at the infection site with
molecular adaptations of the pathogen and a simple representation of
the adaptive immunity. Vulnerable BB Bt enter the infection site and adapt
at a rate α to a state where they are not recognized by phagocytes
anymore. These adapted bacteria (Bm) can be bound by antibody I (not
shown), making them susceptible again. Bt: phagocytosis-susceptible
bacteria, Bm: adapted bacteria, B∗
m : antibody-bound bacteria, beta: bacterial
replication rate, K : carrying capacity, ρ: phagocytosis rate, φ: physiological
phagocyte migration into infection site, ψ: phagocyte recruitment as
infection response, C: bacterial concentration yielding half-maximal
recruitment of phagocytes, θ: phagocyte death rate, α: bacterial adaptation
rate (transition to resistant state), μ: antibody binding rate, ν antibody
dissociation rate, I antibody concentration.

FIGURE 6 | Experimentally measured IgM titers (Barthold et al., 1991),
normalized to 1, and the corresponding function given by equation 18
with Imax = 1, tig = 72, t 1/2 = 100 and n = 4.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 104 | 6

Binder et al.

Population dynamics of Borrelia burgdorferi

The maximal antibody concentration in the tissue is difﬁcult to
estimate, as the concentration in the serum is most likely higher
than in the tissue. However, since to our knowledge, the antibody
concentration in the tissue has not been determined experimen-
tally and also varies between different mice and pathogen strains,
we take the IgM serum concentration measured by Wooten et al.
(2002) 2 weeks p.i. as approximation of the antibody concentration
in the tissue.

The antibody can now bind reversibly to the phagocytosis-
resistant spirochaetes Bm, leading to a third, opsonized bacterial
∗
population B
m. Binding and dissociation of the antibody can be
described by

∗
m,

= −μI Bm + νB
= μI Bm − νB
∗
m,

dBm
dt
∗
dB
m
dt

(19)

(20)

where μ denotes the binding rate and ν the corresponding disso-
ciation rate. Note that the antibody consumption by the binding
process is ignored in this approach. Combining equations 17 and
∗
19/20 and considering the antibody-bound bacteria B
m to be sus-
ceptible to phagocytosis, we can express the bacterial dynamics at
the infection site as

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

= βBm
= μI Bm − νB

1 − Bt + Bm
K
− ρB
∗
mM .

∗
m

dBm
dt
∗
dB
m
dt

+ αBt − μI Bm + νB

∗
m,

(21)

(22)

Since we do not consider the limited phagocytic capacity to be
critical for the survival of the pathogen, the distinction between
active and saturated phagocytes is obsolete. Recruitment and death
of phagocytes are modeled as before. The differential equation
describing their dynamics is thus straightforward:

dM
dt

= φ + ψB
C + B

M − θM .

(23)

Numerical simulation of the system shows that the model is able to
reproduce the experimental data (Figure 7A). The parameter set
used for this simulation is shown in Table 2. The three individual
sub-populations of BB show a quick transition from the initial,
vulnerable state to the “phagocytosis-resistant” state (Figure 7B).
Already 1 day p.i., most bacteria have adapted to the immune
response in our model; 2 days p.i., the initial, vulnerable popula-
tion is almost extinct. This fast adaptation is achieved by regulating
the parameter α and seems reasonable given the fact that in vivo,
already 2 days p.i. BB has completely downregulated the tick-stage
speciﬁc ospA gene (Hodzic et al., 2002). Although the leukocyte
recruitment is limited in the model, this limitation alone could
not rescue the bacterial population, as relatively low phagocyte
numbers in the beginning are sufﬁcient to drastically reduce the
bacterial population size (Figure 8).

DISCUSSION
Our three modeling approaches presented here try to give three
different explanations for the survival of BB in the ﬁrst days of

FIGURE 7 | Numerical simulation of the BB infection model with
adaptation of the spirochaetes and humoral immune response. (A)
Total number of spirochaetes per 106 mouse cells in experiment (Pahl et al.,
1999) and simulation. The parameters used are described in Table 2. The
simulation result is shown as the sum of all three BB sub-populations. (B)
Borrelia sub-populations. Bt is the initial, vulnerable BB population, Bm the
adapted, resistant one, and B∗

m antibody-bound spirochaetes.

the immune response. All three models can explain this, but in
the ﬁrst two approaches, this is only possible in a narrow range of
parameters that is biologically unlikely, e.g., with extremely high
bacterial replication and migration rates or with a fast saturation
of the phagocytes (i.e., low phagocytic capacity) and a slow diges-
tion rate within the phagocytic cells. The high population size that
the spirochaetes reach at the infection site after the infection was
almost cleared is striking and can only be explained by the third
model presented here, which includes bacterial adaptations to the
immune response of the host.

The ﬁrst model tries to explain the failure to clear the infection
by spirochetal escape to other tissues in the body. The bacteria
might escape to other tissues, replicate there and then migrate
back to the blood and from there into the infection site. However,

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 104 | 7

Binder et al.

Population dynamics of Borrelia burgdorferi

Table 2 | Parameters used for the numerical simulations in Figure 7A.

Parameter

β
K
α

ρ
Imax
t
t 1/2
n
μ

ν

φ

ψ
C

θ

Unit
h−1
cells
h−1
cells h−1
μg ml−1
h
h
–
ml μg−1 h−1
h−1
cells h−1
h−1
cells

h−1

Value

Derived from

Description

0.06
150,000
0.0006
0.005
8.5
72
100
4
0.0085
1
0.1
0.001
1000

Barbour (1983)
Max. value from Pahl et al. (1999)
Estimate
Estimate
Wooten et al. (2002)
Barthold et al., 1991; phenomenology)
Barthold et al., 1991; phenomenology)
Barthold et al., 1991; phenomenology)
Estimate
Estimate
Estimate
Estimate
Estimate

0.0076

van Furth and Diesselhoff-den Dulk (1970)

Bacterial growth rate
Bacterial carrying capacity
Bacterial adaptation rate (transition to resistant state)
Phagocytosis rate
Antibody concentration
Time until antibody response starts
Time until antibody response reaches half-maximal value
Hill coefﬁcient in antibody response function
Antibody binding rate
Antibody dissociation rate
Physiological phagocyte migration to tissue
Phagocyte recruitment (infection response)
Bacterial population size that yields half-maximal phagocyte
recruitment
Phagocyte death rate

a strong dilution effect for the bacteria in the blood: the spatially
limited tissue area can yield a high concentration of bacteria. A
fraction of these bacteria now migrates through the endothelial
barriers into the blood stream, where it is dispersed in a much
larger volume. Furthermore, although bacteria can move in the
extracellular space, migration through endothelial barriers is an
active process involving bacterial movement through dense tis-
sues and binding of host factors, likely resulting in a slow process.
In contrast, at the infection site, the bacterial population recovers
at earlier times from the innate immune response. It seems thus
unlikely, that the recovery of the spirochetal populations from
the initial immune response at the infection site results from the
re-immigration of bacteria from the blood.

The second model neglects migration processes of the bacteria
and tries to explain the failure of the immune response by a limited
phagocytic capacity. Phagocytes might take up bacteria, but fail to
digest them fast enough. The phagocytic cells would engulf many
bacteria, but stop to phagocytose more due to physical restrictions,
becoming inactive until the bacteria are digested. In our model,
this is expressed by introducing a population of inactive phagocytic
cells. However, we could not reproduce the dynamics measured at
the infection site using this model. It is possible to achieve a recov-
ery of the bacterial population in the model, but this requires a
large fraction of the phagocytic cells to be in an inactive state. The
short clearance time of BB in macrophages (Peterson et al., 1984)
and the generally high capacity of phagocytic cells to engulf parti-
cles (Cannon and Swanson, 1992) makes this assumption unlikely
from a biological point of view. In addition, the ﬁnal reduction of
the bacterial population at day 7 p.i. could not be reproduced by
this model.

The third model does not rely on phagocytes reaching the limit
of bacteria uptake. Instead, a very simple phagocytosis model is
employed; phagocytosis is limited only by the amount of available
phagocytic cells in this model which is determined by the recruit-
ment of cells. There is solid evidence for a number of different
adaptations of BB (Zhang and Norris, 1998; Hodzic et al., 2003;
Grimm et al., 2004; Palmer et al., 2009; Tsao, 2009) to different

FIGURE 8 | Numerical simulation of the BB infection model with
adaptation of the spirochaetes and humoral immune response. Btot is
the total bacterial population size, M the number of phagocytic cells.

this process would have to be very fast to explain the dynamics
measured at the infection site: to overcome the immune response,
a high bacterial concentration in the blood is required. A large
amount of bacteria has to migrate to the infection site to lead to a
high concentration of bacteria that is in excess of the number of
bacteria that can be digested by the phagocytes. Considering pre-
vious studies on experimentally infected mice of the same strain
(Barthold et al., 1991), this seems unlikely. Blood samples of these
mice were not consistently tested positive on BB before day 10
p.i., indicating that the average spirochaete load in the blood was
probably not very high in the ﬁrst days. This is conﬁrmed by later
results where culture-positive on BB were only found 2 weeks p.i.
(Hodzic et al., 2003) and even at this time only in one out of ﬁve
tested mice. One factor that contributes to this fact is that there is

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 104 | 8

Binder et al.

Population dynamics of Borrelia burgdorferi

factors of the host environment, including immune responses. A
classical example of these adaptations is the reciprocal regulation
of the surface proteins OspA and OspC. The former is a tick spe-
ciﬁc protein that is exclusively expressed when the spirochaete is
in the tick’s midgut, but downregulated in the mammalian host
environment. OspC is only expressed inside the mammalian host,
and is crucial for dissemination and survival of the spirochaetes
in the early stages. The downregulation of OspA has been shown
to be suppressed in reaction to the host’s immune response, which
is also true for other surface proteins (Hodzic et al., 2003). These
adaptations are included in the third modeling approach.

It was assumed in this third model that BB becomes com-
pletely resistant against phagocytosis by immune cells. This is a
strong assumption and the situation is probably different in vivo,
as the bacteria are recognized and attacked via different path-
ways (Schröder et al., 2008). However, this simpliﬁcation allows
to estimate the inﬂuence of a molecular adaptation to a host
response without making further assumptions about different
innate immune processes that are not completely resolved. The
transition of the whole population to the resistant state happens
fast. But, surprisingly, the inﬂuence of the rate α on the speed
of this transition is low. The transition is facilitated by removing
bacteria susceptible to phagocytosis and by this allowing the resis-
tant population to replicate faster within the limits imposed by the
carrying capacity K for bacteria in the logistic growth function.

After the peak on day 8 p.i., the bacterial population decreases
again. This coincides with an early IgM antibody response that
may start to control the infection at this time. The antibody mod-
eled in this approach binds to the spirochaetes and is assumed to
make them susceptible to phagocytosis again. The afﬁnity of these
antibodies has not been investigated to our knowledge. Also, anti-
body responses to BB have different targets, making it difﬁcult to
determine the antibody afﬁnity that is represented by the ratio of
the dissociation and binding rates of the antibody ν
μ in our model.
As the dissociation constant widely determines the asymp-
totic bacterial load (Figure 9), these rates were estimated to ﬁt

FIGURE 9 | Single-site model with bacterial adaptation and adaptive
immune reaction. Simulations were done with different values for ν
μ as
shown in the ﬁgure.

the bacterial levels measured experimentally at 55 days p.i. The
ratio ν
μ used in our simulations, corresponding to a dissociation
constant KD = 1.3·10
−7 M, can be considered to be in a realistic
range of IgM afﬁnities. For example, human IgM antibodies have
been shown to bind to different human antigens with dissocia-
−8 M (Diaw et al., 1997). The
tion constants between 10
presented results are robust within this experimental range of dis-
sociation constants. However, the resulting asymptotic bacterial
load is quantitatively lifted up and down in dependence on its
exact value (see Figure 9).

−6 and 10

To evaluate the robustness of this last model, single parameters
like the phagocytosis rate ρ or reasonable combinations of para-
meters like ν
μ were varied. The fact that there is a population of
bacteria in our model that is not attacked by the phagocytes at
all before the IgM response is visible makes the overall behavior
of the system robust to strong variations in different parameters;
the parameters ρ and ψ can, however, change the behavior quali-
tatively, since setting them arbitrarily low leads to uncontrolled
replication of the bacteria in the early stages of the infection.
For the later development, the antibodies’ dissociation constant ν
μ
determines the bacterial population size in the late infection. This
population size, however, cannot be interpreted as a real equi-
librium, since the biological situation is more complicated due
to different adaptive immune strategies, adaptations of the bac-
teria to these immune strategies and the presence of bacteria in
immunoprivileged niches like the synoviae.

Our model is only intended to capture the ﬁrst few weeks of
the infection, speciﬁcally why the spirochaetes are not removed
from the infection site. More sophisticated models of the spe-
ciﬁc immune response would be required to describe later stages
and investigate the persistence of BB. For example, the IgG
response that reaches its maximum signiﬁcantly later would have
to be included. Furthermore, for long-term persistence of the
spirochaetes, the migration to different tissues might still be
important even though the present analysis showed that its role is
not important in the early stage of the infection. BB aligns with
collagenic ﬁbers in many tissues by binding to different host fac-
tors which might provide a protected niche for spirochetal survival
(Steere and Glickstein, 2004; Rupprecht et al., 2008).

The model could also be extended to better describe the in vivo
situation. Currently, the model is based on experimental data from
experimentally infected mice, where both the effect of the tick envi-
ronment before infection and the inﬂuence of the tick bite itself
are missing, as the mice are infected intradermally with a syringe.
In particular, immunosuppressive components of tick saliva can
be expected to have an inﬂuence on the infection dynamics and
control of the disease. Such effects are currently embedded into
the phagocytosis rates without being explicit.

Our approach has shown that the representation of different
mechanisms of bacteria-host-interaction in mathematical models
allows to disentangle their relevance in different phases of a bac-
terial infection. In the case of BB, the measured dynamics of the
bacterial load provides sufﬁcient constraints to exclude speciﬁc
mechanisms and to favor others. However, the relevance derived
from the modeling is valid only in the early stage of the infection.
Thus, this model for the BB infection dynamics can be used to

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 104 | 9

Binder et al.

Population dynamics of Borrelia burgdorferi

simulate and optimize therapeutical approaches in the ﬁrst days
after infection.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Numerical simulations of the model were done using the LSODA
solver for Ordinary Differential Equations implemented in the
library deSolve for the R statistics language and in our own
implementation of a ﬁfth order Dormand-Prince method in C++.
Parameter values were derived from literature data where avail-
able and otherwise estimated in an iterative approach. First, the
phagocytosis rate ρ, the phagocyte recruitment ψ and its half-
maximal bacterial concentration, and the physiological phagocyte
migration φ were approximated by ﬁtting the decline of the total
bacterial population size to the sharp initial decline measured
experimentally for the ﬁrst days. Second, the parameter α was
adjusted to allow for recovery of the bacterial population accord-
ing to measured data by a transition from the vulnerable to a
resistant state of the bacteria. Setting α in this way also shows
an adaptation of most of the bacterial population after the ﬁrst 3
days p.i., reﬂecting the time frame in which reciprocal regulation
of ospA and ospC as an example for molecular adaptations to a
changed host environment can be found in vivo (Hodzic et al.,
2003) and that is hence considered as a realistic time required for

cultivation of

REFERENCES
Åsbrink, E., and Hovmark, A. (2009).
Successful
spiro-
chetes from skin lesions of patients
with erythema chronicum migrans
Afzelius and acrodermatitis chronica
atrophicans. Acta Pathol. Microbiol.
Immunol. Scand. B 93B, 161–163.

Barbour,A. G. (1983). Isolation and cul-
tivation of Lyme disease spirochetes.
Yale J. Biol. Med. 57, 521–525.

Barthold, S. W., Persing, D. H., Arm-
strong, A. L., and Peeples, R. A.
(1991). Kinetics of Borrelia burgdor-
feri dissemination and evolution of
disease after intradermal
inocula-
tion of mice. Am. J. Pathol. 139,
263–273.

Cannon, G. J., and Swanson, J. A.
(1992). The macrophage capacity for
phagocytosis. J. Cell. Sci. 101 (Pt 4),
907–913.

de Silva, A. M., and Fikrig, E. (1997).
Arthropod- and host-speciﬁc gene
expression by Borrelia burgdorferi. J.
Clin. Invest. 99, 377–379.

Diaw, L., Magnac, C., Pritsch, O., Buckle,
M., Alzari, P. M., and Dighiero,
G. (1997). Structural and afﬁnity
studies of IgM polyreactive natural
autoantibodies.
Immunol. 158,
968.

J.

Feder, H. M.,

Johnson, B.

J. B.,
O’Connell, S., Shapiro, E. D., Steere,
A. C., and Wormser, G. P. (2007). A
critical appraisal of “chronic Lyme
disease.” N. Engl.
J. Med. 357,
1422–30.

Grimm, D., Tilly, K., Byram, R., Stew-
art, P. E., Krum, J. G., Bueschel, D.
M., Schwan, T. G., Policastro, P. F.,

Elias, A. F., and Rosa, P. A. (2004).
Outer-surface protein C of the Lyme
disease spirochete: a protein induced
in ticks for infection of mammals.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101,
3142–3147.

Hirschfeld, M., Kirschning, C.

J.,
Schwandner, R., Wesche, H., Weis,
J. H., Wooten, R. M., and Weis, J.
J. (1999). Cutting edge: inﬂamma-
tory signaling by Borrelia burgdor-
feri lipoproteins is mediated by toll-
like receptor 2. J. Immunol. 163,
2382–2386.

Hodzic, E., Feng, S., Freet, K., Borjesson,
D., and Barthold, S. (2002). Borrelia
burgdorferi population kinetics and
selected gene expression at the host-
vector interface. Infect. Immun. 70,
3382.

Hodzic, E., Feng, S., Freet, K.

J.,
and Barthold, S. W. (2003). Borre-
lia burgdorferi population dynamics
and prototype gene expression dur-
ing infection of immunocompetent
and immunodeﬁcient mice. Infect.
Immun. 71, 5042–5055.

Hubalek, Z. (2009). Epidemiology of
Lyme borreliosis. Curr. Probl. Der-
matol. 37, 31–50.

Lane, R., Piesman, J., and Burgdorfer, W.
(1991). Lyme borreliosis: relation of
its causative agent to its vectors and
hosts in North America and Europe.
Annu. Rev. Entomol. 36, 587–609.

Montgomery, R. R., Lusitani, D., de
Boisﬂeury Chevance, A., and Malaw-
ista, S. E. (2002). Human phago-
cytic cells in the early innate immune
response to Borrelia burgdorferi. J.
Infect. Dis. 185, 1773–1779.

the majority of a bacterial population to adapt to a host’s immune
response. For this second step, the experimental data up to the sec-
ond peak in the bacterial population size were taken into account.
In the last step, the binding afﬁnity of the antibody, μ
ν , was esti-
mated to match the size that the bacterial population approaches
at the end of the experimental measurements. The sum of squared
errors was used as measure of discrepancy between data and pre-
dictions. When estimating parameters without prior knowledge
about the exact values, parameters were set to physiologically rea-
sonable values and the parameter space was scanned within a
maximum of biologically plausible range; e.g., for the antibody dis-
−6 M,
sociation constant, ν
−5 M and the ﬁt optimized within
so ν
this range. The parameters used for our ﬁnal model are given in
Table 2 and explained in the text.

μ , published values lie within 10

μ was varied from 10

−8 to 10

−9 to 10

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Michael Meyer-Hermann was supported by HFSP and BMBF
within the GerontoSys initiative (projects GerontoMitoSys and
GerontoShield). Sebastian Binder was supported by the Helmholtz
International Graduate School
for Infection Research. This
research was supported by a fellowship of the Volkswagen Foun-
dation awarded to Arndt Telschow.

Montgomery, R. R., and Malawista, S.
E. (1996). Entry of Borrelia burgdor-
feri into macrophages is end-on and
leads to degradation in lysosomes.
Infect. Immun. 64, 2867–2872.

Nau, R., Christen, H.-J., and Eiffert,
H. (2009). Lyme disease – current
state of knowledge. Dtsch. Arztebl.
Int. 106, 72–81; quiz 82, I.

Pahl, A., Kuehlbrandt, U., Brune,
K., Roellinghoff, M., and Gess-
ner, A. (1999). Quantitative detec-
tion of Borrelia burgdorferi by real-
time PCR. J. Clin. Microbiol. 37,
1958–1963.

Palmer, G. H., Bankhead, T., and
Lukehart, S. A. (2009). “Nothing
is permanent but change” – anti-
genic variation in persistent bacte-
rial pathogens. Cell. Microbiol. 11,
1697–1705.

Peterson, P. K., Clawson, C. C., Lee,
D. A., Garlich, D.
J., Quie, P.
G., and Johnson, R. C. (1984).
Human phagocyte interactions with
the Lyme disease spirochete. Infect.
Immun. 46, 608–611.

Rizzoli, A., Hauffe, H., Carpi, G.,
Vourc’h, G., Neteler, M., and Rosa, R.
(2011). Lyme borreliosis in Europe.
Euro Surveill. 16, 1–8.

Rupprecht, T. A., Koedel, U., Fingerle,
V., and Pﬁster, H.-W. (2008). The
pathogenesis of Lyme neuroborre-
liosis: from infection to inﬂamma-
tion. Mol. Med. 14, 205–212.

Sadziene, A., and Barbour, A. (1996).
Experimental immunization against
Lyme borreliosis with recombinant
Osp proteins: an overview. Infection
24, 195–202.

Schröder, N. W. J., Eckert, J., Stübs,
G., and Schumann, R. R. (2008).
induced by
Immune
membrane
spirochetal
lipoproteins
glycolipids.
Immunobiology 213, 329–340.

responses
outer
and

Shih, C.-M., Telford, S. R., Pollack, R.
J., and Spielman, A. (1993). Rapid
dissemination by the agent of Lyme
disease in hosts that permit fulmi-
nating infection. Infect. Immun. 61,
2396–2399.

Stanek, G., Fingerle, V., Hunfeld, K.-
P., Jaulhac, B., Kaiser, R., Krause,
A., Kristoferitsch, W., O’Connell, S.,
Ornstein, K., Strle, F., and Gray,
J. (2011). Lyme borreliosis: clinical
case deﬁnitions for diagnosis and
management in Europe. Clin. Micro-
biol. Infect. 17, 69–79.

Steere, A. C., and Glickstein, L. (2004).
Elucidation of Lyme arthritis. Nat.
Rev. Immunol. 4, 143–152.

Steere, A. C., Klitz, W., Drouin, E. E.,
Falk, B. A., Kwok, W. W., Nepom,
G. T., and Baxter-Lowe, L. A. (2006).
Antibiotic-refractory Lyme arthritis
is associated with HLA-DR mole-
cules that bind a Borrelia burgdorferi
peptide. J. Exp. Med. 203, 961–971.
Steere, A. C., Malawista, S. E., Snydman,
D. R., Shope, R. E., Andiman, W. A.,
Ross, M. R., and Steele, F. M. (1977).
An epidemic of oligoarticular arthri-
tis in children and adults in three
Connecticut communities. Arthritis
Rheum. 20, 7–17.

Tilly, K., Rosa, P. A., and Stewart, P.
E. (2008). Biology of infection with
Borrelia burgdorferi. Infect. Dis. Clin.
North Am. 22, 217–234.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbial Immunology

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 104 | 10

Binder et al.

Population dynamics of Borrelia burgdorferi

Tsao,

J.

spirochetes

I. (2009). Reviewing mol-
ecular adaptations of Lyme bor-
reliosis
in the con-
text of reproductive ﬁtness in nat-
ural transmission cycles. Vet. Res.
40, 36.

van Furth, R., and Diesselhoff-den
Dulk, M. (1970). The kinetics of
promonocytes and monocytes in
the bone marrow.
J. Exp. Med.
132, 813.

Wooten, R. M., Ma, Y., Yoder, R. A.,
Brown, J. P., Weis, J. H., Zachary,
J. F., Kirschning, C. J., and Weis,
J. J. (2002). Toll-like receptor 2 is

required for innate, but not acquired,
host defense to Borrelia burgdorferi.
J. Immunol. 168, 348–355.

Wormser, G., McKenna, D., Carlin,
J., Nadelman, R., Cavaliere, L.,
and
Holmgren, D., Byrne, D.,
(2005).
Nowakowski,
J.
Brief
communication:
hematogenous
in
dissemination
Lyme
early
disease. Ann.
Intern. Med. 142,
751–755.

Zhang, J.-R., and Norris, S. J. (1998).
the Borrelia
vlsE involves
gene

Genetic variation of
burgdorferi
cassette-speciﬁc,

segmental

gene

conversion.
3698–3704.

Infect.

Immun.

66,

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 14 December 2011; accepted: 01
March 2012; published online: 22 March
2012.
Citation: Binder SC, Telschow A and
Meyer-Hermann M (2012) Population

dynamics of Borrelia burgdorferi in Lyme
disease. Front. Microbio. 3:104. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00104
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Microbial Immunology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Binder, Telschow
and Meyer-Hermann. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 104 | 11

