REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 26 January 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00018

Origin and evolution of antibiotic resistance: the common
mechanisms of emergence and spread in water bodies

Agnese Lupo1*, Sébastien Coyne 2 and Thomas Ulrich Berendonk 1

1 Institute of Hydrobiology, Department of Hydrosciences, Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Germany
2 Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology – Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany

Edited by:
Stefania Stefani, University of
Catania, Italy
Reviewed by:
Fernando Baquero, Ramón y Cajal
Institute for Health Research, Spain
Manuela Coci, National Research
Council, Italy
*Correspondence:
Agnese Lupo, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Department of
Hydrosciences, Technical University
Dresden, Zellescher Weg 40, 01217
Dresden, Germany.
e-mail: agnese.lupo@tu-dresden.de

The environment, and especially freshwater, constitutes a reactor where the evolution and
the rise of new resistances occur. In water bodies such as waste water efﬂuents, lakes,
and rivers or streams, bacteria from different sources, e.g., urban, industrial, and agricul-
tural waste, probably selected by intensive antibiotic usage, are collected and mixed with
environmental species. This may cause two effects on the development of antibiotic resis-
tances: ﬁrst, the contamination of water by antibiotics or other pollutants lead to the rise of
resistances due to selection processes, for instance, of strains over-expressing broad range
defensive mechanisms, such as efﬂux pumps. Second, since environmental species are
provided with intrinsic antibiotic resistance mechanisms, the mixture with allochthonous
species is likely to cause genetic exchange. In this context, the role of phages and integrons
for the spread of resistance mechanisms appears signiﬁcant. Allochthonous species could
acquire new resistances from environmental donors and introduce the newly acquired
resistance mechanisms into the clinics. This is illustrated by clinically relevant resistance
mechanisms, such as the ﬂuoroquinolones resistance genes qnr. Freshwater appears to
play an important role in the emergence and in the spread of antibiotic resistances, high-
lighting the necessity for strategies of water quality improvement. We assume that further
knowledge is needed to better understand the role of the environment as reservoir of antibi-
otic resistances and to elucidate the link between environmental pollution by anthropogenic
pressures and emergence of antibiotic resistances. Only an integrated vision of these two
aspects can provide elements to assess the risk of spread of antibiotic resistances via
water bodies and suggest, in this context, solutions for this urgent health issue.

Keywords: water, freshwater, antibiotic resistance, environment, gene transfer

INTRODUCTION
Evolution of bacterial antibiotic resistances, and its spread and
emergence, represent one of the most threatening health care prob-
lems with worldwide proportions (Hawkey, 2008). The rise of
new resistances and of multi-drug resistances urgently asks for
a better understanding of the factors and hot spots involved in
its diffusion and development. All the known antibiotic resis-
tance mechanisms, acquired by opportunistic and pathogenic
bacteria, evolve by means of Darwinian forces, i.e., mutations
occurring in pre-existing genes of the bacterial chromosome pos-
itively selected by environmental forces (Gullberg et al., 2011;
Zhang et al., 2011). Mutations within the chromosome can be
responsible for the decreased afﬁnity of antibiotics to their targets.
Furthermore, some resistance mechanisms (e.g., efﬂux pumps,
chromosomal AmpC β-lactamases) are ﬁnely regulated in their
expression and at a basal level confer a naturally reduced sus-
ceptibility to the drugs. Mutations in the genomic architectures
regulating such mechanisms result in their over-expression and
high level of antibiotic resistance (Jacoby, 2009; Coyne et al.,
2011). However, adaptation to the selective pressure of antibi-
otics accelerates acquisition of antibiotic resistance genes by lat-
eral transfer from donor species (Wiedenbeck and Cohan, 2011).

Aminov (2011) has reviewed the role of horizontal gene trans-
fer mechanisms in environmental microbiota. Although many
more studies are necessary to completely understand the role of
horizontal gene transfer in the environment, experimental evi-
dences have demonstrated that transduction has an important
role in genetic exchanges among environmental microbiota, espe-
cially in freshwater. Horizontal gene transfer events are respon-
sible for the acquisition of heterologous resistance mechanisms
among species and from antibiotic producers to commensal and
pathogen bacteria. Hospitals, human community, farms, aquacul-
tures, and agriculture are reactors where the usage of antibiotics
selects for resistant bacteria and promotes the gene exchange.
Recently, much more attention has focused on the role of the
environment and of connected ecological habitats, water bodies
such as rivers, streams, waste water efﬂuents, and lakes, that have
been suggested to be important in facilitating the transport and
transfer of the antibiotic resistance genes (Aminov and Mackie,
2007; Baquero et al., 2008). Low-cost pharmaceuticals, preventa-
tive medication with broad spectrum antibiotics together with the
overuse of those drugs contribute signiﬁcantly to the emergence of
bacterial drug resistances (Depledge, 2011). The combination of
all these factors together with an inadequate waste-management

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 1

Lupo et al.

Antibiotic resistances in water bodies

of the pharmaceuticals seem to be responsible for the alarm-
ing pollution of the environmental habitats such as agricultural
soils and rivers, which probably contribute to the selection of
antibiotic resistant bacteria and speed up the emergence of new
resistances. Furthermore, rivers often receive bacteria from differ-
ent sources, e.g., waste water treatment plants or water originating
from urban efﬂuent, industrial, or agricultural activities, thus con-
stituting potential compartments where environmental, human,
and/or animal related bacteria can coexist, at least temporally
(Baquero et al., 2008). This mixing can result in two main risks: (i)
many environmental bacterial species are provided with intrin-
sic antibiotic resistance genes, constituting part of the so-called
resistome. These bacteria represent a reservoir of drug resistance
mechanisms and may act as donors for human related bacteria
which, in turn, could introduce new acquired resistance mecha-
nisms in the clinics (Wright, 2010); (ii) due to the intensive usage
of antibiotics in medicine, agriculture, and aquaculture, human or
animal related bacteria are more likely to be selected for antibiotic
resistances within polluted environments directly by the pres-
ence of antibiotics and indirectly through co-selection by other
pollutants (Martinez, 2009). Thus, when antibiotic resistant bac-
teria contaminate rivers, their resistance mechanisms can spread
in the environment through bacteria, and/or mobile genetic ele-
ments. The localization of antibiotic resistance genes on diverse
genetic structures such as integrons, which are platforms for gene
aggregation, and mobile genetic elements (e.g., transposons and
plasmids), together with the presence of phages, enhance their
spread, inﬂuencing the course of their evolution (Wright et al.,
2008). In particular, integrons are supposed to have a crucial role in
the development of multi-drug resistances (Cambray et al., 2010).
Recent studies suggest that the spread of resistant bacteria in nat-
ural fresh water systems can reach drinking water supplies and thus
enter the human food chain (Walsh et al., 2011). These factors lead
to an unlimited spread of antibiotic resistances and indicate that
water sanitation or a better management of the respective water
quality is crucial for a better control of the spread of antibiotic
resistances.

This review aims to describe the current knowledge on the
origins of antibiotic resistances mechanisms and environmental
reservoirs of antibiotic resistances. Mechanisms, originating and
spreading in bacterial populations naturally occurring in the water
habitats, will be highlighted. The consequences of horizontal gene
transfer by transduction and gene recombination events mediated
by integrons in water habitats will be underlined. The Table 1
summarizes the mechanisms of resistances cited in the review.

MUTATIONS AND THE RISE OF ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCES IN
FRESH WATER HABITATS
Mutations in environmental habitats occur frequently and usually
depend on evolutionary or demographic factors such as popu-
lation size etc. Generally, the rate of mutations can be increased
due to anthropogenic impacts. However, especially antibiotics in
the environment are more likely to select for speciﬁc mutations
within bacteria. We summarize which mutations are most relevant
in the context of antibiotic resistance in water habitats and might
therefore be selected to a higher frequency due to the presence of
antibiotics in water bodies.

In the clinics it has often been observed that the onset of spon-
taneous mutations in chromosomal bacterial genes may lead to the
emergence of resistances affecting from one antibiotic to several
drug classes of antibiotics. For instance, different point mutations
in ribosomal proteins confer aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, and
macrolides resistance; or in the RNA polymerase confer rifampicin
resistance. To the best of our knowledge, these mechanisms have
never been reported in bacteria of environmental origin, most
likely because they have been overlooked.

Mutations in the penicillin binding proteins (PBPs) can lead
to a decreased afﬁnity for β-lactams drugs establishing bacterial
resistance (Lambert, 2005). This mechanism has been extensively
reported from clinical species. Although no direct reports exist
from environmental sources, bacterial species such as Enterococ-
cus faecium and Proteus mirabilis have been described to resist to
β-lactams by mutations in PBP5 and PBP2 respectively. E. faecium
has been frequently reported as contaminant of water body and P.
mirabilis has been described as shuttle species between human or
animal guts and water bodies (Sosa et al., 2006). The risk associated
with the spread of organisms harboring such mechanisms is prob-
ably low. However, investigations to understand the link between
PBP modiﬁcation and ﬁtness in terms of survival in water could
yield signiﬁcant information, to better assess the risk of spread
for these species and antibiotic resistances. Probably, the role of
mutations in the propagation and emergence of antibiotic resis-
tant bacteria is minor compared to the acquisition of heterologous
determinants. However, it seems that also very low concentrations
of antibiotics can select for less susceptible bacteria (Gullberg et al.,
2011). In environmental habitats this could result in an ecological
imbalance with a higher prevalence of resistant microorganisms.

CHROMOSOMALLY ENCODED CEPHALOSPORINASE
Bacteria, especially Gram-negative, can also resist to β-lactams
by the production of hydrolytic enzymes, β-lactamases. Detec-
tion of antibiotic resistant bacteria, in freshwater, harboring β-
lactamases has been reported from several geographical areas.
Clinical occurrence of β-lactamases encoding genes has been
extensively reviewed (Bonnet, 2004; Pitout et al., 2005; Coque
et al., 2008; Bush, 2010) and recently much attention to their
propagation in the environment has been paid (see hereafter the
section on acquired β-lactamases). According to Ambler (1980)
β-lactamases are classiﬁed in four classes, simplistically ranging
from A to D. Bush and Jacoby have proposed a categorization
of the β-lactamases according to their hydrolytic and inhibitory
proﬁles. For an exhaustive knowledge of β-lactamases nomencla-
ture and biochemical characteristics, we suggest the recent review
by Bush and Fisher (2011). Jacoby (2009) has reviewed the dis-
tribution, origins, and enzymatic action of AmpC β-lactamases,
belonging to the class C. The author has observed that ampC
genes are located on the chromosome of bacteria belonging to dif-
ferent and phylogenetically distant species. ampC genes are widely
distributed in bacterial species of environmental origins. Water
borne species such as Aeromonas spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens, Ochrobactrum anthropi, as well as sev-
eral Enterobacteriaceae, commonly found in water habitats, like
Enterobacter spp., Morganella morganii, and Hafnia alvei harbor
chromosomal ampC genes. Typically, ampC genes are regulated

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 2

Lupo et al.

Antibiotic resistances in water bodies

Table 1 | Overview of some mechanisms of bacterial antibiotic resistances occurring in water habitats.

Antibiotic

Resistance mechanism

Host

Source

β-Lactams

PBP2 mutations
PBP5 mutations
ampC regulators mutations
ampC promoter region mutations
Acquired AmpC

Proteus mirabilis
Enterococcus faecium
Gram-negative species
Escherichia coli
E. coli

Acquired CTX-M
Acquired KPC
Acquired VIM

Acquired IMP
Acquired OXA-23
Acquired OXA-48
Acquired NDM-1

Fluoroquinolones

QRDR (quinolones resistance
determining region) mutations

E. coli
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Brevundimonas diminuta, Rhizobium
radiobacter, Pseudomonas monteilii,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Ochrobactrum
anthropi, Enterobacter ludwigii,
Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes
Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens
Acinetobacter baumannii
Serratia marcescens
P. aeruginosa, Achromobacter spp.,
Kingella denitriﬁcans
P. aeruginosa

QnrS

Aeromonas spp., E. coli
Aeromonas allosaccarophila
E. coli
Aeromonas punctata, Aeromonas media
A. punctata
Metagenome
E. coli
Enterococci spp.
Gram-negative species Aeromonas
bestiarium
Tet efﬂux
Several species
Over-expression of RND efﬂux pumps Gram-negative

QnrS2
QnrVC4
QepA efﬂux
OqxAB efﬂux
modiﬁcation of the peptidoglycan
FloR efﬂux

Vancomycin
Chloramphenicol
and ﬂorfenicol
Tetracyclines
MDRb

–a
–a
–a
Recreational beaches, drinking water
Recreational beaches, drinking water,
bioﬁlm of water supplies
River, sediment, birds
Hospital waste water efﬂuent
Hospital waste water efﬂuent

river,

Waste water
River, hospital waste water efﬂuent
River
Tap water

Hospital and urban waste water efﬂuent

River and lake, urban efﬂuent
Lake
River
Lake
Waste water efﬂuent
River sediment, water from farm environment
Farm water
Waste water efﬂuents, bioﬁlm
Aquacultures streams

Farms, sediment
–a

aObserved in clinics but likely occurring in environmental and water habitats.
bMDR, multi-drug resistance.

and their expression is induced in the presence of β-lactams. The
regulation of ampC expression is quite complex and has been
reviewed for P. aeruginosa by Lister et al. (2009). Mutations in the
transcription factor AmpR, a LysR-type transcriptional regulator,
in the inner membrane permease AmpG, or in the cytosolic ami-
dase AmpD, have been found to confer a constitutive expression
of the cephalosporinase gene, even in the absence of antibiotics.

Mataseje et al. (2009) described the over-expression of ampC,
by mutations in the promoter region, in Escherichia coli strains
isolated from recreational beaches and drinking water (Table 1).
As for other β-lactamases, chromosomal cephalosporinases have
been described to evolve by point mutation, hydrolyzing a broader
spectrum of β-lactams (Jacoby, 2009). Of particular concern is
the plasmidic location of several ampC genes, which likely orig-
inated from the chromosomal cephalosporinase of environmen-
tal species. Details will be discussed in the section on acquired
β-lactamases. AmpC enzymes are indistinguishable from the D-
peptidases, involved in the cell wall biosynthesis (Jacoby, 2009).

Thus, these enzymes probably adapted to confer β-lactams resis-
tance from the natural physiological function, likely by gene dupli-
cation and mutation events (Sandegren and Andersson, 2009).
Genes encoding AmpC enzymes are largely distributed on the
chromosomes of many bacterial species of environmental origins.
The intrinsic function of AmpC remains unknown, but the conser-
vation of this enzyme in several unrelated species and the complex
regulation of its structural gene highly suggests a physiological
role. Deciphering this role could provide useful information on
the evolutionary processes and driving forces that have lead to the
selection of β-lactamases.

DNA GYRASE AND TOPO-ISOMERASE
Generally, mutations in the quinolone resistance determining
region (QRDR) of gyrA, gyrB, parC, and parE genes coding
for the bacterial DNA gyrase and the topo-isomerase IV respec-
tively, are responsible for the onset of bacterial resistance to
ﬂuoroquinolones. This mechanism is known to occur in water

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 3

Lupo et al.

Antibiotic resistances in water bodies

environments. Schwartz et al. (2006) have detected ciproﬂoxacin
resistant P. aeruginosa in six different treatment plants from four
cities in Germany receiving the waste water from hospitals and
cities. Molecular investigations demonstrated the occurrence of
mutations in gyrA and parC genes. Further, the study demon-
strated the spread of the ciproﬂoxacin resistant P. aeruginosa also
in the waste water receiving river (Table 1). Alcaide et al. (2010)
have reported about the gyrA and parC mutation conferring ﬂu-
oroquinolones resistances in a variety of Aeromonas spp. isolated
from freshwater. The authors found that the mutations in gyrA
and parC, which are responsible for ﬂuoroquinolones resistance,
in recently described Aeromonas spp. such as Aeromonas media,
Aeromonas veronii, and Aeromonas popofﬁ are similar to the one
described in Aeromonas hydrophila, Aeromonas sobria, Aeromonas
caviae, and Aeromonas salmonicida. In Portugal, Figueira et al.
(2011) reported about mutations in gyrA and parC mostly linked
to Aeromonas punctata and A. media isolated from an urban
efﬂuent. The same authors have recently characterized E. coli
strains, isolated from a waste water efﬂuent, that harbored muta-
tions in gyrA and parC genes, likely responsible for the observed
ciproﬂoxacin resistance (Table 1).

EFFLUX PUMPS
The role of efﬂux pumps in conferring antibiotic resistance and
multi-drug resistances in bacteria has been extensively studied and
reviewed (Poole, 2004; Piddock, 2006; Martinez, 2009; Nikaido
and Pages, 2011). Efﬂux systems conferring drug resistance typi-
cally belong to ﬁve main families: the ATP-binding cassette (ABC)
transporter, the major facilitator superfamily (MFS), the small
multi-drug resistance (SMR), the multi-drug and toxic-compound
extrusion (MATE), and the resistance nodulation division (RND)
families, the latter present only in Gram-negative bacteria and
chromosomally located. The structural genes for these systems
can be located on transferable genetic elements and constitute
the main acquired mechanisms for drug resistance (e.g., the Tet
and the CmlA/FloR efﬂux systems families for tetracycline and
chloramphenicol resistance, respectively). However, bacteria are
intrinsically provided with chromosomally encoded efﬂux sys-
tems that are believed to participate in the cell homeostasy, by
extruding endo and/or exogenous toxic compounds, heavy met-
als, virulence factors, quorum sensing signal, etc. In Gram-negative
bacteria, RND systems exhibit a wide substrate spectrum, which
usually includes drugs of different classes. Nikaido and Pages
(2011) have recently reviewed the role of these efﬂux pumps in
a wide range of pathogenic and opportunistic bacterial species
such as E. coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter spp., P. aerug-
inosa, Acinetobacter baumannii, and the emergent opportunistic
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. Typically, the expression of RND
efﬂux pumps is ﬁnely regulated by a dedicated regulator (Coyne
et al., 2011). A more complex regulation network, linking efﬂux
to membrane permeability and other cellular functions, is likely
to occur in these bacteria, as described for the mar regulon in E.
coli (reviewed by Grkovic et al., 2002). Some RND efﬂux genes
are not expressed in absence of inducing signal, whereas others
exhibit a basal level of expression, and therefore contribute to
intrinsic resistance (Coyne et al., 2011). Point mutations in a reg-
ulator or in the promoter sequence of RND efﬂux genes can be

+

+

+

(K

)/H

responsible for their over-expression and, in turn, for enhanced
resistance. Similarly, the acquisition of an insertion sequence, car-
rying a strong and constitutive promoter, upstream of the regulator
or the promoter sequence of RND efﬂux genes, can also mediate
their over-expression and cause drug resistance. These systems
have been mostly studied in the context of antibiotic resistance;
therefore only little information concerning the natural and physi-
ological mechanisms inducing the expression of RND efﬂux genes
exist. Recently, studies have identiﬁed the role of oxidative and
nitrosative stress in the activation of MexXY and MexEF–OprN,
respectively (Fetar et al., 2011; Fraud and Poole, 2011). These stress
signals are likely to occur in the environment and might represent
natural inducers of the efﬂux systems expression. The natural role
of efﬂux systems has been extensively reviewed by Martinez et al.
(2009) who concluded that the intrinsic role of efﬂux in the bac-
terial physiology has lead to the conservation of the genes coding
for efﬂux pumps among species of the same genus. For example,
if the over-expression of mdfA confers MDR to E. coli, a basal
expression is involved in the Na
antiport, that allows
the pH homeostasis of the cell (Lewinson and Bibi, 2001). Efﬂux
pumps conferring resistance to antibiotics, such as the AcrAB–
TolC from Salmonella spp. has also been shown to efﬂux bile salts,
therefore conferring a selective advantage which allowed coloniz-
ing and surviving in human or animal intestines (Lacroix et al.,
1996). Mosqueda and Ramos (2000) described the contribution
of efﬂux pumps in the cellular extrusion of toluene, an organic
solvent, in Pseudomonas putida. This species, able to grow on the
liquid interface of water and toluene and to survive in highly conta-
minated environments, extrudes the solvent by the TtgABC pump.
The genes coding for this RND efﬂux pump usually exhibit a basal
expression level but are induced by the presence of toluene in
the medium. In water sediment, Groh et al. (2007) demonstrated
that a MexF-like pump from Shewanella oneidensis, further than
contributing to resistance to tetracycline and chloramphenicol,
confers an increased ﬁtness in anoxic environments. The underly-
ing mechanism is unclear but could involve the extrusion of toxic
compounds. A well documented role, for some efﬂux pumps, is
their involvement in the cell to cell communication. This func-
tion has been demonstrated for MexAB–OprM in P. aeruginosa
(Evans et al., 1998), BpeAB–OprB in Burkholderia pseudomallei
(Chan and Chua, 2005) and AcrAB–TolC in Enterobacteriaceae
(Rahmati et al., 2002). These RND pumps, further than extruding
homoserine lactones, are also able to confer MDR. Moreover, sev-
eral reports have shown that efﬂux pumps, notably from the RND
family, are involved in mechanisms leading to bacterial virulence.
For example, Piddock (2006) highlighted the crucial role of efﬂux
pumps in extruding abiotic substances such as ﬂavonoids during
plant colonization and in establishing virulence. In antibiotic pro-
ducing bacteria, efﬂux pumps play a crucial role as a self defense
mechanism by extruding the bioactive secondary metabolites. For
instance, an efﬂux-mediated self-resistance has been developed
in the oxytetracycline-producing Streptomyces rimosus (Petkovic
et al., 2006). Bacteria living in the same habitat, being exposed to
the produced antibiotics, could either adapt their intrinsic mech-
anisms, e.g., by the over-expression of an efﬂux pump, or acquire
by horizontal gene transfer the resistance mechanism from the
producers. The ﬁrst option would require a point mutation to

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 4

Lupo et al.

Antibiotic resistances in water bodies

over-express a pre-existing efﬂux system able to pump out the
toxic compound, whereas the second pathway would involve the
mobilization and transfer of the gene coding for the self-protecting
mechanism. Thus, efﬂux pumps had an ecological role much
before they conferred drug resistances in clinics, as they constitute
a selective advantage in presence of competing microorganisms.
The massive usage of these drugs has further selected optimized
mechanisms and enhanced their spread. The role of mobile and
mobilizing genetic elements, such as insertion sequences, inte-
grons, transposons, and plasmids, were critical for a successful
and rapid spread. Nikaido and Pages (2011) have observed that
the rise of resistance due to efﬂux pumps mechanisms in clinics
is tightly linked to the sub-inhibitory concentration of the antibi-
otics during clinical therapies. Consequently, the appearance of
this kind of resistance favors the emergence of other mechanisms
such as reduced membrane permeability to drugs, increase of point
mutation in the drug target genes or activation of enzymatic resis-
tance mechanisms. It would be of interest to investigate this aspect
of resistance development in environmental habitats, where the
concentration of antibiotics varies dependent on the degree of
pollution and where other selective forces are present. Especially,
heavy metals, naturally present in the soil, and solvents produced
as consequences of metabolic activities, have been demonstrated to
be substrates of several efﬂux pumps conferring multi-drug resis-
tance (Silver and Phung, 1996; Moken et al., 1997). Concerning
heavy metals, pumps have the additional role to defend bacteria
from a toxic excess and to maintain the proper intra-cellular con-
centration for co-factors and enzymes (Teitzel et al., 2006). The
presence of these compounds in freshwater could therefore select
for the over-expression of an intrinsic efﬂux pump. Some heavy
metals efﬂux genes, notably from the SMR family, are located on R
plasmids containing antibiotic resistance genes, and heavy metals
may favor the co-selection of these two features. In the environ-
ment, maintenance and propagation of antibiotic resistance genes
might have been promoted by heavy metals selection (Martinez
et al., 2009). Moreover, a causal relationship between pollution of
the water environment by antibiotics or other pollutants agents
and the selection of bacteria expressing or over-expressing efﬂux
pumps appears conceivable. Hernandez et al. (2011a) have recently
demonstrated in vitro how triclosan, a detergent antibiotic used
in cosmetic, binds the regulator SmeT of the SmeDEF pump in S.
maltophilia, leading to the over-expression of the pump and conse-
quent multi-drug resistance. This observation is of major concern
since S. maltophilia is an aquatic species that can be responsible
for nosocomial infection.

Until now, it remains unclear how the efﬂux pumps contribute
to the emergence of resistant bacteria in the environment. It has
been demonstrated that an efﬂux pump over-expression could
be coupled with a reduced bacterial ﬁtness. However, this is not
a general rule. Sanchez et al. (2002) investigated the ﬁtness of
two P. aeruginosa mutants over-expressing the MexAB–OprM and
MexCD–OprJ efﬂux pumps, both conferring multi-drug resis-
tance. The authors demonstrated in vitro that the MexAB–OprM
over-expressing mutant showed a signiﬁcantly decreased survival
in water compared to the wild type strain, while no signiﬁcant
differences were observed for the second efﬂux pump mutant.
In addition, the production of bioﬁlm in both mutants was not

affected if not promoted in the MexCD–OprJ mutant. Production
of bioﬁlm implies a higher probability of survival in natural water
ecosystem and would thus constitute a beneﬁcial characteristic.
Selection in polluted environments of opportunistic species such
as P. aeruginosa, S. maltophilia, or A. baumannii, over-expressing
efﬂux systems could contribute to the spread of these bacteria and
their introduction into clinics. It would be interesting to focus on
the above described mechanisms also in water environments, to
gain a better understanding of their physiological function and
their role in the emergence of bacterial drug resistance.

ACQUISITION OF GENES IN WATER HABITATS AND
DEVELOPMENT OF ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCES
Acquisition of heterologous genes by lateral transfer largely facil-
itate the adaptive evolution of bacteria, especially under strong
selective pressures. Transfer of exogenous DNA in bacteria may be
mediated by plasmids, phages, transposons, genomic islands, or
captation of free DNA by transformation. Sengelov and Sorensen
(1998) have found that in environments such as bulk water, plas-
mid transfer from a donor to a recipient cell occur, even at a low
frequency. Taylor et al. (2011) have observed that several factors
could, not only inﬂuence, but also promote gene transfer among
bacteria in water environment. One such factor is ﬁlter feeding
organisms that collect bacteria belonging to different species and
concentrate them at high density in a reduced space, facilitating
gene exchange. Bioﬁlm matrix in water habitats also creates favor-
able conditions both for plasmid exchange and transformation
process (Molin and Tolker-Nielsen, 2003). Interestingly, Meibom
et al. (2005) have demonstrated how chitin present in the crus-
tacean exoskeletons is able to activate the competence status of
Vibrio cholerae, and thus enhance transformation by acquisition of
exogenous DNA. Although they are not classiﬁed as mobile genetic
elements, integrons are platforms for genes aggregation, and thus
contribute to MDR development. Furthermore, the abundance of
integrons in bacterial communities of water habitats seems to be
associated with the degree of water bodies’ pollution (Wright et al.,
2008). Many ﬁndings support the crucial role of genetic transfer
in water habitats mediated by phages (Ripp and Miller, 1995).

INTEGRONS
Several studies have highlighted the crucial role of integrons, par-
ticularly class 1 integrons, in the evolution of antibiotic resistances
in clinics (Cambray et al., 2010). Indeed, class 1 integrons are
not only platforms for genes aggregation, leading to the establish-
ment of multi-drug resistance, but their localization on mobile
genetic elements such as plasmids and transposons favor the
spread of several genes in a unique transfer event. Recently, stud-
ies on environmental microbial communities have demonstrated
that integrons of class 1 are largely present in the environment.
Gillings et al. (2008) have provided evidences that the clinical
class 1 integrons originated from environmental bacterial com-
munities. The authors observed that class 1 integrons isolated
from environmental samples do not carry any antibiotic resistance
gene and harbored the qac gene cassettes, which is responsible
for the bacterial resistance to quaternary ammoniums by efﬂux.
Clinical class 1 integrons would have arisen from environmen-
tal ones by integration on a Tn402-like transposon, which then

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 5

Lupo et al.

Antibiotic resistances in water bodies

disseminated in human commensals and pathogens. The pres-
ence of the qac gene has conferred a selective advantage to adapt
in clinical environments, where bacteria are often challenged by
disinfectants. The establishment of class 1 integrons in clinical
strains has later on enabled the acquisition of antibiotic resistances
positively selected by the usage of drugs. This hypothesis is also
supported by the fact that clinical class 1 integrons demonstrated
similar structures among them, in terms of integrases and recom-
bination site, inferring a common ancestor. Gaze et al. (2005)
have demonstrated how pollution of water bodies and their sed-
iments with quaternary ammonium compounds, directly select
for bacteria harboring qacE gene cassettes, located on the class 1
integrons. Furthermore, evidence of selection of bacteria harbor-
ing class 1 integrons in water bodies contaminated by industrial
waste has been provided by Wright et al. (2008). The authors
demonstrated that the contamination of freshwater with heavy
metals correlated positively with a higher abundance of class 1
integrons in the bacterial community. More recently, Gaze et al.
(2011) showed in sewage sludge and pig slurry that the preva-
lence of class 1 integrons and of qac genes was higher in bacteria
exposed to detergents and/or antibiotic residues. All these studies
demonstrate that pollution of water bodies with different agents
increases the risk of selection and spread of integron structures.
These genetic structures may be acquired by bacterial species
that play role as shuttle between environment and clinics, con-
stituting gene vectors for further dissemination in nosocomial
bacteria.

PHAGES
Phages are major constituents of environmental ecosystems, in
particular freshwater (Weinbauer, 2004; Srinivasiah et al., 2008).
Their abundance is usually higher than bacterial abundance
and, since a signiﬁcant fraction of the prokaryotic community
is infected with phages in aquatic systems, phages are likely to
play an important role in horizontal gene transfer. Parsley et al.
(2010) have proven the presence of β-lactamases genes in the viral
metagenome of an activated sludge, conﬁrming that transduc-
tion events may be responsible for the propagation of antibiotic
resistance genes in these environments. Interestingly, Colomer-
Lluch et al. (2011) demonstrated the presence of blaTEM and
blaCTX-M, the most common genes conferring β-lactams resis-
tance in Enterobacteriaceae, and mecA, responsible for methicillin
resistance in Staphylococcus aureus, in phage DNA isolated from a
waste water treatment plant and the natural water of the receiving
river.

The presence of mecA in the phage fraction of natural freshwa-
ter is of great sanitary concern because of the threat represented
by methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infections,
both in hospitals and communities (Campanile et al., 2011). This
ﬁnding is also of interest for the understanding of the propaga-
tion of this gene. mecA codes for a protein with a low afﬁnity to
penicillin (PBP2a), conferring methicillin resistance. This gene is
located on a mobile genomic element, the staphylococcal cassette
chromosome (SCCmec), and has been reported only from the
Staphylococcus genus from clinics. Baba et al. (2009) have char-
acterized a methicillin resistance gene complex, mecIRAm, which
could be the progenitor of SCCmec observed in clinical MRSA,

from a strain of Macrococcus caseolyticus (closely related to S.
aureus), isolated from animal meat. Interestingly, Tsubakishita
et al. (2010) found a mecA gene in S. ﬂeurettii chromosoma-
lly located and not associated to the SCCmec element. Thus, the
authors advanced the hypothesis that S. ﬂeurettii, an animal related
species, is the progenitor of this resistance mechanism. The mecA
gene has been reported rarely from natural water, but Schwartz
et al. (2003) detected mecA in hospital waste waters. Later, Bock-
elmann et al. (2009) have reported the sporadic presence of mecA
in a ground water recharge system. Kassem et al. (2008) described
the presence of the mecA gene in 18 Proteus vulgaris, four M. mor-
ganii, and three Enterococcus faecalis isolated from surface water.
A ca. 250 bp-sequence of mecA from one representative isolate
of P. vulgaris, M. morganii, and E. faecalis was found to exhibit
100% similarity with the S. aureus mecA gene. However, this result,
which is the ﬁrst report of MecA in non-staphylococcal organ-
isms, has never been conﬁrmed by other studies or investigated
further. Acquisition by transduction of heterologous genes, partic-
ularly of antibiotic resistance genes, might represent an important
mechanism of horizontal gene transfer in water bodies. Consid-
ering the high concentration of phages in such environments
(Weinbauer, 2004; Srinivasiah et al., 2008), transduction consti-
tutes probably one of the main gene transfer mechanisms and of
genome evolution for bacteria in water habitats. More studies are
needed to understand the impact of phage communities on bac-
terial evolution and antibiotic resistance spread within the water
bodies.

ORIGINS OF ACQUIRED ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE
MECHANISMS
Recently, D’Costa et al. (2011) have reported a metagenomic analy-
sis of the Beringian permafrost, which is 30,000 years old. They
showed molecular evidences of the ancient origins of antibiotic
resistances, detecting β-lactamases genes, vanX-like, component
of the vancomycin resistance operon, and tet M, coding for a pro-
tein protecting the ribosomal target from tetracycline. Sequence
analysis revealed that the β-lactamases genes recovered from the
permafrost demonstrated an amino-acid homology (53–84%) to
known β-lactamases from β-lactams producing Streptomyces. The
tet M sequences revealed a high similarity to the genes coding
for the ribosomal protection protein of actinomycetes. The vanX
sequence showed a similarity to the vanX gene recovered in path-
ogenic vancomycin resistant enterococci (VRE) and to the vanX
gene from Amycolatopsis orientalis. This environmental species,
belonging to the actinobacteria phylum, is a natural producer
of vancomycin, and very likely the progenitor of the van genes
operons, responsible for resistance to vancomycin. The integration
of the van operons on transposons and on conjugative plasmids
has enhanced their spread (Courvalin, 2006). Reports of VRE in
freshwater have been provided by several authors (Talebi et al.,
2008; Lata et al., 2009; Luczkiewicz et al., 2010). Interestingly,
Schwartz et al. (2003) detected vanA genes in the bioﬁlm of drink-
ing water supplies, in the absence of enterococci, demonstrating
the lateral transfer of this gene. Notably, the progenitors of these
resistance genes are soil bacteria thus most likely, a shuttle has been
responsible for the introduction of these genes into the commensal
bacterial community and afterward into the pathogenic species.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 6

Lupo et al.

Antibiotic resistances in water bodies

FLUOROQUINOLONES RESISTANCE BY TARGET PROTECTION
Resistance mechanisms originating from bacterial population of
water bodies are less well documented than from soil organ-
isms. However, the signiﬁcance of water bodies as natural source
for resistance mechanisms is similar compared to the soil. For
example, a well known example is provided by the acquired ﬂuo-
roquinolones resistance genes of the qnr family. qnr genes encode
proteins binding the bacterial DNA gyrase, thus preventing the
interaction of the antibiotic with its target. Generally, the presence
of these acquired genes does not confer a high level of ﬂuoro-
quinolones resistance, but provides a selective advantage in the
presence of these drugs, even at low concentrations (Rodriguez-
Martinez et al., 2011). Further, this protecting mechanism and the
associated low level resistance may favor the emergence of strains
with higher resistances to ﬂuoroquinolones by mutations in the
QRDR, quinolones resistance determining region, and/or by over-
expressing efﬂux systems. Several aquatic bacterial species have
been proposed as progenitors for these genes families. Poirel et al.
(2005b) reported evidences that the qnrA gene located on plas-
mids and found in clinical isolates of ﬂuoroquinolones resistant
Enterobacteriaceae, is derived from the chromosome of Shewanella
algae, a bacterial species present in marine and freshwater. The
authors advanced the hypothesis that the gene jumped from the
environmental species to Enterobacteriaceae probably under pres-
sure of antibiotic usage. Beaber et al. (2004) have demonstrated
that the presence of ﬂuoroquinolones induces the SOS bacterial
repair system, which in turn promotes horizontal gene transfer.
Poirel et al. (2005a) conducted further investigations in order to
understand the origin of this antibiotic resistance mechanism.
Their study highlighted that the chromosomes of water borne
bacteria, Vibrio vulniﬁcus, Vibrio parahaemolyticus, and Photo-
bacterium profundum harbored qnr-like genes with homology
(40–67% identity) to the plasmidic qnrA, qnrB, and qnrS genes
described in clinical Enterobacteriaceae.

Interestingly, qnrA has been observed frequently associated
with the insertion sequence ISCR1, a genetic element able to
mobilize adjacent genes. Toleman et al. (2006) hypothesized that
the ISCR1 mediated mobilization of qnrA, as well as a further
localization on a class 1 integron to form a so-called complex inte-
gron structure. The authors formulated that this complex integron
structure is responsible for the successful dissemination of qnrA
gene. Arsène and Leclercq (2007) investigated the intrinsic resis-
tance of E. faecalis to ﬂuoroquinolones and found that this species
is provided with a chromosomal qnr-like gene, which contributes
to resistance against ﬂuoroquinolones. Soon afterward, Sánchez
et al. (2008) discovered that the aquatic bacterium S. maltophilia
is a sink of qnr genes and the chromosomally located Smqnr gene
identiﬁed in this species is able to confer resistance to ﬂuoro-
quinolones in heterologous species. In 2010, Velasco et al. (2010)
reported qnr-like genes from Serratia marcescens, an environmen-
tal species. These genes, called Smaqnr, were largely present in the
chromosome of the genus. Recently, Jacoby et al. (2011) have high-
lighted that the Citrobacter spp. chromosome constitutes a reser-
voir for the qnrB ﬂuoroquinolones resistance gene. The presence
of qnr genes on the chromosome of phylogenetically distant bac-
terial species (Shewanella, Stenotrophomonas, Vibrio, Enterococcus,
Serratia, Citrobacter), suggests an ancestral role of this antibiotic

resistance mechanism. Hernandez et al. (2011b) postulated a reg-
ulatory role for the Qnr proteins. Indeed, by interacting with the
DNA gyrase, Qnr may protect the DNA gyrase against toxic DNA
substances and indirectly modulate gene expression in response to
environmental changes. Moreover, a beneﬁcial role of these pro-
tecting mechanisms has been shown for qnrA3, which confers a
ﬁtness advantage to the bacteria, favoring its dissemination. The
ﬁtness advantage was found abolished when qnrA3 was carried
by large multi-drug resistance plasmids (Michon et al., 2011). The
activation of qnrB expression by the SOS-response system could
also have an implication in the conservation of such mechanism.
As ciproﬂoxacin induces the SOS-response system, it activates its
corresponding resistance mechanisms (Da Re et al., 2009). Sev-
eral studies have reported qnr genes in heterologous species from
water habitats. Cattoir et al. (2008) recovered from the Seine River
A. punctata and A. media harboring qnrS2. Similarly, Picao et al.
(2008) detected qnrS genes in Aeromonas allosaccarophila from the
Lugano Lake, in Switzerland. A qnrVC4 allele was isolated from
aquatic environments in A. punctata by Xia et al. (2010). All these
reports demonstrate that the Aeromonas genus represents a reser-
voir for ﬂuoroquinolones resistance mediated by Qnr. Our own
studies characterized a qnrS determinant in E. coli belonging to
ST131 isolated from freshwater of a Ukrainian River (Lupo et al.,
submitted). Similarly, Dhanji et al. (2011) isolated E. coli strains
belonging to ST131 harboring a qnrS allele from the Thames
River (Table 1). These ﬁndings reﬂect a spread of these resistance
mechanisms by geographical and clonal means and highlight the
potential of rivers in the dissemination of international resistant
clones.

ACQUIRED EFFLUX MECHANISMS
Another acquired ﬂuoroquinolones resistance mechanisms is rep-
resented by efﬂux mechanisms. The qepA gene, initially char-
acterized on a conjugative plasmid from a clinical isolate of E.
coli (Perichon et al., 2007), encodes a MFS efﬂux pump. It has
been recently recovered from the metagenome of river sediments
impacted by improperly managed urban waste waters (Cummings
et al., 2011). Environmental reports of this gene are rare; however,
Deng et al. (2011) have highlighted the possible spread of this
gene by animal and human related bacterial strains in water com-
partments. Similarly, the detection of the OqxAB efﬂux pump,
conferring resistance to ﬂuoroquinolones, olaquindox, and chlo-
ramphenicol, remains rare in environmental samples. The oqxAB,
found on a conjugative plasmid in E. coli strains, represents the
only example of transferable RND efﬂux pumps, so far (Hansen
et al., 2004). Recently, Zhao et al. (2010) have reported an E.
coli strain, isolated from a water pond in a farm environment,
harboring the oqxAB gene (Table 1).

Resistance by acquired efﬂux mechanisms to other drug classes
than ﬂuoroquinolones has been extensively reported in the litera-
ture (Poole, 2004; Piddock, 2006; Nikaido and Pages, 2011). Studies
conducted in water habitats such as aquaculture, impacted by
anthropogenic activities, and notably by the application of antibi-
otics, demonstrated the risk of selection of acquired efﬂux pumps.
Fernandez-Alarcon et al. (2010) reported the presence of differ-
ent Gram-negative species from aquacultures in Chile expressing
the ﬂoR gene, which codes for a chloramphenicol and ﬂorfenicol

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 7

Lupo et al.

Antibiotic resistances in water bodies

exporter, drugs intensively used in veterinary medicine. Alarm-
ingly, those strains resistant to ﬂorfenicol also demonstrated a
multi-drug resistance, suggesting a process of co-selection. Gor-
don et al. (2008) characterized the ﬂoR gene, in Aeromonas bes-
tiarum strains from freshwater streams in France, located on a
25-kb-plasmid harboring also the tetracycline efﬂux gene tet (Y),
strB-strA, conferring resistance to streptomycin, and sul2 con-
ferring resistance to sulfonamides (Table 1). Interestingly, this
plasmid contained sequences with high nucleotide homologies
to other genetic elements recognized in different aquatic bacter-
ial species such as V. cholerae and Photobacterium damselae. This
demonstrated the contribution of horizontal gene transfer in the
spread of these resistances in aquatic habitats. Furthermore, genes
encoding tetracycline efﬂux mechanisms have been found to cir-
culate between farm environments and ground water (Aminov
et al., 2002). Propagation of tetracycline resistance genes, by efﬂux
or by ribosomal protection, has been linked to the extensive usage
of this drug class in animal feeding, and although the usage of this
antibiotic has been restricted, tetracycline resistance genes seem to
persist in the food chain and in the environment.

THE ENZYMATIC β-LACTAMS RESISTANCE
Resistance to β-lactams has spread worldwide. The low toxicity
of these molecules and the broad spectrum of action of some of
them make β-lactams the most prescribed antibiotic drug class
and propagation of resistance constitutes therefore a major clini-
cal concern. Studies have highlighted that the rise of the bacterial
resistance against β-lactams is related to the usage of the drug
in clinics, both because of selection of resistant bacteria and by
promoting the mobilization of the genes responsible for such
resistances (Bush and Fisher, 2011). Similarly, the presence of
antibiotics in water environments could promote the selection of
antibiotic resistant strains. Detecting and measuring the concen-
tration of antibiotics or intermediary products from their metab-
olization and degradation in water medium is difﬁcult, mainly
because of the lack of standardized methods (Pérez-Parada et al.,
2011). However, different studies described analytical methods
to investigate pollution of freshwater by antibiotic compounds
(Bailon-Perez et al., 2009; Ibanez et al., 2009) and antibiotics,
including β-lactams, have been found to contaminate signiﬁcantly
several rivers (Pei et al., 2006; Jiang et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2011).
A recent report from Pérez-Parada et al. (2011) has demonstrated
the presence of compounds derived from amoxicillin in river efﬂu-
ent water. Although a selection due to these compounds has not
been demonstrated, a corresponding risk cannot be excluded.

The most prevalent mechanism of β-lactams resistance in
Gram-negative bacteria has been, for a long time, the enzymatic
inactivation mediated by penicillinases such as TEM, SHV, and the
extended spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) derived from these fam-
ilies (Coque et al., 2008). In the last decade, blaTEM and blaSHV,
genes have become less frequently detected in clinics and have
been replaced by the more recently described blaCTX-M (Bonnet,
2004). CTX-M enzymes represent a special concern in clinics due
to the extended spectrum of action and to its global, successful
spread that has occurred in bacteria responsible for nosocomial
and community acquired infections (Pitout et al., 2005). In 1963,
blaTEM has been reported for the ﬁrst time, located on a plasmid.

All the currently known blaTEM genes have been documented to
derive from the ﬁrst characterized allele (Barlow and Hall, 2002).
However, the origin of this mechanism has not been elucidated
until now. The K. pneumoniae chromosome is thought to be the
origin of blaSHV, even if the physiological role of this mechanism
remains unknown (Haeggman et al., 2004). CTX-M enzymes have
been extensively investigated in clinics and more recently reported
from environmental samples. Presence of blaCTX-M in bacteria
from freshwater (Dhanji et al., 2011; Lupo et al., submitted), water
sediment (Lu et al., 2010), or water-associated birds (Randall
et al., 2011) constitutes further reservoirs and shuttles for these
resistance determinants (Table 1). Based on aminoacidic homol-
ogy, the blaCTX-M genes are sorted in four groups: blaCTX-M-1,
blaCTX-M-2, blaCTX-M-8, blaCTX-M-9 (Pitout et al., 2005). The prog-
enitor of each gene group has been found located on the chromo-
some of Kluyvera spp., of the Enterobacteriaceae family. Mobiliza-
tion events from the ancestor genes have given rise to the clinically
relevant mechanisms. In detail, blaCTX-M-1 and blaCTX-M-2 derived
from Kluyvera ascorbata (Humeniuk et al., 2002; Rodriguez et al.,
2004), blaCTX-M-8 and blaCTX-M-9 from Kluyvera georgiana (Poirel
et al., 2002; Canton and Coque, 2006). The Kluyvera genus seems
to be a sink of blaCTX-M. Indeed, Kluyvera cryocrescens harbors a
chromosomal β-lactamase, KLUC-1, which shares ca. 85% iden-
tity with CTX-M-1 (Bonnet, 2004). To the best of our knowledge,
KLUC-1 has not been encountered in clinical isolates, but this
species represents a reservoir of a new potential clinical ESBL.
Although Kluyvera spp. are considered environmental bacteria and
have been found also in water, elucidating the natural habitat of
this species may help to evaluate the risk of the propagation of
their β-lactamases. The CTX-M enzymes have been extensively
investigated because of the clinical consequences that their spread
has caused. However, many class A β-lactamases are chromoso-
mally located in several members of Enterobacteriaceae and could
constitute, if integrated on mobile elements, future mechanisms
emerging in clinics. Bellais et al. (2001) discovered a chromosomal
β-lactamase in Rahnella aquatilis (RAHN-1), which had similar-
ities to blaCTX-M-1 and blaCTX-M-2; Arakawa et al. (1989) charac-
terized KOXY from Klebsiella oxytoca; Perilli et al. (1991) MAL-1
in Citrobacter diversus; Peduzzi et al. (1994) CUM-A in P. vulgaris;
Liassine et al. (2002) HUG-A from Proteus penneri; Peduzzi et al.
(1997) SFO-1 from Serratia fonticola; Seoane and Garcia Lobo
(1991) YENT from Yersinia enterocolitica; Vimont et al. (2002)
ERP-1 from Erwinia persicina; Walckenaer et al. (2004) PLA-1 and
ORN-1A from Raoultella planticola and Raoultella ornithinolytica,
respectively. The above mentioned list provides only some exam-
ples: Bush and Fisher (2011) have reviewed that almost 600 class A
β-lactamases naturally occur and have been reported in 2011. Wor-
ryingly, mechanisms exhibiting a spectrum of activity extended to
carbapenems are emerging in clinics (Rossolini, 2005; Queenan
and Bush, 2007). VIM, IMP, KPC, some OXA, and the newly
described NDM-1 represent examples of these enzymes. The emer-
gence of KPC (K. pneumoniae carbapenemase) was described in
2001 (Yigit et al., 2001) and this enzyme has been found to spread
worldwide and among several bacterial species such as Enterobac-
teriaceae, P. aeruginosa, and A. baumannii (Bush and Fisher, 2011).
The crucial molecular vector of its spread has been recognized by
Naas et al. (2008), who characterized the location of blaKPC gene on

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 8

Lupo et al.

Antibiotic resistances in water bodies

a Tn-3-like transposon, the Tn4401, probably responsible for the
original mobilization of this gene. The transposon contains several
sequences encoding transposases or insertion sequences derived
from environmental bacterial species, but the ancestral host of
this enzyme has not been identiﬁed, so far. Recently Chagas et al.
(2011) have detected K. pneumoniae producing KPC in an efﬂuent
receiving hospital waste water, highlighting an environmental vec-
tor for the dissemination of these enzymes (Table 1). VIM enzymes
have been rarely reported from environmental isolates. Scotta et al.
(2011) isolated Brevundimonas diminuta, Rhizobium radiobacter,
Pseudomonas monteilii, P. aeruginosa, O. anthropi, and Enterobacter
ludwigii strains producing VIM enzymes, again from an efﬂuent
receiving the waste water of a hospital. Previously, Quinteira et al.
(2005) isolated a strain of Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes harbor-
ing blaVIM from a hospital wastewater efﬂuent (Table 1). Probably,
the presence of VIM producer species in the environment is due
to nosocomial selective conditions and contamination by waste-
water from hospitals. However, the detection of blaVIM in different
environmental species from freshwater highlights the potential of
water as a reservoir for these genes and as a vector facilitating their
spread. Concerning IMP enzymes, so far, a unique report has been
provided by Pellegrini et al. (2009), in a strain of P. ﬂuorescens
recovered from waste water (Table 1). A carbapenemase activity
is also exhibited by several class D β-lactamases, among which the
families of OXA-23, OXA-40, OXA-58, and OXA-51 are associated
to A. baumannii (Poirel et al., 2010). This opportunistic pathogen,
provided with an intrinsic but silent blaOXA51-like gene, is widely
distributed in nature. The origin of blaOXA-40 and blaOXA-58-like
genes remains unknown but Poirel et al. (2008) have characterized
a blaOXA-23-like chromosomally located in Acinetobacter radiore-
sistens, suggesting that this species is the progenitor for OXA-23.
Moreover, A. baumannii isolates carrying blaOXA-23 have been
detected in river (Girlich et al., 2010) and wastewater from hos-
pitals (Ferreira et al., 2011, Table 1). OXA-48 represents another
class D carbapenemase that dramatically spreads among Enter-
obacteriaceae. This latter enzyme is supposed to originate from
the chromosome of the water borne species S. oneidensis (Poirel
et al., 2004). Recently, S. marcescens strains harboring blaOXA-48
have been isolated from a river in Morocco (Potron et al., 2011),
demonstrating the risks for their dissemination in water habitats
(Table 1). The recent emergence and dramatic spread of NDM-1
enzyme in clinical isolates of A. baumannii and Enterobacteri-
aceae, has focused major attentions. Usually, strains harboring this
broad spectrum carbapenemase gene demonstrate a multi-drug
resistant phenotype and a wide set of virulence genes (Walsh et al.,
2011). The carriage of bacteria harboring blaNDM-1 by healthy
individuals has lead researchers to investigate the source of this
gene. Walsh et al. (2011) recently demonstrated the presence of
different bacterial species (P. aeruginosa, Achromobacter spp., and
Kingella denitriﬁcans) harboring blaNDM-1 in tap water used as
drinking water in India (Table 1). This ﬁnding is closing the trans-
mission circle and explains the fast and successful dissemination
of this gene. Several genes encoding carbapenemase enzymes have
been found chromosomally located in bacterial species of environ-
mental origin and water related, for instance the sme gene on the
chromosome of S. marcescens, and the sfc gene on the S. fonticola
chromosome (Naas and Nordmann, 1994; Henriques et al., 2004).

The water borne S. maltophilia also harbors a gene coding for the
L1 carbapenemase. Avison et al. (2001) have elucidated that this
gene is located on a plasmid-like element considered intrinsic to
S. maltophilia.

Class C β-lactamases located on plasmids (CMY, MIR, DHA,
and ACT) have been found worldwide from several sources
(Jacoby, 2009). Water borne bacteria, such as A. hydrophila, M.
morganii, H. alvei, and shuttle species between water and gut such
as Citrobacter freundii, Enterobacter asburiae, have been proposed
to be the progenitors of the most commonly encountered plas-
midic ampC genes detected in clinical isolates. These genes have
been reported from Canadian and Korean water bodies (Kim et al.,
2008; Mataseje et al., 2009). Schwartz et al. (2003) detected ampC
in waste, surface, and drinking water bioﬁlms (Table 1). The pres-
ence of antibiotic resistance genes in bioﬁlm matrices, especially
in those located in drinking water supplies is of particular con-
cern. Indeed, such bioﬁlm matrices can be a long lasting source
of antibiotic resistance genes that can directly spread via the food
chain.

CONCLUSION
The emergence of antibiotic resistance is the consequence of a
complex interaction of factors involved in the evolution and spread
of resistance mechanisms. The over-usage of antibiotics in clin-
ics has been believed to be the principal element involved in the
rise of new resistances. Recently, many more evidences suggest
that environmental habitats especially water bodies such as rivers
and streams are ideal vectors for the antibiotic resistance dissem-
ination. Here, the propagation of bacteria harboring antibiotic
resistance genes can occur spatially along the river. Furthermore,
the dispersion of these bacteria in the environment favors the inter-
action with the autochthonous microbiota, creating new scenarios
for the evolution of antibiotic resistances.

In strong contrast to clinics, there are no data available on the
epidemiology of antibiotic resistances in the environment, espe-
cially for geographically based data. This in turn makes extremely
difﬁcult to make any predictions on the risk of spread and emer-
gence of new antibiotic resistances. For this reason we assume that
a better knowledge on the environmental reservoir of resistances
is fundamental to predict the emergences of new resistances of
clinical concern.

It should be noticed that the pollution of water can select
antibiotic resistant bacteria. This process, involving notably co-
selection events, could cause an ecological imbalance leading to
the dominance of resistant bacteria and global disturbance of
the ecosystems. This latter point highlights the necessity of col-
lecting information and data on the status of the sampling sites
when performing a study on antibiotic resistance in freshwater.
The development of antibiotic resistances occurs very likely nat-
urally in the environment, but factors like pollution, especially of
water bodies, could force the speed of its evolution. A good sta-
tus of water quality could limit this phenomenon. Despite this,
the status of the surface water quality in many countries is still
poor. We argue for the implementation of feasible methodologies
to characterize quality parameters and detect antibiotic resistance
in water bodies, and thus to establish adapted and pragmatic mea-
sures to improve water resources. Amelioration of water status is

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 9

Lupo et al.

Antibiotic resistances in water bodies

of major concern: it can contribute to a direct and local decreased
risk for the health of populations living in the vicinity of the fresh-
water, and lead to more global effects by avoiding that water bodies
could constitute reactors for antibiotic resistance emergence and
evolution.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Authors’ research is ﬁnanced by the German Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (Grant No.: FKZ 02WM1028). We thank
the members of the Cost Action TD0803 “Detecting evolutionary
hot spots of antibiotic resistances in Europe”for helpful discussion.

REFERENCES
Alcaide, E., Blasco, M. D., and Esteve, C.
(2010). Mechanisms of quinolone
in Aeromonas
resistance
species
isolated
from humans, water
and eels. Res. Microbiol.
161,
40–45.

Ambler, R. P. (1980). The structure
of beta-lactamases. Philos. Trans.
R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 289,
321–331.
Aminov, R.

(2011). Horizontal
gene exchange in environmental
microbiota. Front. Microbiol. 2:158.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2011.00158

I.

Aminov, R. I., Chee-Sanford, J. C., Gar-
rigues, N., Teferedegne, B., Krapac,
I. J., White, B. A., and Mackie,
R. I. (2002). Development, vali-
dation, and application of PCR
primers for detection of tetracycline
efﬂux genes of gram-negative bac-
teria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68,
1786–1793.

Aminov, R. I., and Mackie, R. I. (2007).
Evolution and ecology of antibiotic
resistance genes. FEMS Microbiol.
Lett. 271, 147–161.

Arakawa, Y., Ohta, M., Kido, N., Mori,
M., Ito, H., Komatsu, T., Fujii, Y.,
and Kato, N. (1989). Chromosomal
beta-lactamase of Klebsiella oxytoca,
a new class A enzyme that hydrolyzes
broad-spectrum beta-lactam antibi-
otics. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
33, 63–70.

Arsène, S., and Leclercq, R. (2007).
Role of a qnr-like gene in the
intrinsic resistance of Enterococ-
cus
to ﬂuoroquinolones.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 51,
3254–3258.

faecalis

Avison, M. B., Higgins, C. S., Von Hel-
dreich, C. J., Bennett, P. M., and
Walsh, T. R. (2001). Plasmid loca-
tion and molecular heterogeneity of
the L1 and L2 beta-lactamase genes
of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45,
413–419.

Baba, T., Kuwahara-Arai, K., Uchiyama,
I., Takeuchi, F., Ito, T., and Hira-
matsu, K. (2009). Complete genome
sequence of Macrococcus caseolyti-
cus strain JCSCS5402, reﬂecting the
ancestral genome of the human-
pathogenic staphylococci. J. Bacte-
riol. 191, 1180–1190.

Bailon-Perez, M. I., Garcia-Campana,
A. M., Del Olmo-Iruela, M., Gamiz-
Gracia, L., and Cruces-Blanco, C.

(2009). Trace determination of 10
beta-lactam antibiotics in environ-
mental and food samples by capil-
lary liquid chromatography. J. Chro-
matogr. A 1216, 8355–8361.

Baquero, F., Martinez, J. L., and Canton,
R. (2008). Antibiotics and antibi-
otic resistance in water environ-
ments. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 19,
260–265.

Barlow, M., and Hall, B. G. (2002).
Predicting evolutionary potential:
in vitro evolution accurately repro-
duces natural evolution of
the
tem beta-lactamase. Genetics 160,
823–832.

Beaber, J. W., Hochhut, B., and Waldor,
M. K. (2004). SOS response pro-
motes horizontal dissemination of
antibiotic resistance genes. Nature
427, 72–74.

(2001).

Bellais, S., Poirel, L., Fortineau, N.,
Decousser, J. W., and Nordmann,
P.
Biochemical-genetic
characterization of the chromoso-
mally encoded extended-spectrum
class
from
A
Antimi-
Rahnella
crob.
45,
2965–2968.

beta-lactamase
aquatilis.

Chemother.

Agents

Bockelmann, U., Dorries, H. H., Ayuso-
Gabella, M. N., Salgot De Mar-
cay, M., Tandoi, V., Levantesi, C.,
Masciopinto, C., Van Houtte, E.,
Szewzyk, U., Wintgens, T., and
Grohmann, E. (2009). Quantita-
tive PCR monitoring of antibi-
otic resistance genes and bacter-
ial pathogens in three European
artiﬁcial groundwater recharge sys-
tems. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75,
154–163.

extended-spectrum

Bonnet, R. (2004). Growing group
of
beta-
lactamases: the CTX-M enzymes.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 48,
1–14.

Bush, K.

(2010). Alarming beta-
lactamase-mediated resistance
in
multidrug-resistant Enterobacteri-
aceae. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 13,
558–564.

Bush, K., and Fisher, J. F. (2011). Epi-
demiological expansion, structural
studies, and clinical challenges of
new beta-lactamases from gram-
negative bacteria. Annu. Rev. Micro-
biol. 65, 455–478.

Cambray, G., Guerout,A. M., and Mazel,
D. (2010). Integrons. Annu. Rev.
Genet. 44, 141–166.

Campanile, F., Bongiorno, D., Fal-
cone, M., Vailati, F., Pasticci, M. B.,
Perez, M., Raglio, A., Rumpianesi,
F., Scuderi, C., Suter, F., Ven-
ditti, M., Venturelli, C., Rava-
sio, V., Codeluppi, M., and Ste-
fani, S. (2011). Changing Italian
nosocomial-community trends and
heteroresistance in Staphylococcus
aureus from bacteremia and endo-
carditis. Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect.
Dis. PMID: 21822974. [Epub ahead
of print].

Canton, R., and Coque, T. M. (2006).
The CTX-M beta-lactamase pan-
demic. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 9,
466–475.

Cattoir, V., Poirel, L., Aubert, C.,
Soussy, C. J., and Nordmann, P.
(2008). Unexpected occurrence of
plasmid-mediated quinolone resis-
tance determinants in environmen-
tal Aeromonas spp. Emerging Infect.
Dis. 14, 231–237.

Chagas, T. P., Seki, L. M., Da Silva, D.
M., and Asensi, M. D. (2011). Occur-
rence of KPC-2-producing Kleb-
siella pneumoniae strains in hospital
wastewater. J. Hosp. Infect. 77, 281.

Chan, Y. Y., and Chua, K. L. (2005). The
Burkholderia pseudomallei BpeAB-
OprB efﬂux pump:
expression
and impact on quorum sensing
and virulence.
J. Bacteriol. 187,
4707–4719.

Colomer-Lluch, M.,

J.,

Jofre,

and
(2011). Antibiotic
Muniesa, M.
resistance genes in the bacterio-
phage DNA fraction of environ-
mental
samples. PLoS ONE 6,
e17549. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0017549

Coque, T. M., Baquero, F., and Canton,
R. (2008). Increasing prevalence of
ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae
in Europe. Euro Surveill. 13, 1–11.

Courvalin, P.

(2006). Vancomycin
resistance in Gram-positive cocci.
Clin.
Infect. Dis. 42(Suppl. 1),
S25–S34.

Coyne, S., Courvalin, P., and Perichon,
B. (2011). Efﬂux-mediated antibi-
otic resistance in Acinetobacter spp.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 55,
947–953.

Cummings, D. E., Archer, K. F., Arriola,
D. J., Baker, P. A., Faucett, K. G.,
Laroya, J. B., Pfeil, K. L., Ryan, C. R.,
Ryan, K. R., and Zuill, D. E. (2011).
Broad dissemination of plasmid-
mediated quinolone resistance genes

in sediments of two urban coastal
wetlands. Environ. Sci. Technol. 45,
447–454.

Da Re, S., Garnier, F., Guerin, E., Cam-
poy, S., Denis, F., and Ploy, M. C.
(2009). The SOS response promotes
qnrB quinolone-resistance determi-
nant expression. EMBO Rep. 10,
929–933.

D’Costa, V. M., King, C. E., Kalan,
L., Morar, M., Sung, W. W.,
Schwarz, C., Froese, D., Zazula, G.,
Calmels, F., Debruyne, R., Gold-
ing, G. B., Poinar, H. N., and
Wright, G. D. (2011). Antibiotic
resistance is ancient. Nature 477,
457–461.

Deng, Y., Zeng, Z., Chen, S., He, L., Liu,
Y., Wu, C., Chen, Z., Yao, Q., Hou, J.,
Yang, T., and Liu, J. H. (2011). Dis-
semination of IncFII plasmids car-
rying rmt B and qepA in Escherichia
coli from pigs, farm workers and the
environment. Clin. Microbiol. Infect.
17, 1740–1745.

Depledge, M. (2011). Pharmaceuticals:
reduce drug waste in the environ-
ment. Nature 478, 36.

Dhanji, H., Murphy, N. M., Akhigbe, C.,
Doumith, M., Hope, R., Livermore,
D. M., and Woodford, N. (2011). Iso-
lation of ﬂuoroquinolone-resistant
O25b:H4-ST131 Escherichia
coli
with CTX-M-14 extended-spectrum
beta-lactamase from UK river water.
J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
66,
512–516.

(1998).

Evans, K., Passador, L., Srikumar,
J., and
R., Tsang, E., Nezezon,
Poole, K.
Inﬂuence of
the MexAB-OprM multidrug efﬂux
system on quorum sensing in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J. Bacte-
riol. 180, 5443–5447.

Fernandez-Alarcon, C., Miranda, C.
D., Singer, R. S., Lopez, Y., Rojas,
R., Bello, H., Dominguez, M., and
Gonzalez-Rocha, G. (2010). Detec-
tion of the ﬂoR gene in a diversity of
ﬂorfenicol resistant Gram-negative
bacilli from freshwater salmon farms
in Chile. Zoonoses Public Health 57,
181–188.

Ferreira, A. E., Marchetti, D. P., De
Oliveira, L. M., Gusatti, C. S., Fuente-
fria, D. B., and Corcao, G. (2011).
Presence of OXA-23-producing iso-
lates of Acinetobacter baumannii in
wastewater from hospitals in south-
ern Brazil. Microb. Drug Resist. 17,
221–227.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 10

Lupo et al.

Antibiotic resistances in water bodies

Fetar, H., Gilmour, C., Klinoski, R.,
Daigle, D. M., Dean, C. R., and Poole,
K. (2011). mexEF-oprN multidrug
efﬂux operon of Pseudomonas aerug-
inosa: regulation by the MexT activa-
tor in response to nitrosative stress
and chloramphenicol. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 55, 508–514.

Figueira, V., Vaz-Moreira, I., Silva, M.,
and Manaia, C. M. (2011). Diver-
sity and antibiotic resistance of
Aeromonas spp.
in drinking and
waste water treatment plants. Water
Res. 45, 5599–5611.

Fraud, S., and Poole, K. (2011). Oxida-
tive stress induction of the MexXY
multidrug efﬂux genes and promo-
tion of aminoglycoside resistance
development in Pseudomonas aerug-
inosa. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
55, 1068–1074.

Gaze, W. H., Abdouslam, N., Hawkey,
P. M., and Wellington, E. M. (2005).
Incidence of class 1 integrons in a
quaternary ammonium compound-
polluted environment. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 49, 1802–1807.

Gaze, W. H., Zhang, L., Abdouslam, N.
A., Hawkey, P. M., Calvo-Bado, L.,
Royle, J., Brown, H., Davis, S., Kay, P.,
Boxall, A. B., and Wellington, E. M.
(2011). Impacts of anthropogenic
activity on the ecology of class 1
integrons and integron-associated
genes in the environment. ISME J.
5, 1253–1261.

Gillings, M., Boucher, Y., Labbate, M.,
Holmes, A., Krishnan, S., Holley, M.,
and Stokes, H. W. (2008). The evolu-
tion of class 1 integrons and the rise
of antibiotic resistance. J. Bacteriol.
190, 5095–5100.

isolation of

Girlich, D., Poirel, L., and Nordmann,
P. (2010). First
the
blaOXA-23 carbapenemase gene from
an environmental Acinetobacter bau-
mannii
isolate. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 54, 578–579.

Gordon, L., Cloeckaert, A., Doublet,
B., Schwarz, S., Bouju-Albert, A.,
Ganiere, J. P., Le Bris, H., Le Fleche-
Mateos, A., and Giraud, E. (2008).
Complete sequence of
the ﬂoR-
carrying multiresistance plasmid
pAB5S9 from freshwater Aeromonas
bestiarum. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
62, 65–71.

Grkovic, S., Brown, M. H., and Skurray,
R. A. (2002). Regulation of bacterial
drug export systems. Microbiol. Mol.
Biol. Rev. 66, 671–701.

Groh, J. L., Luo, Q., Ballard, J. D., and
Krumholz, L. R. (2007). Genes that
enhance the ecological ﬁtness of She-
wanella oneidensis MR-1 in sedi-
ments reveal the value of antibiotic
resistance. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
73, 492–498.

Gullberg, E., Cao, S., Berg, O. G.,
Ilback, C., Sandegren, L., Hughes,
D., and Andersson, D. I. (2011).
Selection of resistant bacteria at
very
concentra-
tions. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002158.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002158

low antibiotic

Haeggman, S., Lofdahl, S., Paauw, A.,
Verhoef, J., and Brisse, S. (2004).
Diversity and evolution of
the
class A chromosomal β-lactamase
gene
pneumoniae.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 48,
2400–2408.

in Klebsiella

Hansen, L. H., Johannesen, E., Bur-
molle, M., Sorensen, A. H., and
Sorensen, S.
J. (2004). Plasmid-
encoded multidrug efﬂux pump
conferring resistance to olaquin-
dox in Escherichia coli. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 48, 3332–3337.

Hawkey, P. M. (2008). The growing
burden of antimicrobial resistance.
J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 62(Suppl.
1), i1–i9.

Henriques, I., Moura, A., Alves, A.,
Saavedra, M. J., and Correia, A.
(2004). Molecular characterization
of a carbapenem-hydrolyzing class
A beta-lactamase, SFC-1, from Ser-
ratia fonticola UTAD54. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 48, 2321–2324.

Hernandez, A., Ruiz, F. M., Romero,
A., and Martinez, J. L. (2011a). The
binding of triclosan to SmeT, the
repressor of the multidrug efﬂux
pump SmeDEF, induces antibiotic
resistance in Stenotrophomonas mal-
tophilia. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002103.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002103

Hernandez, A., Sanchez, M. B., and
Martinez, J. L. (2011b). Quinolone
resistance: much more than pre-
dicted.
2:22.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2011.00022

Front. Microbiol.

A.

(2002).

Humeniuk, C., Arlet, G., Gautier,
V., Grimont, P., Labia, R., and
Philippon,
Beta-
lactamases of Kluyvera ascorbata,
probable
some
plasmid-encoded CTX-M types.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 46,
3045–3049.

progenitors

of

Ibanez, M., Guerrero, C., Sancho,
J. V., and Hernandez, F. (2009).
Screening of antibiotics in surface
and wastewater samples by ultra-
high-pressure liquid chromatogra-
phy coupled to hybrid quadrupole
time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry. J.
Chromatogr. A 1216, 2529–2539.

Jacoby, G. A. (2009). AmpC beta-
lactamases. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 22,
161–182.

Jacoby, G. A., Grifﬁn, C. M., and Hooper,
D. C. (2011). Citrobacter spp. as a
source of qnrB alleles. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 55, 4979–4984.

Jiang, L., Hu, X., Yin, D., Zhang, H.,
and Yu, Z. (2011). Occurrence, dis-
tribution and seasonal variation of
antibiotics in the Huangpu River,
Shanghai, China. Chemosphere 82,
822–828.

Kassem, II, Esseili, M. A., and Sigler,
V. (2008). Occurrence of mecA in
nonstaphylococcal pathogens in sur-
face waters. J. Clin. Microbiol. 46,
3868–3869.

Kim, J., Kang, H. Y., and Lee, Y. (2008).
The identiﬁcation of CTX-M-14,
TEM-52, and CMY-1 enzymes in
Escherichia coli
isolated from the
Han River in Korea. J. Microbiol. 46,
478–481.

Lacroix, F. J., Cloeckaert, A., Grepinet,
O., Pinault, C., Popoff, M. Y., Waxin,
H., and Pardon, P. (1996). Salmo-
nella typhimurium acrB-like gene:
identiﬁcation and role in resistance
to biliary salts and detergents and in
murine infection. FEMS Microbiol.
Lett. 135, 161–167.

Lambert, P. A. (2005). Bacterial resis-
tance to antibiotics: modiﬁed tar-
get sites. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 57,
1471–1485.

R.

(2009).

propensity

in river Ganga
of

Lata, P., Ram, S., Agrawal, M., and
Entero-
Shanker,
surface
cocci
species
waters:
of
distribution,
antimicrobial-resistance
and
virulence-markers among species
along landscape. BMC Microbiol. 9,
140. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-9-140

dissemination

Lewinson, O., and Bibi, E. (2001).
Evidence for simultaneous bind-
ing of dissimilar substrates by the
Escherichia coli multidrug trans-
porter MdfA. Biochemistry
40,
12612–12618.

Liassine, N., Madec, S., Ninet, B.,
Metral, C., Fouchereau-Peron, M.,
Labia, R., and Auckenthaler, R.
(2002). Postneurosurgical meningi-
tis due to Proteus penneri with selec-
tion of a ceftriaxone-resistant iso-
late: analysis of chromosomal class
A beta-lactamase HugA and its
LysR-type regulatory protein HugR.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 46,
216–219.

Lister, P. D., Wolter, D. J., and Han-
son, N. D. (2009). Antibacterial-
resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa:
clinical impact and complex regu-
lation of chromosomally encoded
resistance mechanisms. Clin. Micro-
biol. Rev. 22, 582–610.

Lu, S. Y., Zhang, Y. L., Geng, S.
N., Li, T. Y., Ye, Z. M., Zhang,
D. S., Zou, F., and Zhou, H. W.
(2010). High diversity of extended-
spectrum beta-lactamase-producing
bacteria in an urban river sediment

habitat. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76,
5972–5976.

A.,
J.,

Jankowska,
K.,
Luczkiewicz,
Kurlenda,
and Olanczuk-
Neyman, K. (2010). Identiﬁcation
resistance of
and antimicrobial
Enterococcus
spp.
isolated from
surface water. Water Sci. Technol. 62,
466–473.

Martinez, J. L. (2009). Environmen-
tal pollution by antibiotics and by
antibiotic resistance determinants.
Environ. Pollut. 157, 2893–2902.

Martinez,

J. L., Sanchez, M. B.,
Martinez-Solano, L., Hernandez, A.,
Garmendia, L., Fajardo, A., and
Alvarez-Ortega, C. (2009). Func-
tional role of bacterial multidrug
efﬂux pumps in microbial natural
ecosystems. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 33,
430–449.

Mataseje, L. F., Neumann, N., Crago,
B., Baudry, P., Zhanel, G. G., Louie,
M., and Mulvey, M. R. (2009). Char-
acterization of
cefoxitin-resistant
Escherichia coli isolates from recre-
ational beaches and private drinking
water in Canada between 2004 and
2006. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
53, 3126–3130.

Meibom, K. L., Blokesch, M., Dolganov,
N. A., Wu, C. Y., and Schoolnik, G. K.
(2005). Chitin induces natural com-
petence in Vibrio cholerae. Science
310, 1824–1827.

Michon, A., Allou, N., Chau, F.,
Podglajen, I., Fantin, B., and Cam-
bau, E. (2011). Plasmidic qnrA3
enhances Escherichia coli ﬁtness in
absence of antibiotic exposure. PLoS
ONE 6, e24552. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0024552

Moken, M. C., Mcmurry, L. M.,
and Levy, S. B.
(1997). Selec-
tion of multiple-antibiotic-resistant
(mar) mutants of Escherichia coli
by using the disinfectant pine oil:
roles of the mar and acrAB loci.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 41,
2770–2772.

Molin, S., and Tolker-Nielsen, T. (2003).
Gene transfer occurs with enhanced
efﬁciency in bioﬁlms and induces
enhanced stabilisation of the bioﬁlm
structure. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 14,
255–261.

Mosqueda, G., and Ramos,

J. L.
(2000). A set of genes encod-
ing a second toluene efﬂux sys-
tem in Pseudomonas putida DOT-
T1E is linked to the tod genes
for toluene metabolism. J. Bacteriol.
182, 937–943.

Naas, T., Cuzon, G., Villegas, M. V.,
Lartigue, M. F., Quinn, J. P., and
Nordmann, P. (2008). Genetic struc-
tures at the origin of acquisition
of the beta-lactamase blaKPC gene.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 11

Lupo et al.

Antibiotic resistances in water bodies

Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 52,
1257–1263.

a

of

Naas, T., and Nordmann, P. (1994).
Analysis
carbapenem-
hydrolyzing class A beta-lactamase
from Enterobacter cloacae and of
its LysR-type regulatory protein.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91,
7693–7697.

Nikaido, H., and Pages, J. M. (2011).
Broad-speciﬁcity efﬂux pumps and
their role in multidrug resistance
of Gram-negative bacteria. FEMS
Microbiol. Rev. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-
6976.2011.00290.x

Parsley, L. C., Consuegra, E. J., Kakirde,
K. S., Land, A. M., Harper, W. F. Jr.,
and Liles, M. R. (2010). Identiﬁca-
tion of diverse antimicrobial resis-
tance determinants carried on bacte-
rial, plasmid, or viral metagenomes
from an activated sludge microbial
assemblage. Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 76, 3753–3757.

Peduzzi,

J., Farzaneh, S., Reynaud,
A., Barthelemy, M., and Labia, R.
(1997). Characterization and amino
acid sequence analysis of a new oxy-
imino
cephalosporin-hydrolyzing
class A beta-lactamase from Serratia
fonticola CUV. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1341, 58–70.

Peduzzi, J., Reynaud, A., Baron, P.,
Barthelemy, M., and Labia, R.
(1994). Chromosomally encoded
cephalosporin-hydrolyzing
beta-
lactamase of Proteus vulgaris RO104
belongs to Ambler’s class A. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1207, 31–39.

Pei, R., Kim, S. C., Carlson, K.
H., and Pruden, A. (2006). Effect
of river landscape on the sedi-
ment concentrations of antibiotics
and corresponding antibiotic resis-
tance genes (ARG). Water Res. 40,
2427–2435.

Pellegrini, C., Mercuri, P. S., Celenza,
G., Galleni, M., Segatore, B., Sac-
chetti, E., Volpe, R., Amicosante, G.,
and Perilli, M. (2009). Identiﬁcation
of blaIMP-22 in Pseudomonas spp. in
urban wastewater and nosocomial
environments: biochemical charac-
terization of a new IMP metallo-
enzyme variant and its genetic loca-
tion. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 63,
901–908.

Pérez-Parada, A., Aguera, A., Gomez-
Ramos Mdel, M., Garcia-Reyes, J.
F., Heinzen, H., and Fernandez-
Alba, A. R. (2011). Behavior of
and
amoxicillin in wastewater
river water:
its
main transformation products by
liquid chromatography/electrospray
quadrupole
time-of-ﬂight mass
spectrometry. Rapid Commun. Mass
Spectrom. 25, 731–742.

identiﬁcation of

Perichon, B., Courvalin, P., and Gali-
mand, M. (2007). Transferable resis-
tance to aminoglycosides by methy-
lation of G1405 in 16S rRNA and
to hydrophilic ﬂuoroquinolones by
QepA-mediated efﬂux in Escherichia
coli. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
51, 2464–2469.

Perilli, M., Franceschini, N., Segatore, B.,
Amicosante, G., Oratore, A., Duez,
C., Joris, B., and Frere, J. M. (1991).
Cloning and nucleotide sequenc-
ing of the gene encoding the beta-
lactamase from Citrobacter diversus.
FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 67, 79–84.

Petkovic, H., Cullum, J., Hranueli, D.,
Hunter,
I. S., Peric-Concha, N.,
Pigac, J., Thamchaipenet, A., Vujak-
lija, D., and Long, P. F. (2006).
Genetics of Streptomyces rimosus, the
oxytetracycline producer. Microbiol.
Mol. Biol. Rev. 70, 704–728.

Picao, R. C., Poirel, L., Demarta, A.,
Silva, C. S., Corvaglia, A. R., Petrini,
O., and Nordmann, P.
(2008).
Plasmid-mediated quinolone resis-
tance in Aeromonas allosaccharophila
recovered from a Swiss
J.
Antimicrob. Chemother. 62, 948–950.
(2006). Multidrug-
resistance efﬂux pumps – not just
for resistance. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 4,
629–636.

Piddock, L.

lake.

J.

Pitout, J. D., Nordmann, P., Laup-
land, K. B., and Poirel, L. (2005).
Emergence of Enterobacteriaceae
producing extended-spectrum beta-
lactamases (ESBLs) in the commu-
nity. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 56,
52–59.

Poirel, L., Figueiredo, S., Cattoir, V.,
Carattoli, A., and Nordmann, P.
(2008). Acinetobacter radioresistens
as a silent source of carbapenem
resistance for Acinetobacter
spp.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 52,
1252–1256.

Poirel, L., Heritier, C., and Nord-
(2004). Chromosome-
mann, P.
class D beta-
encoded ambler
lactamase of Shewanella oneiden-
sis as a progenitor of carbapenem-
hydrolyzing oxacillinase. Antimi-
crob. Agents Chemother. 48, 348–351.
Poirel, L., Kampfer, P., and Nordmann,
(2002). Chromosome-encoded
P.
Ambler
class A beta-lactamase
of Kluyvera georgiana, a prob-
able progenitor of
a subgroup
of
CTX-M extended-spectrum
beta-lactamases. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 46, 4038–4040.

Poirel, L., Liard, A., Rodriguez-
Martinez, J. M., and Nordmann, P.
(2005a). Vibrionaceae as a possible
source of Qnr-like quinolone resis-
tance determinants. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 56, 1118–1121.

Poirel,

L., Rodriguez-Martinez,

J.
M., Mammeri, H., Liard, A., and
Nordmann, P.
(2005b). Origin
quinolone
of
resistance
QnrA.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49,
3523–3525.

plasmid-mediated

determinant

Poirel, L., Naas, T., and Nordmann, P.
(2010). Diversity, epidemiology, and
genetics of class D beta-lactamases.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54,
24–38.

Poole, K. (2004). Efﬂux-mediated mul-
tiresistance in Gram-negative bacte-
ria. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 10, 12–26.
Potron, A., Poirel, L., Bussy, F., and
Nordmann, P. (2011). Occurrence
of
carbapenem-hydrolyzing
blaOXA-48
beta-lactamase
in the environment
in Morocco.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 55,
5413–5414.

gene

the

Queenan, A. M., and Bush, K. (2007).
Carbapenemases: the versatile beta-
lactamases. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 20,
440–458.

Quinteira, S., Ferreira, H., and Peixe, L.
(2005). First isolation of blaVIM-2
in an environmental
isolate of
Pseudomonas
pseudoalcaligenes.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49,
2140–2141.

Rahmati, S., Yang, S., Davidson, A. L.,
and Zechiedrich, E. L. (2002). Con-
trol of the AcrAB multidrug efﬂux
pump by quorum-sensing regulator
SdiA. Mol. Microbiol. 43, 677–685.

Randall, L. P., Clouting, C., Horton, R.
A., Coldham, N. G., Wu, G., Clifton-
Hadley, F. A., Davies, R. H., and
Teale, C. J. (2011). Prevalence of
Escherichia coli carrying extended-
spectrum beta-lactamases (CTX-M
and TEM-52) from broiler chick-
ens and turkeys in Great Britain
between 2006 and 2009. J. Antimi-
crob. Chemother. 66, 86–95.

Ripp, S., and Miller, R. V. (1995). Effects
of suspended particulates on the
frequency of transduction among
Pseudomonas aeruginosa in a fresh-
water environment. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 61, 1214–1219.

Rodriguez, M. M., Power, P., Radice,
M., Vay, C., Famiglietti, A., Galleni,
M., Ayala, J. A., and Gutkind, G.
(2004).
Chromosome-encoded
CTX-M-3 from Kluyvera ascorbata:
a possible origin of plasmid-borne
CTX-M-1-derived
cefotaximases.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 48,
4895–4897.

Rodriguez-Martinez, J. M., Cano, M.
E., Velasco, C., Martinez-Martinez,
L., and Pascual, A. (2011). Plasmid-
mediated quinolone resistance: an
update.
Infect. Chemother. 17,
149–182.

J.

Rossolini, G. M.

(2005). Acquired
metallo-beta-lactamases: an increas-
ing clinical threat. Clin. Infect. Dis.
41, 1557–1558.

J.

Sánchez, M. B., Hernandez, A.,
Rodriguez-Martinez,
M.,
Martinez-Martinez, L., and Mar-
tinez, J. L. (2008). Predictive analysis
of
transmissible quinolone resis-
tance indicates Stenotrophomonas
maltophilia as a potential source
of a novel
family of Qnr deter-
minants. BMC Microbiol. 8, 148.
doi:10.1186/1471-2180-8-148

Sanchez, P., Linares, J. F., Ruiz-Diez, B.,
Campanario, E., Navas, A., Baquero,
F., and Martinez, J. L. (2002). Fit-
ness of in vitro selected Pseudomonas
aeruginosa nalB and nfxB mul-
tidrug resistant mutants. J. Antimi-
crob. Chemother. 50, 657–664.

Sandegren, L., and Andersson, D. I.
(2009). Bacterial gene ampliﬁca-
tion: implications for the evolution
of antibiotic resistance. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 7, 578–588.

Schwartz, T., Kohnen, W., Jansen, B.,
and Obst, U.
(2003). Detection
of antibiotic-resistant bacteria and
their resistance genes in wastewater,
surface water, and drinking water
bioﬁlms. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 43,
325–335.

Schwartz, T., Volkmann, H., Kirchen,
S., Kohnen, W., Schon-Holz, K.,
Jansen, B., and Obst, U. (2006). Real-
time PCR detection of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa in clinical and munic-
ipal wastewater and genotyping
of
the ciproﬂoxacin-resistant iso-
lates. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 57,
158–167.
Scotta, C.,

Juan, C., Cabot, G.,
Oliver, A., Lalucat,
J., Bennasar,
A., and Alberti, S. (2011). Envi-
ronmental microbiota represents a
natural
for dissemina-
tion of clinically relevant metallo-
beta-lactamases. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 55, 5376–5379.

reservoir

Sengelov, G., and Sorensen, S. J. (1998).
Methods for detection of conjuga-
tive plasmid transfer
in aquatic
environments. Curr. Microbiol. 37,
274–280.

Seoane, A., and Garcia Lobo, J. M.
(1991). Nucleotide sequence of a
new class A beta-lactamase gene
from the chromosome of Yersinia
enterocolitica: implications for the
evolution of class A beta-lactamases.
Mol. Gen. Genet. 228, 215–220.

Silver, S., and Phung, L. T. (1996). Bac-
terial heavy metal resistance: new
surprises. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 50,
753–789.

Sosa, V., Schlapp, G., and Zunino, P.
(2006). Proteus mirabilis isolates of

Frontiers in Microbiology | Antimicrobials, Resistance and Chemotherapy

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 12

Lupo et al.

Antibiotic resistances in water bodies

Srinivasiah, S., Bhavsar,

different origins do not show corre-
lation with virulence attributes and
can colonize the urinary tract of
mice. Microbiology 152, 2149–2157.
J., Thapar,
K., Liles, M., Schoenfeld, T., and
Wommack, K. E. (2008). Phages
across
contrasts
of viruses
in soil and aquatic
environments. Res. Microbiol. 159,
349–357.

the biosphere:

Talebi, M., Pourshaﬁe, M. R., Katouli,
M., and Mollby, R. (2008). Molec-
ular structure and transferability of
Tn1546-like elements in Enterococ-
cus faecium isolates from clinical,
sewage, and surface water samples
in Iran. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74,
1350–1356.

Taylor, N. G., Verner-Jeffreys, D.
W., and Baker-Austin, C. (2011).
Aquatic systems: maintaining, mix-
ing and mobilising antimicrobial
resistance? Trends Ecol. Evol. (Amst.)
26, 278–284.

Teitzel, G. M., Geddie, A., De Long, S.
K., Kirisits, M. J., Whiteley, M., and
Parsek, M. R. (2006). Survival and
growth in the presence of elevated
transcriptional proﬁling
copper:
copper-stressed Pseudomonas
of
aeruginosa.
188,
7242–7256.

Bacteriol.

J.

Toleman, M. A., Bennett, P. M., and
Walsh, T. R.
(2006). Common
regions e.g. orf513 and antibiotic
resistance: IS91-like elements evolv-
ing complex class 1 integrons. J.
Antimicrob. Chemother. 58, 1–6.

Tsubakishita, S., Kuwahara-Arai, K.,
Sasaki, T., and Hiramatsu, K. (2010).
Origin and molecular evolution of

the determinant of methicillin resis-
tance in staphylococci. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 54, 4352–4359.

Velasco, C., Rodriguez-Martinez, J. M.,
Briales, A., Diaz De Alba, P., Calvo,
J., and Pascual, A. (2010). Smaqnr,
a
chromosome-encoded
quinolone resistance determinant in
Serratia marcescens. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 65, 239–242.

new

Vimont, S., Poirel, L., Naas, T.,
and Nordmann, P. (2002). Iden-
tiﬁcation of a chromosome-borne
expanded-spectrum class a beta-
lactamase from Erwinia persicina.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 46,
3401–3405.

Walckenaer, E., Poirel, L., Leﬂon-
Guibout, V., Nordmann, P., and
Nicolas-Chanoine, M. H. (2004).
Genetic and biochemical characteri-
zation of the chromosomal class A
beta-lactamases of Raoultella (for-
merly Klebsiella) planticola and
Raoultella ornithinolytica. Antimi-
crob. Agents Chemother. 48, 305–312.
Walsh, T. R., Weeks, J., Livermore, D. M.,
and Toleman, M. A. (2011). Dissem-
ination of NDM-1 positive bacteria
in the New Delhi environment and
its implications for human health:
an environmental point prevalence
study. Lancet Infect. Dis. 11, 355–362.
Weinbauer, M. G. (2004). Ecology of
prokaryotic viruses. FEMS Micro-
biol. Rev. 28, 127–181.

Wiedenbeck,

J., and Cohan, F. M.
(2011). Origins of bacterial diversity
through horizontal genetic trans-
fer and adaptation to new ecologi-
cal niches. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 35,
957–976.

Wright, G. D. (2010). Antibiotic resis-
tance in the environment: a link to
the clinic? Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 13,
589–594.

Wright, M. S., Baker-Austin, C., Lin-
dell, A. H., Stepanauskas, R., Stokes,
H. W., and Mcarthur, J. V. (2008).
Inﬂuence of industrial contamina-
tion on mobile genetic elements:
class 1 integron abundance and gene
cassette structure in aquatic bacterial
communities. ISME J. 2, 417–428.

Xia, R., Guo, X., Zhang, Y., and Xu,
H. (2010). qnrVC-like gene located
in a novel complex class 1 inte-
gron harboring the ISCR1 ele-
ment
in an Aeromonas punctata
strain from an aquatic environ-
ment in Shandong Province, China.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54,
3471–3474.

Yang, J. F., Ying, G. G., Zhao, J. L., Tao,
R., Su, H. C., and Liu, Y. S. (2011).
Spatial and seasonal distribution of
selected antibiotics in surface waters
of the Pearl Rivers, China. J. Environ.
Sci. Health B 46, 272–280.

Yigit, H., Queenan, A. M., Ander-
son, G. J., Domenech-Sanchez, A.,
Biddle,
J. W., Steward, C. D.,
Alberti, S., Bush, K., and Tenover,
F. C. (2001). Novel carbapenem-
hydrolyzing beta-lactamase, KPC-
1,
carbapenem-resistant
strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45,
1151–1161.

from a

Zhang, Q., Lambert, G., Liao, D.,
Kim, H., Robin, K., Tung, C. K.,
Pourmand, N., and Austin, R. H.
(2011). Acceleration of emergence
of bacterial antibiotic resistance in

connected microenvironments. Sci-
ence 333, 1764–1767.

Zhao, J., Chen, Z., Chen, S., Deng,
Y., Liu, Y., Tian, W., Huang, X.,
Wu, C., Sun, Y., Zeng, Z., and Liu,
J. H. (2010). Prevalence and dis-
semination of oqxAB in Escherichia
coli
farm-
workers,
environment.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 54,
4219–4224.

isolates from animals,

and the

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 10 November 2011; paper
pending published: 05 December 2011;
accepted: 10 January 2012; published
online: 26 January 2012.
Citation: Lupo A, Coyne S and Beren-
donk TU (2012) Origin and evolu-
tion of antibiotic resistance: the common
mechanisms of emergence and spread in
water bodies. Front. Microbio. 3:18. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00018
This article was
submitted to Fron-
tiers in Antimicrobials, Resistance and
Chemotherapy, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Lupo, Coyne and
Berendonk. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution Non Com-
mercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 18 | 13

