REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 26 January 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00019

The genes and enzymes of phosphonate metabolism by
bacteria, and their distribution in the marine environment

Juan F. Villarreal-Chiu, John P. Quinn* and John W. McGrath

School of Biological Sciences, Queen’s University, Belfast, UK

Edited by:
Angelicque White, Oregon State
University, USA
Reviewed by:
Vanessa Karel Michelou, Stanford
University, USA
Shawn R. Campagna, University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, USA
*Correspondence:
John P. Quinn, School of Biological
Sciences, Queen’s University, MBC,
97 Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9 7BL,
UK.
e-mail: j.quinn@qub.ac.uk

Phosphonates are compounds that contain the chemically stable carbon–phosphorus (C–P)
bond.They are widely distributed amongst more primitive life forms including many marine
invertebrates and constitute a signiﬁcant component of the dissolved organic phosphorus
reservoir in the oceans. Virtually all biogenic C–P compounds are synthesized by a pathway
in which the key step is the intramolecular rearrangement of phosphoenolpyruvate to phos-
phonopyruvate. However C–P bond cleavage by degradative microorganisms is catalyzed
by a number of enzymes – C–P lyases, C–P hydrolases, and others of as-yet-uncharacterized
mechanism. Expression of some of the pathways of phosphonate catabolism is controlled
by ambient levels of inorganic P (Pi) but for others it is Pi-independent. In this report
we review the enzymology of C–P bond metabolism in bacteria, and also present the
results of an in silico investigation of the distribution of the genes that encode the path-
ways responsible, in both bacterial genomes and in marine metagenomic libraries, and
their likely modes of regulation. Interrogation of currently available whole-genome bac-
terial sequences indicates that some 10% contain genes encoding putative pathways of
phosphonate biosynthesis while ∼40% encode one or more pathways of phosphonate
catabolism. Analysis of metagenomic data from the global ocean survey suggests that
some 10 and 30%, respectively, of bacterial genomes across the sites sampled encode
these pathways. Catabolic routes involving phosphonoacetate hydrolase, C–P lyase(s), and
an uncharacterized 2-aminoethylphosphonate degradative sequence were predominant,
and it is likely that both substrate-inducible and Pi-repressible mechanisms are involved
in their regulation. The data we present indicate the likely importance of phosphonate-P
in global biogeochemical P cycling, and by extension its role in marine productivity and in
carbon and nitrogen dynamics in the oceans.

Keywords: phosphonate, C–P bond, marine bacteria, phosphorus cycling

PHOSPHORUS IN THE OCEANS
Phosphorus (P) is usually found in the biosphere in its highest oxi-
dation state (+5) as orthophosphate (Pi), which is thought to be
its most bioavailable form. P availability has long been identiﬁed
as a key determinant of marine productivity (Dyhrman and Haley,
2006; Paytan and McLaughlin, 2007; Dyhrman et al., 2009) and its
cycling is closely linked to carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) dynamics
in the oceans. In oligotrophic regions, and seasonally in the surface
waters of a broad range of marine environments, Pi concentrations
can be extremely low, e.g., most of the central oceanic gyres have
levels close to the limit of chemical detection (<1 nM). In these
instances recent climatically inﬂuenced extension of the N-ﬁxation
season appears to have led to a shift from an N- to a P-limited
ecosystem (Karl et al., 2001). Correlated with this has been an
increase in levels of Dissolved Organic Phosphorus (DOP), relative
to those of Pi. Several recent studies suggest that DOP is a signiﬁ-
cant additional P source that is available to the marine microbiota
in a variety of trophic regimes (Björkman and Karl, 2003; Luo
et al., 2009, 2011; Martinez et al., 2010). For example a study
in the oligotrophic North Paciﬁc subtropical gyre showed that
DOP accounted for up to 80% of total soluble P and was rapidly

utilized by the microbial fraction (Björkman and Karl, 2003). It
may thus play an important role in determining the composition
and community dynamics of marine microbial populations.

PHOSPHONATES IN THE MARINE ENVIRONMENT
An important component of marine DOP is phosphonate-P, which
occurs widely in nature in a range of biogenic molecules that
contain the highly stable and apparently ancient direct carbon–
phosphorus (C–P) bond, rather than the more common C–O–P
bond found in phosphate esters (Ternan et al., 1998; Quinn et al.,
2007; White and Metcalf, 2007). Phosphonates are known to be
produced by many primitive life forms, including a wide range
of marine invertebrates in which phosphonate-P may comprise
as much as 50% of the total P content (Quin, 1965, 2000).
The presence of phosphonates at levels of some 10% of total
P in cells of the bloom-forming marine cyanobacterium Tri-
chodesmium erythraeum IMS 101 has also recently been demon-
strated (Dyhrman et al., 2009). Natural-product phosphonates
such as 2-aminoethylphosphonic acid (2-AEP; ciliatine) or 2-
amino-3-phosphonopropionic acid (phosphonoalanine) are nor-
mally found as side groups on exopolysaccharides or glycoproteins,

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 1

Villarreal-Chiu et al.

Phosphonate metabolism by marine bacteria

or in the polar head groups of membrane phosphonolipids
(Hilderbrand, 1983); their presence may increase structural rigid-
ity or protect against enzymatic degradation, since the C–P bond is
resistant to the action of phosphatases. However a growing range
of small-molecule phosphonates are also known to be produced
(reviewed by Metcalf and van der Donk, 2009); many are likely to
serve as antimetabolites (e.g., fosfomycin, fosmidomycin, alafos-
falin, and phosphinothricin) due to their structural analogies to
phosphate esters or carboxylic acids.

The qualitative composition and quantitative importance of
phosphonate-P in the oceans have been difﬁcult to establish deﬁn-
itively because of analytical limitations. Nonetheless studies using
31P-NMR indicate that C–P compounds comprise more than 25%
of ultraﬁltered DOP, and 23% of total particulate P (Clark et al.,
1998; Kolowith et al., 2001). In situ evidence for high rates of phos-
phonate remineralization has also been presented, for example by
Benitez-Nelson et al. (2004). Moreover a number of recent ﬁeld,
laboratory, and genome-enabled studies (Dyhrman et al., 2006;
Quinn et al., 2007; Karl et al., 2008; Gilbert et al., 2009; Ilikchyan
et al., 2009; Martinez et al., 2010; Thomas et al., 2010; Luo et al.,
2011) also suggest that phosphonate-P may constitute a signiﬁcant
P source in the oceans. Additional – if circumstantial – evidence
for this view is provided by the fact that the “streamlined” genome
of SAR 11, the most abundant bacterial clade on earth, con-
tains (and expresses in situ) phosphonate transport genes (Sowell
et al., 2009). Despite this growing body of information, however,
our understanding of the factors that inﬂuence the production
and consumption of phosphonates in the oceans remains limited
(Dyhrman et al., 2007, 2009).

BIOSYNTHESIS OF PHOSPHONATES
Virtually all known pathways of phosphonate biosynthesis share
a central C–P bond-forming reaction in which an intramolecular
rearrangement of the intermediary metabolite phosphoenolpyru-
vate (PEP) is catalyzed by the enzyme PEP phosphomutase (Ppm;
EC 5.4.2.9), with phosphoryl group transfer leading to formation
of phosphonopyruvate (Bowman et al., 1988; Seidel et al., 1988;
Metcalf and van der Donk, 2009; Figure 1A). Since the equilibrium
of the reaction carried out by PEP phosphomutase strongly favors
formation of the C–O–P bond of PEP, however, most C–P bond-
synthesizing microorganisms contain a coupled enzyme, phos-
phonopyruvate decarboxylase (Ppd; EC 4.1.1.82), which subse-
quently converts phosphonopyruvate to phosphonoacetaldehyde
in an irreversible reaction (Zhang et al., 2003; Figure 1A). Phos-
phonoacetaldehyde then forms the central metabolite in a range
of subsequent biosynthetic sequences (Metcalf and van der Donk,
2009); for example in the biosynthesis of 2-AEP it is transaminated
by the enzyme 2-AEP–pyruvate transaminase (EC 2.6.1.37; Barry
et al., 1988).

ENZYMES OF PHOSPHONATE CATABOLISM IN
MICROORGANISMS
The importance of phosphonates as a P reservoir in the global
ocean is by now well-established but information on the molecular
strategies employed by marine microorganisms for their utiliza-
tion remains incomplete. Current understanding of the catabolic
activities involved is summarized below.

C–P LYASE
The predominant route for microbial utilization of phosphonates
has been thought to be the “C–P lyase” pathway (Ternan et al.,
1998) and its presence and activity in marine microorganisms has
recently been demonstrated (e.g., Dyhrman et al., 2006). How-
ever the broad-speciﬁcity C–P lyase multienzyme complex has not
yet been fully characterized (Hove-Jensen et al., 2011) although a
major technical obstacle to its elucidation has very recently been
overcome with the ﬁrst report (Kamat et al., 2011) of the in vitro
reconstitution of the pathway in Escherichia coli and identiﬁcation
of the reaction intermediates. In E. coli the C–P lyase complex is
comprised of 14 gene products which together catalyze the difﬁcult
dephosphonation reaction in a range of structurally diverse phos-
phonates which may contain either activated or unactivated C–P
bonds (Wackett et al., 1987; Yakovleva et al., 1998). In each case
the product is the corresponding hydrocarbon and Pi (Figure 1B).
Of these 14 genes, phnCDE are thought to encode an ATP-binding
cassette transporter, and phnF a repressor protein, while the prod-
ucts of phnNOP are thought to have regulatory or other acces-
sory roles (Hove-Jensen et al., 2010, 2011). Seven gene products
(PhnGHIJKLM) constitute the“core”components of the C–P lyase
reaction pathway, with PhnJ now known to catalyze its central reac-
tion, the S-adenosyl-l-methionine-dependent radical cleavage of
5-phosphoribosyl-1-phosphonate to produce 5-phosphoribosyl-
1,2-cyclic phosphate and the corresponding alkane (Hove-Jensen
et al., 2011; Jochimsen et al., 2011; Kamat et al., 2011). Variant
forms of the C–P lyase enzyme complex with different substrate
ranges are also known to exist (e.g., Kertesz et al., 1991; Sviridov
et al., 2012), and other genes of as-yet unknown function have
frequently been found associated with the C–P lyase operon (see
Occurrence of the phnJ Component of the C-P Lyase Operon
in Sequenced Bacterial Genomes). In addition the role of PhnK
remains unknown (Kamat et al., 2011).

In all bacteria studied to date the genes that encode the C–
P lyase pathway(s) have been found to be arranged in tandem
and transcribed from a single promoter in an operon that is a
member of the Pho regulon – a suite of genes whose products
include proteins required for Pi-scavenging, and for the catabo-
lism of alternative P sources. Expression of the genes of the Pho
regulon is induced under conditions of Pi-starvation but is Pi-
repressible (Quinn et al., 2007). Thus in T. erythraeum the genes of
the C–P lyase pathway were expressed in situ at Pi concentrations
−1, but not under Pi-replete conditions (Dyhrman
of ∼6 nmol l
et al., 2006). Similarly the aerobic production of methane from
methylphosphonate by mixed marine microbial communities
(likely to be mediated by C–P lyase) was demonstrated under
Pi-stressed conditions (Karl et al., 2008).

All C–P bond cleavage enzymes had originally been thought to
be similarly subject to Pho regulon control; however, it seems likely
that in this event phosphonates could be utilized by microorgan-
isms only as a source of P, since any Pi released during their catab-
olism in excess of that required for balanced cellular growth would
repress any further degradation (McGrath et al., 1997; Quinn et al.,
2007). Indeed, further phosphonate uptake by cells would also
be repressed because the relevant high-afﬁnity transporters are
also Pho-regulated. However ﬁeld and laboratory observations
(Benitez-Nelson et al., 2004; Beversdorf et al., 2010) suggest that

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 2

Villarreal-Chiu et al.

Phosphonate metabolism by marine bacteria

FIGURE 1 | Pathways for the microbial metabolism of phosphonates:
(A) phosphonate biosynthesis by phosphoenolpyruvate phosphomutase
[1] and phosphonopyruvate decarboxylase [2]. (B) C–P lyase [3] pathway.
(C) 2-AEP catabolism by 2-AEP transaminase [4] and
phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase [5]. (D) Phosphonoacetate catabolism

by phosphonoacetate hydrolase [6]. (E) 2-AEP catabolism by 2-AEP
transaminase [4], phosphonoacetaldehyde dehydrogenase [7], and
phosphonoacetate hydrolase [6]. (F) Phosphonoalanine catabolism by a
phosphonoalanine transaminase [8] and phosphonopyruvate
hydrolase [9].

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 3

Villarreal-Chiu et al.

Phosphonate metabolism by marine bacteria

phosphonate degradation in the oceans continues under con-
ditions of Pi sufﬁciency. And indeed three inducible enzymes
capable of C–P bond cleavage have been identiﬁed and charac-
terized (Quinn et al., 2007). Unlike C–P lyase, which is capable of
the cleavage of both activated and unactivated C–P bonds, each
of these phosphonohydrolases is uniquely speciﬁc to a natural-
product phosphonate that contains an electron-withdrawing car-
bonyl group in the beta position to the P atom. Expression of all
three enzymes has been shown to be Pi-insensitive and hence inde-
pendent of Pho regulation – thus they are likely to play a role in the
marine environment that is complementary to that of C–P lyase.

PHOSPHONOACETALDEHYDE HYDROLASE
The phnX gene product phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase (EC
3.11.1.1; phosphonatase) cleaves the C–P bond of its unique sub-
strate to yield acetaldehyde and Pi (LaNauze et al., 1977; Dumora
et al., 1989); it is encoded within a degradative operon for the
mineralization of 2-aminoethylphosphonic acid (2-AEP, ciliatine).
2-AEP replaces its structural analog ethanolamine phosphate as
a component of the phosphonoglycolipids common in the cell
membrane of many invertebrates and is considered – along with
its N -methylated derivatives – to be the most abundant and ubiq-
uitous marine C–P compound (Hilderbrand, 1983; Hori et al.,
1984; Quin and Quin, 2001). The mechanism of C–P bond cleav-
age by phosphonatase, a member of the halo acid dehalogenase
superfamily, involves the formation of a Schiff base intermediate
between a lysine residue at the active site of the enzyme and the
phosphonoacetaldehyde carbonyl group; this activates the phos-
phonate group for attack by an active site nucleophile (Baker et al.,
1998; Morais et al., 2004). The phosphonatase pathway of 2-AEP
degradation (Figure 1C) also includes a 2-AEP:pyruvate amino-
transferase (EC 2.6.1.37), encoded by phnW, whose products are
phosphonoacetaldehyde and alanine (Kim et al., 2002). The Pi-
starvation-inducible expression of this pathway as a part of the
Pho regulon has been described in Enterobacter aerogenes and Sal-
monella typhimurium, neither of which is able to utilize 2-AEP as
sole carbon and energy source (Jiang et al., 1995). However in other
bacterial strains, e.g., Pseudomonas putida NG2 and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa PAO1 that are able to mineralize 2-AEP as sole C, N, and
P source, expression of the operon is substrate-inducible, medi-
ated by the product of an adjacent gene that encodes a LysR-like
transcriptional activator (LTTR; Ternan and Quinn, 1998a; Quinn
et al., 2007).

PHOSPHONOACETATE HYDROLASE
The phnA gene product, phosphonoacetate hydrolase, was iden-
tiﬁed in an activated sludge isolate of Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens
that was capable of utilizing phosphonoacetate as sole C and P
source (McMullan et al., 1992). The enzyme is a member of the
alkaline phosphatase superfamily and forms acetate and Pi from
its substrate following metal-assisted hydrolytic cleavage of the
C–P bond (McGrath et al., 1995; Agarwal et al., 2011; Kim et al.,
2011; Figure 1D). In its original host phosphonoacetate hydrolase,
together with an associated phosphonate transporter, was found
to be encoded within an operon whose expression was regulated
by a phosphonoacetate-responsive LTTR (Kulakova et al., 2001,
2009). More recently, however, the phnA gene has been found in

other bacterial strains within an operon that also encodes 2-AEP
+
transaminase (PhnW) and a novel NAD
-dependent phospho-
noacetaldehyde dehydrogenase (PhnY) whose product is phos-
phonoacetate (Borisova et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2011; Figure 1E).
The enzyme sequence encoded by this operon thus represents
an alternative route of 2-AEP mineralization to that of the
phosphonatase pathway (see Phosphonoacetaldehyde Hydrolase),
and is likely to be a major route of biogenic phosphonoacetate
production (Cooley et al., 2011).

PHOSPHONOPYRUVATE HYDROLASE
This enzyme was identiﬁed by Ternan and Quinn (1998b) in
cells of a Burkholderia strain that utilized phosphonoalanine (2-
amino-3-phosphonopropionic acid) as sole C, N, and P source.
Phosphonoalanine, the phosphonate analog of aspartic acid, is
formed by the transamination of phosphonopyruvate (Horigane
et al., 1989). It is a constituent of membrane phosphonolipids
and is widely distributed amongst marine invertebrates (Kittredge
and Hughes, 1964); its degradative pathway involves an initial
transamination to phosphonopyruvate, followed by cleavage of
the C–P bond by a metal-dependent phosphonohydrolase to yield
pyruvate and Pi (Figure 1F). Phosphonopyruvate hydrolase (EC
3.11.1.3) is a member of the phosphoenolpyruvate phosphomu-
tase/isocitrate lyase superfamily and was shown in Variovorax sp.
Pal2 to be encoded within an operon that also contains phos-
phonoalanine transaminase and phosphonate transporter genes;
its expression is regulated by an adjacent phosphonoalanine-
and phosphonopyruvate-responsive LTTR (Kulakova et al., 2003,
2009). Phosphonopyruvate hydrolase shares 41% sequence iden-
tity with the C–P bond-forming enzyme, phosphoenolpyruvate
phosphomutase (see Biosynthesis of Phosphonates above); a single
amino acid substitution at the active site is likely to be responsi-
ble for the functional divergence of the two enzymes (Chen et al.,
2006).

OTHER ENZYMES OF PHOSPHONATE CATABOLISM
There is also evidence for the existence of a number of less well-
characterized C–P bond cleavage activities that are likely to be of
signiﬁcance in marine environments:

(a) Martinez et al. (2010) have demonstrated by functional gene
complementation that a fragment of marine genomic DNA
∗
that encodes a putative 2-oxoglutarate dioxygenase (PhnY
)
and a phosphohydrolase (PhnZ) conferred on E. coli the abil-
ity to utilize 2-AEP as a sole P source; however the biochemical
reactions catalyzed by these genes remain uncharacterized. [It
will be important to avoid future confusion between the activ-
ity encoded by phnY
and the unrelated phosphonoacetalde-
hyde dehydrogenase (see Phosphonoacetate Hydrolase above)
recently described in Sinorhizobium meliloti by Borisova et al.
(2011) which has also been designated as PhnY, both here and
in a number of annotated genomes].

∗

(b) McGrath et

al.

(1998) have

the phosphonate

reported the utiliza-
tion of
fosfomycin (2-
epoxypropylphosphonic acid) as the sole C and P source
by a Sinorhizobium huakuii isolate. The catabolic reaction
sequence involved has been further elucidated (McGrath et al.,

antibiotic

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 4

Villarreal-Chiu et al.

Phosphonate metabolism by marine bacteria

2009, 2011), and although the enzyme responsible for the C–P
bond cleavage step has not yet been fully described its substrate
is likely to be (R)-1-hydroxy-2-oxopropylphosphonic acid.
Given that S. huakuii cells release essentially quantitative lev-
els of Pi when using fosfomycin as a sole C source, expression
of the C–P cleavage enzyme is clearly Pho-independent.

(c) Mendz et al. (2005) and Ford et al. (2010) have presented evi-
dence for the existence of novel, as-yet-undescribed pathways
of Pi-insensitive phosphonate catabolism in Campylobacter
and Helicobacter spp. The existence of further uncharacter-
ized, but likely unrelated, C–P cleavage activities has also been
reported in cells of Synechococcus spp. (Gomez-Garcia et al.,
2011).

DISTRIBUTION OF THE GENES OF PHOSPHONATE
METABOLISM AMONGST SEQUENCED BACTERIA
BLAST analysis of the occurrence of the genes of phosphonate
metabolism amongst the bacterial genome sequences deposited in
the NCBI GenBank database as at the beginning of 2011 was car-
ried out. The query sequences from deduced peptides of conﬁrmed
function used to interrogate the database are listed in Table 1. A
minimum expectation value of 1× 10
−10 and a minimum of 10%
sequence identity over the entire sequence length were employed
as criteria for homolog selection. In addition each gene identity
was conﬁrmed by inspection of its genomic context.

Out of the 1384 sequenced genomes in the database, 664 (48%)
contained homologs that indicated possession of one or more of
the known pathways of phosphonate metabolism (Table 2); these
included 121 of the 190 marine bacterial genomes in the data-
base. Fourfold more strains contained known genes associated
with phosphonate catabolism than with C–P bond formation. Of
the putative phosphonate degradative pathways detected, those
involving C–P lyase and phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase com-
prised some 83% of the total. The abundance of phnX homologs
encoding the substrate-speciﬁc phosphonoacetaldehyde hydro-
lase, and of homologs that encode the PhnD transporter which
shows highest afﬁnity for 2-AEP (Rizk et al., 2006) suggests that
2-AEP is likely to have been an important source of P through a
long period of evolutionary history. An analysis of the distribu-
tion of each of the pathways and of the variation in their associated
operons is presented below.

OCCURRENCE IN SEQUENCED BACTERIAL GENOMES OF THE
PHOSPHOENOLPYRUVATE PHOSPHOMUTASE/PHOSPHONOPYRUVATE
DECARBOXYLASE OPERON FOR PHOSPHONATE BIOSYNTHESIS
129 sequenced strains (almost 10% of the genomes contained in
the NCBI GenBank database) contained the ppd gene indicative of
the PEP phosphomutase/phosphonopyruvate decarboxylase path-
way of phosphonate biosynthesis; seven of these were of marine
origin. Of the 129 strains, 48 also possessed a pathway for phospho-
nate degradation, and 10 the associated phnCDE operon encod-
ing a phosphonate transporter linked to phosphonate catabolism
(Huang et al., 2005). The phosphonate biosynthetic pathway was
distributed amongst distant bacterial groups, but predominantly
within the members of the proteobacteria, actinobacteria, and
clostridia (Figure 2). Analysis of their ppm/ppd operon struc-
tures failed to reveal any clearly conserved gene composition,
which may reﬂect the wide range of phosphonate metabolites that
are produced by microorganisms (Circello et al., 2010; Johannes
et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2010). Nevertheless, two enzymes frequently
found to be encoded within the operon (in addition to PEP phos-
phomutase and phosphonopyruvate decarboxylase) were 2-AEP
aminotransferase (PhnW) – observed in 60 strains – which plays
a key role in the production of 2-AEP, and an acetaldehyde dehy-
drogenase (found in 16 strains), which shares strong homology
(44% identity, 60% similarity) with the phosphonoacetaldehyde
dehydrogenase (PhnY) known to be involved in the production
of phosphonoacetate from phosphonoacetaldehyde and found in
the phosphonoacetate hydrolase pathway of 2-AEP degradation
(Borisova et al., 2011; see Phosphonoacetate Hydrolase). In addi-
tion nine Gram-negative bacterial strains possessed a copy of
the phosphonate biosynthetic operon that was ﬂanked by genes
encoding enzymes involved in exopolysaccharide biosynthesis; it
is known that the capsular polysaccharide B complex associated
with virulence in Bacteroides fragilis is characterized by its high
content of 2-AEP.

OCCURRENCE OF THE phnJ COMPONENT OF THE C–P LYASE OPERON
IN SEQUENCED BACTERIAL GENOMES
Analysis of
the distribution of phnJ, which encodes a cat-
alytic component of the C–P lyase multienzyme system, indi-
cates that C–P lyase is (after “phosphonatase,” see Occurrence
in Sequenced Bacterial Genomes of the phnX Gene Encoding

Table 1 | Polypeptides used as query sequences for bioinformatic analyses.

Pathway

Enzyme

Accession
number

Microbial origin

Reference

Phosphonate biosynthesis
C–P lyase
Phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase
Phosphonoacetate hydrolase
Phosphonopyruvate hydrolase
Phosphonate transport
Potential new degradation pathway
(Martinez et al. (2010))
Protein of unknown function
related to C–P lyase

Kuwahara et al. (2004)

Ppd
Complex subunit PhnJ
PhnX
PhnA
PalA
Transporter subunit PhnD
PhnY*
PhnZ
Complex subunit DUF6
Complex subunit DUF1045 ABQ32108.1

YP_099861.1
NP_418522.1
NP_250002.1
AAC15507.1
AAO24736.1
NP_418529.1
ACU83549
ACU83550
YP_0010234431 Methylibium petroleiphilum PM1

Bacteroides fragilis YCH46
Escherichia coli str. K-12 substr. MG1655 Bury-Mone et al. (2009)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1
Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens 23F
Variovorax sp. Pal2
Escherichia coli str. K-12 substr. MG1655 Bury-Mone et al. (2009)
Uncultured bacterium HF130_AEPn_1
Uncultured bacterium HF130_AEPn_1

Cirz et al. (2006)
Kulakova et al. (2001)
Kulakova et al. (2009)

Martinez et al. (2010)
Martinez et al. (2010)

Acidiphilium cryptum JF-5

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 5

Villarreal-Chiu et al.

Phosphonate metabolism by marine bacteria

Table 2 | Homologs retrieved from the NCBI bacterial genomes database that indicate possession of pathways of phosphonate metabolism.

Pathway

Query polypeptide

“Hits” in sequenced strains “Hits” in marine strains

Phosphonate biosynthesis
C–P lyase
Phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase
Phosphonoacetate hydrolase
Phosphonopyruvate hydrolase
Phosphonate transport
Potential new 2-AEP degradation pathway (Martinez et al., 2010) PhnY*

Unknown function related to C–P lyase

Ppd
Complex subunit PhnJ
PhnX
PhnA
PalA
Transporter subunit PhnD

129 (9.3%)a
223 (16.1%)
235 (17.0%)
89 (6.4%)
3 (0.2%)
294 (21.2%)
5 (0.4%)
5 (0.4%)
PhnZ
Complex subunit DUF6
9 (0.7%)
Complex subunit DUF1045 78 (5.6%)

7 (3.6%)b
44 (23.2%)
50 (26.3%)
6 (3.2%)
0
67 (35.3%)
4 (2.1%)
4 (2.1%)
4 (2.1%)
22 (11.6%)

aExpressed as a percentage of the 1384 sequenced bacterial genomes contained in the database.
bExpressed as a percentage of the 190 sequenced marine bacterial genomes contained in the database.

FIGURE 2 | Distribution of phosphonopyruvate decarboxylase (ppd ) gene homologs within sequenced bacterial genomes. The numbers and afﬁliations
of marine bacterial strains that contain the ppd gene, out of the 190 sequenced marine bacterial genomes publically available, are indicated to the right of the
Figure.

Phosphonoacetaldehyde Hydrolase) the second most abundant
pathway for phosphonate degradation amongst sequenced bac-
teria, and that it is widely distributed amongst diverse bacte-
rial groups (Figure 3). Its 223 homologs, including 44 from
marine strains, occur mainly in the alpha-, beta-, and gamma-
proteobacteria. (Interestingly, however, a copy of the entire operon,
and a second copy of its phnCDE genes, were found in the genome
of the archaeon Haloquadratum walsbyi; further analysis suggests
that these copies have separate proteobacterial origins).

Great diversity was found in the composition and architec-
ture of the C–P lyase operon (including insertions, substitutions,
and deletions of components); this conﬁrms a similar observation
by Huang et al. (2005) and suggests that the operon has been
subject to multiple horizontal gene transfers. All these genetic
variations could represent potential variations in the speciﬁcity

or functionality of the reaction sequence encoded, and thus pro-
vide possible evolutionary advantages to their hosts. For example
domain of unknown function (DUF) 1045, which is not con-
ventionally designated as one of the 14 genes of the C–P lyase
operon, was in fact present in 78 of the 223 operons identiﬁed
(almost all from the alpha- and beta-proteobacteria, and includ-
ing 26 of the 44 marine strains in which the operon was found).
In 86% of instances DUF1045 ﬂanked or lay close to phnN which
is thought to encode a “feeder” activity for the C–P bond cleavage
pathway (Hove-Jensen et al., 2011). Expression of both DUF1045
and phnN has been found to be highly induced in the presence
of methylphosphonate or the absence of Pi in Acidithiobacillus
ferrooxidans (Vera et al., 2008).

Genomic data thus appear to provide support for existing bio-
chemical evidence (see C–P Lyase above) that the C–P lyases may

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 6

Villarreal-Chiu et al.

Phosphonate metabolism by marine bacteria

FIGURE 3 | Distribution of phnJ homologs within sequenced bacterial
genomes. The numbers and afﬁliations of marine bacterial strains that contain

the phnJ gene, out of the 190 sequenced marine bacterial genomes publically
available, are indicated to the right of the Figure.

be considered as a family of closely related multienzyme systems
that nevertheless vary in, for example, their substrate speciﬁci-
ties. The high incidence of “optional” genes suggests that these
may provide additional functional features. In terms of their reg-
ulation, ∼90% of C–P lyase operons were apparently controlled
by ﬂanking GntR regulators, conﬁrming numerous ﬁndings that
this pathway is inducible only under conditions of Pi-starvation
(Wackett et al., 1987). Surprisingly, however, genes predicted to
encode alternative regulators (including those from the LysR, IclR,
DeoR, LuxR, MarR, ArsR, TetR, and TonB families) were found
adjacent to C–P lyase operons in some 6% of cases, while in a small
number of others no putative regulatory genes could be identiﬁed.

OCCURRENCE IN SEQUENCED BACTERIAL GENOMES OF THE phnX
GENE ENCODING PHOSPHONOACETALDEHYDE HYDROLASE
Genes encoding the phosphonatase pathway of 2-AEP degra-
dation, which comprises 2-AEP-pyruvate transaminase (PhnW)
and phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase (PhnX; see Phosphonoac-
etaldehyde Hydrolase), were found in 235 bacterial genomes of
which 50 were of marine origin, mostly from within the alpha- and
gamma-proteobacteria. It is thus the most abundant phosphonate
degradation pathway amongst the 1384 bacteria whose sequences
are currently available; this may reﬂect the fact that 2-AEP is
thought to be the most widely distributed biogenic phosphonate
in the environment (White and Metcalf, 2007). The distribution
of genes encoding the phosphonatase operon is shown in Figure 4;
some 44% belonged to the gamma-proteobacteria, of whom the
majority were potential pathogens (Salmonella, Vibrio, etc.) that
have been implicated in gastrointestinal diseases. Predicted phnX-
containing strains belonging to the bacillales, bacteroidetes, and
clostridia are also associated with similar pathologies. To date,
there is no direct evidence to link phosphonoacetaldehyde hydro-
lase activity to pathogenesis; however it has been reported that
low Pi conditions can enhance the virulence of pathogenic species
such as P. aeruginosa and Salmonella typhimurimum (Beier and
Gross, 2006; Lamarche et al., 2008). Additionally, mutations in
Pho regulon genes have been thought to be responsible for the

decrease of colonization rates by intestinal strains of E. coli and
Vibrio cholerae (von Krüger et al., 1999, 2006). Since phnX in most
gamma-proteobacteria was associated with GntR regulators and
hence likely to be expressed under Pi limiting conditions (Gebhard
and Cook, 2008), it is conceivable that phosphonoacetaldehyde
hydrolase may play a role in the infection process.

The phosphonatase operons in Bacillaceae and clostridial
strains were observed to be ﬂanked by deoR, and in bacteroidetes by
araC regulatory sequences. Only in alpha-proteobacteria (mostly
marine isolates), and in beta-, and gamma-proteobacteria (all
pseudomonads) were the phosphonatase pathways associated with
LysR type regulators. No such strains have been implicated in
gastrointestinal infections.

Several features of the phosphonatase operon structures pro-
vide strong evidence that PhnX is encoded as part of a genomic
island which can be easily transferred amongst bacteria. “Pick-
and-mix” horizontal gene transfer is suggested not only by the
broad range of regulatory systems apparently involved in the con-
trol of the operon expression (including GntR, LysR, DeoR, AraC,
and TetR), but also by the insertion of genes such as that encod-
ing 4-aminobutyrate transferase, or DUF6 homologs (the latter
is found in some marine strains; DUF6 can also occur within
some C–P lyase operons). Furthermore the various rearrange-
ments of the operon components (phnW,X and the phosphonate
transporter genes phnC,D,E) that were observed is a feature that is
almost entirely absent in pathways of apparently shorter evolution-
ary history, e.g., that involving phnA (see Occurrence in Sequenced
Bacterial Genomes of the phnA Gene Encoding Phosphonoacetate
Hydrolase).

OCCURRENCE IN SEQUENCED BACTERIAL GENOMES OF THE phnA
GENE ENCODING PHOSPHONOACETATE HYDROLASE
The phnA gene was much less widely distributed in sequenced
bacterial genomes than those encoding the C–P lyase or phos-
phonoacetaldehyde hydrolase pathways. Figure 5 shows the afﬁl-
iation of the 69 bacterial strains that encoded the 89 phnA
homologs detected during the bioinformatic analysis (these were

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 7

Villarreal-Chiu et al.

Phosphonate metabolism by marine bacteria

FIGURE 4 | Distribution of phnX homologs within sequenced bacterial
genomes. The numbers and afﬁliations of marine bacterial strains that contain

the phnX gene, out of the 190 sequenced marine bacterial genomes
publically available, are indicated to the right of the Figure.

FIGURE 5 | Distribution of phnA homologs within sequenced bacterial
genomes. The numbers and afﬁliations of marine bacterial strains that contain

the phnA gene, out of the 190 sequenced marine bacterial genomes
publically available, are indicated to the right of the Figure.

predominantly Burkholderia spp. within the beta-proteobacteria).
Only six strains were identiﬁed as marine isolates; however ﬁve of
these are members of the Roseobacter clade, which is known to be
the predominant bacterial group in the near-surface waters of the
oceans.

The limited distribution of phnA within other phyla suggests
that phosphonate degradation via phosphonoacetate hydrolase is
a pathway of recent development or that it lacks the transferability
observed in the cases of the C–P lyase and phosphonoacetaldehyde
hydrolase pathways. Nevertheless, the phnA gene was frequently
duplicated within the genomes of the species that possessed it
(e.g., in 20 different strains of beta-proteobacteria). Only three
sequenced strains possessed duplications of phnX, and ﬁve strains
a duplication of the C–P lyase operon. Mechanisms of duplication
have been suggested to consolidate the existence of pathways in
the host genome, as has been reported for phthalate metabolism
in Rhodococcus sp. strain DK17 (Choi et al., 2007).

In contrast with the C–P lyase and phosphonatase pathways
with their apparently longer evolutionary histories, analysis of
those operons that contained phnA homologs indicated that these

were almost exclusively controlled by only two kinds of regulators:
GntR or LysR. Of these, GntR regulators were exclusively encoded
in gamma-proteobacteria, with LysR present in all alpha- and
some beta-proteobacterial strains (including all six marine strains
identiﬁed). Rearrangements in the structure of the operons that
contained phnA were very limited; most (71 out of 89) contained
the phnY gene that encodes phosphonoacetaldehyde dehydroge-
nase and phnW that encodes 2-AEP aminotransferase, suggesting
that phosphonoacetate hydrolase (phnA) is more commonly a
component of a degradative sequence for the catabolism of 2-
AEP (see Phosphonoacetate Hydrolase), than directly inducible
by phosphonoacetate as is the case in the operon originally char-
acterized in P. ﬂuorescens 23F by Kulakova et al. (2001), in which
neither phnW or phnY is present.

DISTRIBUTION IN SEQUENCED BACTERIAL STRAINS OF THE pph GENE
ENCODING PHOSPHONOPYRUVATE HYDROLASE
In contrast to the wide distribution exhibited by the phospho-
nate degradative sequences analyzed above, pph was found to be
present in only three sequenced bacterial strains, all Burkholderia

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 8

Villarreal-Chiu et al.

Phosphonate metabolism by marine bacteria

spp. In each instance the associated operon was controlled by a
LysR regulator and contained a copy of the phnW gene coding for
2-AEP-aminotransferase. This suggests that the operon associated
with phosphonopyruvate hydrolase activity may be of relatively
recent origin and that it has not been subject to extensive gene
transfer.

DISTRIBUTION IN SEQUENCED BACTERIAL STRAINS OF ADDITIONAL
GENES INVOLVED IN PHOSPHONATE METABOLISM
In addition to the pathways responsible for the breakdown of phos-
phonates, the distribution of genes that encode other activities
associated with their metabolism was analyzed.

The gene that encodes the PhnD periplasmic binding protein
of the phosphonate PhnCDE transporter was very widely distrib-
uted across bacteria (Figure 6), even more so than those encoding
the C–P lyase catalytic protein, PhnJ, or phosphonoacetaldehyde
hydrolase. Numbers of predicted homologs were particularly high
amongst marine bacteria; of the 294 strains in the NCBI database
that were conﬁrmed to possess a phnD homolog, 67 were of marine
origin. In 177 of the strains identiﬁed, phnD was juxtaposed with
a phosphonate degradative gene (thus 60% of strains capable of
transporting phosphonates into the cell have an apparent ability to
degrade them). On the other hand, 117 other strains that contained
phnD did not encode any known pathway of phosphonate degra-
dation, suggesting that not all phosphonate degradation pathways
have yet been discovered (as has been proposed by Palenik et al.,
2003). It is also possible that phosphonates are not always used as
a P source, but after transport into the cell may be incorporated
into phosphonolipids, phosphonoproteins, or other macromole-
cules by anabolic routes. And conversely, 289 strains that possessed
genes associated with a known phosphonate degradation pathway
showed no evidence of possessing the PhnCDE route of phos-
phonate acquisition – suggesting the existence of as-yet unknown
uptake routes.

An apparent example of a recent pathway of phosphonate
metabolism is encoded by the operon designated as PhnY
/PhnZ
and discovered by Martinez et al. (2010) in a clone from a fosmid

∗

library from the Sargasso Sea. The enzymes of the pathway have
not yet been characterized, but it was experimentally proven that
they conferred the capacity to consume phosphonates as a P source
∗
on an E. coli phn mutant strain (Martinez et al., 2010). PhnY
is
thought to be a 2-oxoglutarate dioxygenase, and PhnZ a pro-
tein of the HD phosphohydrolase family (Martinez et al., 2010).
Bioinformatic analysis indicated that only ﬁve sequenced bacte-
rial strains possessed a copy of this operon. Interestingly, four
of these were isolated from the marine environment, suggesting
that this pathway may have evolved in the oceans and may now
play a signiﬁcant role in P acquisition in marine microorganisms.
Three of the strains (Plesiocystis paciﬁca SIR-1, and Prochlorococcus
marinus str. MIT9301 and MIT9303) possess a copy of the phos-
phonate transporter operon phnCDE but had been considered to
lack any recognized phosphonate degradation pathway. As is the
case with the phosphonopyruvate hydrolase pathway of C–P bond
∗
cleavage, the PhnY
/PhnZ pathway appears to have undergone no
extensive evolutionary rearrangement. In this paper the phnY gene
∗
described by Martinez et al. (2010) is designated as phnY

.

ABUNDANCE AND DISTRIBUTION OF THE GENES OF
PHOSPHONATE METABOLISM IN MARINE METAGENOMIC
DATABASES
The analysis presented in Section “Distribution of the Genes of
Phosphonate Metabolism Amongst Sequenced Bacteria” is based
on the information currently available on sequenced bacterial
genomes which remains heavily biased in favor of species of
clinical, or other applied signiﬁcance. Hence little can be extrap-
olated to the ecological signiﬁcance of the various pathways of
phosphonate metabolism identiﬁed. In an attempt to address this
shortcoming, query sequences indicative of the various phospho-
nate metabolic pathways were used to interrogate the specialist
genomic database for marine bacteria, CAMERA (Nealson and
Venter, 2007), using the protocol of Lim et al. (2007). An indi-
cation was thus obtained of the abundance of the genes encod-
ing those pathways in genomic DNA recovered at the 83 sites
from the surface of the world’s oceans sampled by the global

FIGURE 6 | Distribution of phnD homologs within sequenced bacterial
genomes. The numbers and afﬁliations of marine bacterial strains that contain

the phnD gene, out of the 190 sequenced marine bacterial genomes
publically available, are indicated to the right of the Figure.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 9

Villarreal-Chiu et al.

Phosphonate metabolism by marine bacteria

ocean survey (GOS) Expedition (Table 3). The results from the
CAMERA BLAST analysis (including those for some additional
activities associated with bacterial P metabolism) were also nor-
malized against the number of “hits” obtained for RecA; recA is
frequently used as a single-copy-per-genome control in distribu-
tion and prevalence analyses (Moran et al., 2004; Karl et al., 2008;
Table 4).

The ppd gene that encodes the phosphonate biosynthetic
enzyme phosphonopyruvate decarboxylase was found at 67 sites,
almost 81% of those sampled by the GOS Expedition, and in
the equivalent of 10% of sampled genomes. This suggests that
natural-product phosphonates may be widely produced in the
oceanic environment, and correlates with the potential biological
advantages that these molecules may provide as structural com-
ponents or secondary metabolites. To date, no experimental data
has been presented on the ability of marine bacterial strains to
synthesize phosphonates, although a recent study using solid-state
NMR spectroscopy has demonstrated that C–P compounds com-
prised almost 10% of the cellular particulate phosphorus pool in
cultured strains of T. erythraeum, suggesting that this cyanobac-
terium might be capable of C–P bond formation (Dyhrman et al.,
2009).

In respect of phosphonate catabolism, bioinformatic analysis
indicated a wide distribution of the phosphonate transporter sub-
unit, PhnD. The conﬁrmed presence of the phnD gene at 72% of

the sites, and in some 5% of the genome-equivalents predicted,
suggests that phosphonates are not only being synthesized by bac-
teria in the oceans but also that exogenous C–P compounds can
be taken up for catabolism (or other metabolic activities) at sig-
niﬁcant levels. This is consistent with recent in situ expression
studies on phnD in marine picocyanobacteria by Ilikchyan et al.
(2009).

In total, some 28% of bacterial genome-equivalents sampled
during the GOS were found to contain genes encoding one or
more pathways of C–P bond cleavage (Table 4); however the
apparent relative abundances of phosphonate degradation path-
ways contrasted with those found amongst sequenced bacteria
in the GenBank database. Thus genes encoding C–P lyase and
phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase had a more limited presence
in the oceanic environment, being present at only 30 and 29%
respectively of the sites sampled by the GOS (Table 3), and in 5
and 2% of sampled genomes (Table 4). However the phnA gene
that encodes phosphonoacetate hydrolase was more widely distrib-
uted in the oceans, being present at almost over 78% of the sites
sampled by the GOS Expedition (Table 3), and in an estimated
11% of genome-equivalents (Table 4). Similarly, the genes that
encode the PhnY
/PhnZ phosphonate catabolic pathway (Mar-
tinez et al., 2010) were of limited occurrence in sequenced bacterial
genomes but were amongst the most widely distributed of those
analyzed in the GOS database; as noted above, four of the ﬁve

∗

Table 3 | Presence of genes encoding pathways of phosphonate metabolism at the 83 oceanic sites sampled by the GOS Expedition.

Pathway

Query polypeptide

% of sampled GOS sites

Phosphonate biosynthesis
C–P lyase
Phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase
Phosphonoacetate hydrolase
Phosphonopyruvate hydrolase
Phosphonate transporter
Potential new degradation pathway (Martinez et al., 2010)

Repair and maintenance of DNA (Control)

Phosphonopyruvate decarboxylase
Complex subunit PhnJ
PhnX
PhnA
PalA
Transporter subunit PhnD
PhnY*
PhnZ
RecA

80.7
30.1
28.9
78.3
1.2
72.3
51.8
77.1
100

Table 4 | Abundance of phosphonate (and related) metabolic pathways in bacterial genomes sampled by the Global Ocean Survey.

Pathway

Query polypeptide

Abundance of pathway (%)

Phosphonate biosynthesis
C–P lyase
Phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase
Phosphonoacetate hydrolase
Phosphonopyruvate hydrolase
Phosphonate transporter
Potential new degradation pathway (Martinez et al., 2010)

Alkaline phosphatase A
Alkaline phosphatase D
Phosphatase X
Repair and maintenance of DNA (Control)

Phosphonopyruvate decarboxylase
Complex subunit PhnJ
PhnX
PhnA
PalA
Transporter subunit PhnD
PhnY*
PhnZ
PhoA
PhoD
PhoX
RecA

10.2
5.1
1.8
11.2
0.1
5.5
1.6
9.4
5.9
4.6
3.5
100

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 10

Villarreal-Chiu et al.

Phosphonate metabolism by marine bacteria

sequenced isolates that possess phnY
/phnZ are marine strains
(see Distribution in Sequenced Bacterial Strains of Additional
Genes Involved in Phosphonate Metabolism).

∗

This discrepancy between the apparent abundances of the var-
ious pathways of phosphonate catabolism and their prevalence
in sequenced bacterial genomes may be in part explained by the
fact that the majority of sequenced strains that possess a copy
of the C–P lyase and phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase oper-
ons belong to the gamma-proteobacteria and other classes of
prokaryotes associated with gastrointestinal pathogenesis, whereas
those strains found to possess the phosphonoacetate hydrolase and
∗
PhnY
/PhnZ pathways were in many cases alpha-proteobacteria.
Most of these had been isolated from the marine environment;
they comprise the predominant class of prokaryotes in the upper
layer of the sea surface (Wagner-Döbler and Biebl, 2006; Moran
et al., 2007). Furthermore, since all those sequenced marine strains
that possessed a phnA (or a phnX ) – encoded pathway of 2-AEP
degradation had an associated lysR gene encoding a transcrip-
tional activator it is possible that this form of inducible regulation
might be of competitive advantage, allowing cells to consume
phosphonates as an additional source of C, (N), and P inde-
pendently of ambient Pi concentrations. Given that expression
of the genes that encode the C–P lyase operon in all cases studied
appears to Pi-starvation-inducible, possession of a Pi-insensitive
mechanism of phosphonate catabolism could be of particular rel-
evance in niches of localized organic enrichment within the bulk
oligotrophic oceans, such as “marine snow.”

The limited available data from other studies are broadly con-
sistent with our ﬁndings. Thus a metagenomic study of a coastal
marine mesocosm by Gilbert et al. (2009) found that phnA was
contained in >3% of genomes sampled while analysis of a metage-
nomic database derived from a 4000-m depth proﬁle sampled
in the North Paciﬁc Subtropical Gyre (Luo et al., 2011) found

that phnA was present in approximately 32% of genomes sam-
pled throughout the water column, but that C–P lyase genes were
conﬁned to P-limited surface waters. Martinez et al. (2010) in
metagenomic analyses of depth proﬁle samples from the Sargasso
Sea and Hawaii Ocean Time Series found that phnA was partic-
ularly abundant in deeper waters (present in an average of 10%
of genomes across all depths at the two sites). The phnY
and
phnZ genes were present on average in 3 and 10% respectively of
genomes at these sites (Martinez et al., 2010). Finally, the likely
relative importances of phosphonate-P and ester-P within marine
DOP can perhaps be gauged by comparison of the broadly similar
abundances in GOS metagenomic samples of genes that encode C–
P cleavage enzymes and those that encode the three major marine
alkaline phosphatases (Table 4).

∗

SUMMARY/CONCLUSION
There is growing awareness of the importance of phosphonates in
the P economy of the oceans, although analytical constraints con-
tinue to limit our knowledge of the identities, abundances, and
biogenic origins of marine C–P compounds, and of the dynamics
of their biotransformations. Genomic, metagenomic (and increas-
ingly, metatranscriptomic) evidence all point to the widespread
utilization of phosphonate-P by the marine microﬂora; the indi-
cations these provide that regulation of C–P bond cleavage activity
may be niche-dependent require further exploration. In addition
there is need for further experimental proof of strong in silico
suggestions that marine bacteria may be of importance as C–P
producers, in addition to their better-known role as phosphonate
consumers.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank CONACYT, Mexico, for a studentship to Juan F.
Villarreal-Chiu.

REFERENCES
Agarwal, V., Borisova, S. A., Met-
calf, W. W., van der Donk, W.
A., and Nair, S. K. (2011). Struc-
tural and mechanistic insights into
C-P bond hydrolysis by phospho-
noacetate hydrolase. Chem. Biol. 18,
1230–1240.

Baker, A. S., Ciocci, M. J., Metcalf, W.
W., Kim, J., Babbitt, P. C., Wanner,
B. L., Martin, B. M., and Dunaway-
Mariano, D. (1998). Insights into
the mechanism of
catalysis by
the P-C bond-cleaving
enzyme
phosphonoacetaldehyde hydrolase
derived from gene sequence analysis
and mutagenesis. Biochemistry 37,
9305–9315.

and

(1988). Elucidation of

Barry, R. J., Bowman, E., McQueney,
Dunaway-Mariano,
M.,
D.
the
2-aminoethylphosphonate biosyn-
thetic pathway
in Tetrahymena
pyriformis. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 153, 177–182.

Beier, D.,

(2006).
Regulation of bacterial virulence

and Gross, R.

by two-component systems. Curr.
Opin. Microbiol. 9, 143–152.

Benitez-Nelson, C. R., O’Neill, L.,
Kolowith, L. C., Pellechia, P., and
Thunell, R. (2004). Phosphonates
and particulate organic phosphorus
cycling in an anoxic marine basin.
Limnol. Oceanogr. 49, 1593–1604.

Beversdorf, L. J., White, A. E., Björk-
man, K. M., Letelier, R. M., and Karl,
D. M. (2010). Phosphonate metab-
olism of Trichodesmium IMS101
and the production of
green-
house gases. Limnol. Oceanogr. 55,
1768–1778.

Björkman, K. M., and Karl, D. M.
(2003). Bioavailability of dissolved
organic phosphorus in the euphotic
zone at Station ALOHA, North
Paciﬁc Subtropical Gyre. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 48, 1049–1057.

Borisova, S. A., Christman, H. D.,
Metcalf, M. E. M., Zulkepli, N. A.,
Zhang, J. K., van der Donk, W. A.,
and Metcalf, W. W. (2011). Genetic
and biochemical characterization
of a pathway for the degradation

2-aminoethylphosphonate

of
in
Sinorhizobium meliloti 1021. J. Biol.
Chem. 286, 22283–22290.

Bowman,

J.,

E., McQueney, M.,
and Dunaway-
Barry, R.
Mariano, D.
(1988). Catalysis
and thermodynamics of the phos-
phoenolpyruvate/phosphopyruvate
rearrangement. Entry into the phos-
phonate class of naturally occurring
organophosphorus compounds. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 110, 5575–5576.

Bury-Mone, S., Nomane, Y., Reymond,
N., Barbet, R., Jacquet, E., Imbeaud,
S., Jacq, A., and Bouloc, P. (2009).
Global analysis of extracytoplas-
mic stress signaling in Escherichia
coli. PLoS Genet. 5,
e1000651.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000651

Chen, C. C., Han, Y., Niu, W.,
Kulakova, A. N., Howard, A., Quinn,
J. P., Dunaway-Mariano, D., and
Herzberg, O.
Structure
and kinetics of phosphonopyru-
vate hydrolase from Variovorax sp.
Pal2: new insight into the diver-
gence of catalysis within the PEP

(2006).

mutase/isocitrate lyase superfamily.
Biochemistry 45, 11491–11504.

Choi, K. Y., Kim, D., Chae, J. C., Zyl-
stra, G. J., and Kim, E. (2007).
Requirement of duplicated operons
for maximal metabolism of phtha-
late by Rhodococcus sp. strain DK17.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
357, 766–771.

Circello, B. T., Eliot, A. C., Lee, J.
H., van der Donk, W. A., and
Metcalf, W. W. (2010). Molecular
cloning and heterologous expres-
sion of
the dehydrophos biosyn-
thetic gene cluster. Chem. Biol. 17,
402–411.

Cirz, R. T., O’Neill, B. M., Hammond,
J. A., Head, S. R., and Romesberg, F.
E. (2006). Deﬁning the Pseudomonas
aeruginosa SOS response and its role
in the global response to the antibi-
otic ciproﬂoxacin. J. Bacteriol. 188,
7101–7110.

Clark, L. L., Ingall, E. D., and Ben-
ner, R. (1998). Marine phosphorus
is selectively remineralized. Nature
393, 426–426.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 11

Villarreal-Chiu et al.

Phosphonate metabolism by marine bacteria

J. F., Gilbert,

Cooley, N. A., Kulakova, N. A.,
Villarreal-Chiu,
J.
A., McGrath, J. W., and Quinn,
(2011). Phosphonoacetate
J. P.
in vitro detection
biosynthesis:
-dependent
of
phosphonoacetaldehyde-oxidizing
activity in cell-extracts of a marine
Roseobacter. Microbiology
80,
335–340.

a novel NADP

+

hydrolase

Dumora, C., Lacoste, A. M., and
(1989). Phospho-
Cassaigne, A.
from
noacetaldehyde
Pseudomonas aeruginosa – puriﬁ-
cation, properties and comparison
with
enzyme.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 997, 193–198.
Dyhrman, S., Ammerman, J. W., and
Van Mooy, B. A. (2007). Microbes
and the marine phosphorus cycle.
Oceanography 20, 110–116.

Bacillus

cereus

Dyhrman, S., Chappell, P. D., Haley, S.
T., Moffett, J. W., Orchard, E. D.,
Waterbury, J. B., and Webb, E. A.
(2006). Phosphonate utilization by
the globally important marine dia-
zotroph Trichodesmium. Nature 439,
68–71.

Dyhrman, S., and Haley, S. (2006).
Phosphorus scavenging in the uni-
cellular marine diazotroph Cro-
cosphaera watsonii. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 72, 1452–1458.

Dyhrman, S. T., Benitez-Nelson, C. R.,
Orchard, E. D., Haley, S. T., and
Pellechia, P. J. (2009). A micro-
bial
in
oligotrophic marine systems. Nat.
Geosci. 2, 696–699.

source of phosphonates

Ford, J. L., Kaakoush, N. O., and Mendz,
G. L. (2010). Phosphonate metabo-
lism in Helicobacter pylori. Antonie
Van Leeuwenhoek 97, 51–60.

Gebhard, S., and Cook, G. M. (2008).
regulation of high-
Differential
afﬁnity phosphate transport systems
of Mycobacterium smegmatis: iden-
tiﬁcation of PhnF, a repressor of the
phnDCE operon. J. Bacteriol. 190,
1335–1343.

Gilbert, J. A., Thomas, S., Cooley, N.
A., Kulakova, A., Field, D., Booth,
T., McGrath, J. W., Quinn, J. P.,
and Joint, I. (2009). Potential for
phosphonoacetate utilization by
marine bacteria in temperate coastal
waters. Environ. Microbiol.
11,
111–125.

Gomez-Garcia, M. R., Davison, M.,
Blain-Hartnung, M., Grossman, A.
R., and Bhaya, D. (2011). Alternative
pathways for phosphonate metab-
olism in thermophilic cyanobacte-
ria from microbial mats. ISME J. 5,
141–149.

Hilderbrand, R. L. (1983). The Role of
Phosphonates in Living Systems. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press Inc.

Hori, T., Horiguchi, M., and Hayashi, A.
(1984). Biochemistry of Natural C-P
Compounds. Kyoto: Maruzen Ltd.

Horigane, A., Horiguchi, M., and Mat-
sumoto, T. (1989). Metabolism of 2-
amino-3-phosphono [3-14C] pro-
pionic acid in cell-free preparations
of Tetrahymena. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 618, 383–388.

Hove-Jensen, B., McSorley, F. R., and
Zechel, D. L. (2011). Physiologi-
cal role of PhnP-speciﬁed phos-
phoribosyl cyclic phosphodiesterase
in catabolism of organophospho-
nic acids by the carbon-phosphorus
lyase pathway. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133,
3617–3624.

Hove-Jensen, B., Rosenkrantz, T.

J.,
Zechel, D. L., and Willemoës, M.
(2010). Accumulation of interme-
the carbon-phosphorus
diates of
lyase pathway
for phosphonate
degradation in phn mutants of
Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 192,
370–374.

Huang, J., Su, Z., and Xu, Y. (2005). The
evolution of microbial phosphonate
degradative pathways. J. Mol. Evol.
61, 682–690.

Ilikchyan, I. N., McKay, R. M., Zehr, J. P.,
Dyhrman, S. T., and Bullerjahn, G.
S. (2009). Detection and expression
of the phosphonate transporter gene
phnD in marine and freshwater pic-
ocyanobacteria. Environ. Microbiol.
11, 1314–1324.

Jiang, W. H., Metcalf, W. W., Lee, K. S.,
and Wanner, B. L. (1995). Molecular
cloning, mapping, and regulation of
Pho regulon genes for phosphonate
breakdown by the phosphonatase
pathway of Salmonella typhimurium
LT2. J. Bacteriol. 177, 6411–6421.

Jochimsen, B., Lolle, S., McSorley, F. R.,
Nabi, M., Stougaard, J., Zechel, D.
L., and Hove-Jensen, B. (2011). Five
phosphonate operon gene products
as components of a multi-subunit
complex of the carbon-phosphorus
lyase pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 108, 11393–11398.

Johannes, T. W., DeSieno, M. A., Grif-
ﬁn, B. M., Thomas, P. M., Kelleher,
N. L., Metcalf, W. W., and Zhao, H.
(2010). Deciphering the late biosyn-
thetic steps of antimalarial com-
pound FR-900098. Chem. Biol. 17,
57–64.

Kamat, S. S., Williams, H.

J., and
Raushel, F. M. (2011). Intermedi-
ates in the transformation of phos-
phonates to phosphate by bacteria.
Nature 480, 570–573.

Karl, D. M., Beversdorf, L. J., Björkman,
K. M., Church, M. J., Martinez, A.,
and DeLong, E. F. (2008). Aerobic
production of methane in the sea.
Nat. Geosci. 1, 473–478.

Karl, D. M., Björkman, K. M., Dore, J.
E., Fujieki, L., Hebel, D. V., Houli-
han, T., Letelier, R. M., and Tupas,
L. M. (2001). Ecological nitrogen-
to-phosphorus stoichiometry at sta-
tion ALOHA. Deep Sea Res. II 48,
1449–1470.

Kertesz, M., Elgorriaga, A.,

and
Amrhein, N. (1991). Evidence for
two distinct phosphonate-degrading
enzymes (C-P lyases) in Arthrobacter
sp. GLP-1. Biodegradation 2, 53–59.
Kim, A., Benning, M. M., OkLee, S.,
Quinn, J. P., Martin, B. M., Holden,
H. M., and Dunaway-Mariano, D.
(2011). Divergence of
chemical
function in the alkaline phosphatase
superfamily: structure and mech-
anism of the C-P bond cleaving
enzyme phosphonoacetate hydro-
lase. Biochemistry 50, 3481–3494.

Kim, A. D., Baker, A. S., Dunaway-
Mariano, D., Metcalf, W. W., Wanner,
B. L., and Martin, B. M. (2002).
2-aminoethylphosphonate-
The
the
speciﬁc
2-aminoethylphosphonate
degra-
dation pathway. J. Bacteriol. 184,
4134–4140.

transaminase

of

Kittredge, J. S., and Hughes, R. R.
(1964). The occurrence of alpha-
amino-beta-phosphonopropionic
acid in the Zoanthid, Zoanthus
sociatus, and the ciliate, Tetrahy-
mena pyriformis. Biochemistry 3,
991–996.

Kolowith, L. C., Ingall, E. D., and Benner,
R. (2001). Composition and cycling
of marine organic phosphorus. Lim-
nol. Oceanogr. 46, 309–320.

Kulakova, A. N., Kulakov, L. A., Aku-
lenko, N. V., Ksenzenko, V. N.,
Hamilton, J. T. G., and Quinn, J.
P. (2001). Structural and functional
analysis of
the phosphonoacetate
hydrolase (phnA) gene region in
Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens 23F. J. Bac-
teriol. 183, 3268–3275.

J. W., and Quinn,

Kulakova, A. N., Kulakov, L. A.,
J.
McGrath,
P.
(2009). The construction of
a whole-cell biosensor for phos-
phonoacetate, based on the LysR-
like transcriptional regulator PhnR
from Pseudomonas ﬂuorescens 23F.
Microb. Biotechnol. 2, 234–240.

Kulakova, A. N., Wisdom, G. B.,
J.
Kulakov, L. A., and Quinn,
P.
(2003). The puriﬁcation and
characterization of phosphonopy-
ruvate hydrolase, a novel carbon-
phosphorus bond cleavage enzyme
from Variovorax sp. Pal2. J. Biol.
Chem. 278, 23426–23431.

Kuwahara, T., Yamashita, A., Hirakawa,
H., Nakayama, H., Toh, H., Okada,
N., Kuhara, S., Hattori, M., Hayashi,
T., and Ohnishi, Y. (2004). Genomic

analysis of Bacteroides fragilis reveals
extensive DNA inversions regulating
cell surface adaptation. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 14919–14924.
Lamarche, M. G., Wanner, B. L., Cre-
pin, S., and Harel, J. (2008). The
phosphate regulon and bacterial vir-
ulence: a regulatory network con-
necting phosphate homeostasis and
pathogenesis. FEMS Microbiol. Rev.
32, 461–473.

LaNauze, J. M., Coggins, J. R., and
Dixon, H. B. F. (1977). Aldolase-
like imine formation in mechanism
of action of phosphonoacetalde-
hyde hydrolase. Biochem.
J. 165,
409–411.

Lee, J. H., Bae, B., Kuemin, M., Circello,
B. T., Metcalf, W. W., Nair, S. K., and
van der Donk, W. A. (2010). Char-
acterization and structure of DhpI,
a phosphonate O-methyltransferase
involved in dehydrophos biosynthe-
sis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
17557–17562.

Lim, B. L., Yeung, P., Cheng, C., and Hill,
J. E. (2007). Distribution and diver-
sity of phytate-mineralizing bacte-
ria. ISME J. 1, 321–330.

Luo, H., Benner, R., Long, R. A., and Hu,
H. (2009). Subcellular localization
of marine bacterial alkaline phos-
phatases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
106, 21219–21233.

Luo, H., Zhang, H., Long, R. A., and
Benner, R. (2011). Depth distribu-
tions of alkaline phosphatase and
phosphonate utilization genes in
the North Paciﬁc Subtropical Gyre.
Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 62, 61–69.

Martinez, A., Tyson, G. W., and DeLong,
E. F. (2010). Widespread known and
novel phosphonate utilization path-
ways in marine bacteria revealed by
functional screening and metage-
nomic analyses. Environ. Microbiol.
12, 222–238.

McGrath, J. W., Hammerschmidt, F.,
Kählig, H., Wuggenig, F., Lamprecht,
G., and Quinn, J. P. (2011). Stud-
ies on the biodegradation of fos-
fomycin: synthesis of (13) C-labeled
intermediates, feeding experiments
with Rhizobium huakuii PMY1, and
isolation of
labeled amino acids
from cell mass by HPLC. Chemistry
17, 13341–13348.

McGrath, J. W., Hammerschmidt, F.,
Preusser, W., Quinn,
J. P., and
Schweifer, A. (2009). Studies on
the biodegradation of fosfomycin:
growth of Rhizobium huakuii PMY1
on possible intermediates synthe-
sised chemically. Org. Biomol. Chem.
7, 1944–1953.

McGrath,

J. W., Hammerschmidt,
F.,
(1998).
Biodegradation of phosphonomycin

and Quinn,

J. P.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 12

Villarreal-Chiu et al.

Phosphonate metabolism by marine bacteria

by Rhizobium huakuii PMY1. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 64, 356–358.

J. P.

McGrath, J. W., Ternan, N. G., and
Quinn,
(1997). Utilization
of organophosphonates by environ-
mental microorganisms. Lett. Appl.
Microbiol. 24, 69–73.

McGrath, J. W., Wisdom, G. B., McMul-
lan, G., Larkin, M. J., and Quinn, J. P.
(1995). The puriﬁcation and proper-
ties of phosphonoacetate hydrolase,
a novel carbon-phosphorus bond
cleavage enzyme from Pseudomonas
ﬂuorescens. Eur.
J. Biochem. 234,
225–230.

McMullan, G., Harrington, F., and
Quinn, J. P. (1992). Metabolism of
phosphonoacetate as the sole carbon
and phosphorus source by an envi-
ronmental bacterial
isolate. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 58, 1364–1366.

Mendz, G. L., Mégraud, F., and Koro-
lik, V. (2005). Phosphonate catab-
olism by Campylobacter spp. Arch.
Microbiol. 183, 113–120.

Metcalf, W. W., and van der Donk,
W. A. (2009). Biosynthesis of phos-
phonic and phosphinic acid natural
products. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 78,
65–94.

Morais, M. C., Zhang, G. F., Zhang,
W. H., Olsen, D. B., Dunaway-
Mariano, D., and Allen, K. N.
(2004). X-ray crystallographic and
site-directed mutagenesis analysis of
the mechanism of Schiff-base for-
mation in phosphonoacetaldehyde
hydrolase catalysis. J. Biol. Chem.
279, 9353–9361.

Moran, M. A., Belas, R., Schell, M. A.,
González, J. M., Sun, F., Sun, S.,
Binder, B. J., Edmonds, J., Ye, W.,
Orcutt, B., Howard, E. C., Meile, C.,
Palefsky, W., Goesmann, A., Ren, Q.,
Paulsen, I., Ulrich, L. E., Thomp-
son, L. S., Saunders, E., and Buchan,
A. (2007). Ecological genomics of
marine Roseobacters. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 73, 4559–4569.

Moran, M. A., Buchan, A., Gonzalez,
J. M., Heidelberg, J. F., Whitman,
W. B., Kiene, R. P., Henriksen, J.
R., King, G. M., Belas, R., Fuqua,
C., Brinkac, L., Lewis, M., Johri,
S., Weaver, B., Pai, G., Eisen, J. A.,
Rahe, E., Sheldon, W. M., Ye, W.,
Miller, T. R., Carlton, J., Rasko, D.
A., Paulsen, I. T., Ren, Q., Daugherty,
S. C., Deboy, R. T., Dodson, R. J.,
Durkin, A. S., Madupu, R., Nelson,

W. C., Sullivan, S. A., Rosovitz, M.
J., Haft, D. H., Selengut, J., and
Ward, N. (2004). Genome sequence
of Silicibacter pomeroyi reveals adap-
tations to the marine environment.
Nature 432, 910–913.

Nealson, K. H., and Venter, J. C. (2007).
Metagenomics and the global ocean
survey: what’s in it for us, and why
should we care? ISME J. 1, 185–190.
Palenik, B., Brahamsha, B., Larimer, F.
W., Land, M., Hauser, L., Chain, P.,
Lamerdin, J., Regala, W., Allen, E. E.,
McCarren, J., Paulsen, I., Dufresne,
A., Partensky, F., Webb, E. A., and
Waterbury, J. (2003). The genome
of a motile marine Synechococcus.
Nature 424, 1037–1042.

Paytan, A., and McLaughlin, A. (2007).
cycle.

The oceanic phosphorus
Chem. Rev. 107, 563–576.

Quin, L. D. (1965). The presences
of
compounds with a carbon-
phosphorus bond in some marine
invertebrates.
4,
324–330.

Biochemistry

Quin, L. D.

(2000). A Guide

to
Organophosphorus Chemistry. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.

Quin, L. D., and Quin, G. S. (2001).
Screening for carbon-bound phos-
phorus in marine animals by high-
resolution P-31 NMR spectroscopy:
coastal and hydrothermal vent inver-
tebrates. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. B
Biochem. Mol. Biol. 128, 173–185.

Quinn, J. P., Kulakova, A. N., Cooley, N.
A., and McGrath, J. W. (2007). New
ways to break an old bond: the bacte-
rial carbon–phosphorus hydrolases
and their role in biogeochemical
phosphorus cycling. Environ. Micro-
biol. 9, 2392–2400.

Rizk, S. S., Cuneo, M. J., and Hellinga, H.
W. (2006). Identiﬁcation of cognate
ligands for the Escherichia coli phnD
protein product and engineering of
a reagentless ﬂuorescent biosensor
for phosphonates. Protein Sci. 15,
1745–1751.

Seidel, H. M., Freeman, S., Seto, H.,
and Knowles, J. R. (1988). Phospho-
nate biosynthesis: isolation of the
enzyme responsible for the forma-
tion of a carbon-phosphorus bond.
Nature 335, 457–458.

Sowell, S. M., Wilhelm, L. J., Norbeck,
A. D., Lipton, M. S., Nicora, C.
D., Barofsky, D. F., Carlson, C. A.,
Smith, R. D., and Giovanonni, S. J.

(2009). Transport functions dom-
inate the SAR11 metaproteome at
low-nutrient extremes in the Sar-
gasso Sea. ISME J. 3, 93–105.

Sviridov, A. V., Shushkova, T. V.,
Zelenkova, N. F., Vinokurova, N. G.,
Morgunov, I. G., Ermakova, I. T., and
Leontievsky, A. A. (2012). Distribu-
tion of glyphosate and methylphos-
phonate catabolism systems in soil
bacteria Ochrobactrum anthropi and
Achromobacter sp. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 93, 787–796.

Ternan, N. G., McGrath, J. W., McMul-
lan, G., and Quinn, J. P. (1998).
Organophosphonates: occurrence,
synthesis and biodegradation by
microorganisms. World J. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 14, 635–647.

Ternan, N. G., and Quinn, J. P. (1998a).
Phosphate starvation-independent
2-aminoethylphosphonic
acid
biodegradation in a newly isolated
strain of Pseudomonas putida, NG2.
Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 21, 346–352.

Ternan, N. G., and Quinn, J. P. (1998b).
In vitro cleavage of
the carbon-
phosphorus bond of phosphonopy-
ruvate by cell extracts of an envi-
ronmental Burkholderia cepacia iso-
late. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Com-
mun. 248, 378–381.

Thomas, S., Burdett, H., Temperton,
B., Wick, R., Snelling, D., McGrath,
J. W., Quinn, J. P., Munn, C., and
Gilbert, J. A. (2010). Evidence for
phosphonate usage in the coral holo-
biont. ISME J. 4, 459–461.

Vera, M.,

Pagliai,

ferrooxidans

and Jerez, C. A.

F., Guiliani,
(2008).
N.,
chemolithoautotroph
The
Acidithiobacillus
can
survive under phosphate-limiting
conditions by expressing a C-P
lyase operon that allows it to grow
on phosphonates. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 74, 1829–1835.

von Krüger, W. M., Humphreys, S.,
and Ketley, J. M. (1999). A role
for the PhoBR regulatory system
homologue in the Vibrio cholerae
phosphate-limitation response and
intestinal colonization. Microbiology
145, 2463–2475.

von Krüger, W. M., Lery, L. M. S., Soares,
M. R., de Neves-Manta, F. S., Batista
e Silva, C. M., Neves-Ferreira, A. G.,
Perales, J., and Bisch, P. M. (2006).
The phosphate-starvation response
in Vibrio cholerae O1 and a phoB

mutant under proteomic analysis:
disclosing functions
involved in
adaptation, survival and virulence.
Proteomics 6, 1495–1511.

Wackett, L. P., Shames, S. L., Ven-
ditti, C. P., and Walsh, C. T. (1987).
Bacterial carbon-phosphorus lyase-
rates,
products,
and regulation
of phosphonic
and phosphinic
acid metabolism. J. Bacteriol. 169,
710–717.

Wagner-Döbler,

I.,

and Biebl, H.
(2006). Environmental biology of
the marine Roseobacter
lineage.
Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 60, 255–280.

White, A. K., and Metcalf, W. W. (2007).
Microbial metabolism of reduced
phosphorus compounds. Annu. Rev.
Microbiol. 61, 379–400.

Yakovleva, G. M., Kim, S. K., and
Wanner, B. L. (1998). Phosphate-
independent
the
carbon-phosphorus lyase activity of
Escherichia coli. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 49, 573–578.

expression of

Zhang, G., Dai, J., Lu, Z., and Dunaway-
Mariano, D. (2003). The phospho-
nopyruvate decarboxylase from Bac-
teroides fragilis. J. Biol. Chem. 278,
41302–41308.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 30 November 2011; paper
pending published: 22 December 2011;
accepted: 10 January 2012; published
online: 26 January 2012.
Citation: Villarreal-Chiu JF, Quinn JP
and McGrath JW (2012) The genes and
enzymes of phosphonate metabolism by
bacteria, and their distribution in the
marine environment. Front. Microbio.
3:19. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00019
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Aquatic Microbiology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Villarreal-Chiu,
Quinn and McGrath. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 19 | 13

