REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 18 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00138

The languages spoken in the water body (or the biological
role of cyanobacterial toxins)

Aaron Kaplan1*, Moshe Harel 1, Ruth N. Kaplan-Levy 2, Ora Hadas 2, Assaf Sukenik 2 and Elke Dittmann3

1 Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel
2 The Yigal Allon Kinneret Limnological Laboratory, Israel Oceanographic and Limnological Research, Migdal, Israel
3 Institut für Biochemie und Biologie, Universität Potsdam, Potsdam, Germany

Edited by:
George S. Bullerjahn, Bowling Green
State University, USA
Reviewed by:
Michael R. Twiss, Clarkson University,
USA
Greg Boyer, State University of New
York, USA
*Correspondence:
Aaron Kaplan, Department of Plant
and Environmental Sciences, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Edmond J. Safra Campus, Givat Ram,
Jerusalem 91904, Israel.
e-mail: aaron.kaplan@mail.huji.ac.il

Although intensiﬁcation of toxic cyanobacterial blooms over the last decade is a matter of
growing concern due to bloom impact on water quality, the biological role of most of the
toxins produced is not known. In this critical review we focus primarily on the biological
role of two toxins, microcystins and cylindrospermopsin, in inter- and intra-species com-
munication and in nutrient acquisition. We examine the experimental evidence supporting
some of the dogmas in the ﬁeld and raise several open questions to be dealt with in future
research. We do not discuss the health and environmental implications of toxin presence
in the water body.

Keywords: aoa, cylindrospermopsin, microcystin, cyr, mcy

INTRODUCTION
“What determines who is there?” is a long standing but neverthe-
less intriguing biological/environmental question. Numerous ﬁeld
and laboratory studies, and modeling of the data thereof, were
performed in an attempt to reveal the effects of biotic and abiotic
parameters on the temporal and spatial dynamics of phytoplank-
ton populations (Ogawa, 1988; Walsby, 1997; Abraham, 1998).
There is a growing body of evidence that secondary metabolites
play an important part in the shaping of the community com-
position through inter- and intra-species communication but, for
the most part, their biological role, mode of action, and regu-
lation of their production are poorly understood. One example
is the evolutionary drivers for the richness and large diversity of
secondary metabolites produced by various cyanobacteria, a phe-
nomenon that we know little about. It has been proposed that
at least part of the richness observed in the case of a Lyngbya
sp. is due to improper systematic analysis and that several strains
are in fact involved (Engene et al., 2011) but, if any, this argu-
ment strengthens the message that a large diversity of secondary
metabolites is formed in this genus (Liu and Rein, 2010). A com-
prehensive chemotyping, i.e., analysis of the array of secondary
metabolites within a given organism (Sivonen, 2008), combined
with the application of genetic approaches using various genomic
tools are required and to some extent emerging (Mejean et al.,
2010; Jones et al., 2011). In the long run it will provide us with
a complete array of metabolites produced and enable recogni-
tion of the genetic potential and its expression particularly under
changing environmental conditions.

Cyanobacteria are known to produce a wide variety of sec-
ondary metabolites including non-ribosomally made peptides,
polyketides, and alkaloids. Naturally most of the research on
cyanobacterial secondary metabolites focused on those that were

classiﬁed as toxic to eukaryotes, mainly microcystin, nodularin,
saxitoxin, and cylindrospermopsin (Pearson et al., 2010), since
their presence may constitute a serious threat to water quality in
many freshwater bodies worldwide (Carmichael, 1997; Grifﬁths
and Saker, 2003; Zegura et al., 2011). There is a growing body of
evidence that regional and global climatic change may beneﬁt var-
ious species of harmful cyanobacteria by increasing their growth
rates, dominance, persistence, geographic distributions, and activ-
ity (see Paerl and Huisman, 2009; Sukenik et al., this issue).

Numerous publications have described the implications of
cyanobacterial toxin production on environmental and health
aspects but this is beyond the scope of the present paper. Here we
discuss the nature and biological role of two cyanobacterial toxins,
microcystin and cylindrospermopsin, for which experimentally
based information has recently been obtained.

MICROCYSTIN
OCCURRENCE AND TOXICITY
Microcystins are the most frequently reported cyanobacterial tox-
ins in freshwater environments and are regarded as a major
health hazard and challenge to the quality of drinking water
(Dittmann and Wiegand, 2006). Microcystins are predominantly
produced by freshwater strains including Microcystis, Planktothrix,
and Anabaena (Welker and von Dohren, 2006) but were also
incidentally reported from terrestrial environments. Toxic and
non-toxic strains usually co-exist in natural bloom samples
due to the sporadic distribution of toxin biosynthesis genes in
the producing genera (Via-Ordorika et al., 2004). Microcystin
penetrates the liver where it inhibits eukaryotic protein phos-
phatases type 1 and 2A, eventually leading to liver hemorrhage
and death (Runnegar et al., 1995). The hepatotoxin was impli-
cated in a number of animal and human intoxications, the

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 138 | 1

Kaplan et al.

Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites

most fatal case being reported from a hemodialysis center in
Brazil where patients died with symptoms of hepatotoxicity after
exposure to water from a nearby reservoir contaminated with
cyanobacteria (Jochimsen et al., 1998). The cyclic heptapeptide
displays the general structure cyclo(d-Ala-X-d-MeAsp-Z-Adda-
d-Glu-MdhA) in which X and Z represent variable l amino
acids. d-MeAsp is d-erythro-β-methyl-aspartic acid, MdhA is
N -methyldehydroalanine and Adda is (2S,3S,8S,9S)-3-amino-9-
methoxy-2,6,8-trimethyl-10-phenyldeca-4,6 dienoic acid (Botes
et al., 1984). Many variants have been described in the scien-
tiﬁc literature, mostly differing in amino acid positions X and
Z (Sivonen and Jones, 1999; Welker and von Dohren, 2006). The
related nodularins are exclusively produced by Nodularia strains
in brackish water environments and possess the general structure
cyclo(d-MeAsp-l-arginine-Adda-d-Glu-Mdhb), in which Mdhb
is 2-(methylamino)-2-dehydrobutyric acid (Annila et al., 1996).

PHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES ON MICROCYSTIN PRODUCTION
Research toward an understanding of the biological role of micro-
cystin started in the 1980s when several research groups began
to study the impact of environmental factors on the cellular toxin
content. Generally, the production of microcystin by a single strain
seems to be rather consistent with variations usually not exceed-
ing a factor of four (Sivonen and Jones, 1999). This led to the
general notion that microcystin production is directly correlated
to growth, perhaps showing a linear correlation between cell divi-
sion and toxin production (Orr and Jones, 1998). This was further
examined by the development of a model for the prediction of cel-
lular microcystin contents from growth rates in N-limited cultures
(Long et al., 2001). This model is in agreement with data obtained
in several studies that have reported high microcystin production
rates in cultures with high nitrogen and high phosphorus concen-
trations that are not limited in growth (Sivonen et al., 1990; Vezie
et al., 2002). From their data, Orr and Jones (1998) concluded
that microcystin is not a secondary metabolite but rather displays
attributes of an essential intracellular compound. The fact that
microcystin and many other cyanobacterial “secondary metabo-
lites” are produced from the beginning of the logarithmic phase
indeed distinguishes them from secondary metabolites of many
other microorganisms.

However, a number of other studies have reported effects of
speciﬁc environmental factors on microcystin production. Lukac
and Aegerter (1993) correlated low iron concentrations with an
increased toxin production, whereas Utkilen and Gjolme (1992),
detected higher microcystin production at high iron conditions.
Other authors have suggested the impact of light, temperature,
and pH (Vanderwesthuizen and Eloff, 1985; Rapala et al., 1997;
Wiedner et al., 2003). Interestingly, some of the environmental
factors had a differential effect on various isoforms of the toxin
(Rapala et al., 1997). Many of the observed effects on micro-
cystin formation might be due to a limiting response of growth
to the respective parameter. The largest problem for the inter-
pretation and comparison of the different studies, however, is the
observed strain-speciﬁc difference in toxin production under stan-
dard growth conditions. The environmentally induced changes
are far less pronounced than the differences in toxin contents
measured in individual strains. Physiological studies could thus

provide an overview about the inﬂuence of abiotic factors on
microcystin production but could not provide a clue about the
role of the toxin in the producing cells.

BIOSYNTHESIS, REGULATION, AND EVOLUTION OF MICROCYSTIN
A new era of research toward understanding the biological role
of microcystin became possible with the identiﬁcation of the
mcy genes encoding the non-ribosomal complex for microcystin
biosynthesis. The mcy clusters were ﬁrst described for two strains
of Microcystis aeruginosa (Nishizawa et al., 1999, 2000; Tillett et al.,
2000). The genomic locus in Microcystis spans 55 kb and com-
prises 10 bidirectionally organized genes encoding non-ribosomal
peptide synthetases (NRPS), polyketide-synthases (PKS), tailoring
enzymes, and an ABC transporter (McyA-J; Nishizawa et al., 1999,
2000; Tillett et al., 2000). The mcy gene cluster was later also char-
acterized for Planktothrix and Anabaena (Christiansen et al., 2003;
Rouhiainen et al., 2004), a closely related gene cluster that could
be assigned to the biosynthesis of nodularin in Nodularia (Mofﬁtt
and Neilan, 2004).

−2 s

Knowledge about the biosynthesis gene cluster ultimately per-
mitted analysis of the impact of environmental stimuli on the
transcription of the mcy genes and a possible interaction of
the promoter region with transcription factors. Several studies
revealed a clear impact of light and iron-limiting conditions on
mcy transcript abundance. Kaebernick and co-workers used the
RNAse protection assay to quantify mcy transcripts under vari-
ous light intensities and qualities. They observed that mcy tran-
scripts are elevated above a critical threshold of light of about
−1 (Kaebernick et al., 2000). In a follow-
30 μmol photons m
up study, the authors could show alternative transcriptional start
sites for the mcyA-C and mcyD-J operons in Microcystis under
low light and high light conditions, respectively (Kaebernick et al.,
2002). An increased mcy transcript accumulation under high
light conditions was also found in Planktothrix agardhii (Tonk
et al., 2005). A signiﬁcant rise in the mcy transcript accumula-
tion and an increased toxin production was observed following
iron starvation (Sevilla et al., 2008). In contrast, the effect of
light on transcription could not be correlated with higher toxin
content per cell. Studies on the transcription of mcy genes were
thus not only answering questions but also raising new ones.
For example, differential effects on the transcription of various
mcy genes were observed following various stresses such as oxida-
tive stress. The mcyB was only 20% up-regulated whereas mcyA,
mcyH, and mcyD transcripts increased by 270, 330, and 370%,
respectively, in agreement with published data (Straub et al.,
2011).

Screening of the 750-bp long bidirectional mcy promoter
region between mcyA and mcyD revealed the presence of tran-
scription factor binding sites for the ferric uptake regulator Fur
and the global nitrogen regulator NtcA (Kaebernick et al., 2002).
For both factors, binding to the mcy promoter region could be
conﬁrmed in vitro (Martin-Luna et al., 2006; Ginn et al., 2010;
Figure 1). The Fur binding suggests a response of mcy genes to
iron availability and redox status of the cell, which could explain
the effects of high light and iron-limiting conditions on transcript
abundance. On the other hand, NtcA binding typically mediates
a response of cyanobacterial cells to nitrogen-limiting conditions

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 138 | 2

Kaplan et al.

Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites

FIGURE 1 | Working model for the global role of microcystin in
M. aeruginosa. Microcystin biosynthesis is up-regulated under high light and
iron deﬁciency. Two transcriptional regulators, NtcA and Fur, were shown to
bind to the bidirectional promoter region of the mcy operon (left). A fraction of
the toxin is released from lysing cells and via the ABC transporter McyH,
thereby acting as an infochemical for the neighboring cells (e.g., leading to an
autoinduction of microcystin biosynthesis) and inﬂuencing extracellular

proteins such as the lectin MVN and the glycoprotein MrpC. The microcystin
receptor is still unknown (middle). Inside cells, microcystin is partly bound to
proteins. Binding partners include proteins of the phycobilisomes (PBA) and
the large subunit of Rubisco (RbcL). The covalent binding to cysteines is
preferentially formed under highlight and oxidative stress conditions.
Microcystin can thus interfere with the known redox control of proteins and
affect their stability and/or activity (right). TL, thylakoids; CS, carboxysomes.

but the expected transcriptional changes (under different nitrogen
concentrations) could not be conﬁrmed (Sevilla et al., 2010).
Considering the fact that the cellular redox state inﬂuences NtcA
expression (Alfonso et al., 2001) and that NtcA and Fur regulons
have been previously shown to overlap in cyanobacteria (Lopez-
Gomollon et al., 2007), NtcA binding to the mcy promoter region
may reﬂect the dependence of mcy transcription on the redox
status of the cell rather than on nitrogen availability.

Elucidation of mcy genes in different genera also provided a
basis for the reconstruction of the evolutionary history of these
genes. Whereas the sporadic distribution of genes suggested an
impact of horizontal gene transfer on mcy evolution, the com-
parison of mcy genes from various cyanobacterial genera with
house-keeping genes could clearly rule out the possibility of a
lateral transfer between different cyanobacterial genera. An evo-
lutionary scenario has been proposed in which the ancestral mcy
genes were already present in the last common ancestor of all
present-day cyanobacteria (Rantala et al., 2004). The sporadic dis-
tribution was explained as a result of frequent gene losses. This

hypothesis is supported by the observation of ongoing deletion
events of partial or complete mcy gene clusters in natural and
laboratory populations (Schatz et al., 2005; Christiansen et al.,
2008). Prior to the phylogenetic analysis and related data showing
dynamic changes in the mcy genes, a major role of microcystin
as a feeding deterrent was widely accepted. However, since the
last ancestor of all extant cyanobacteria preceded the appearance
of the metazoans, a primary defense role of microcystin against
eukaryote grazers is questionable. It was recently demonstrated
that microcystin binds to thiol groups of various proteins (Zilliges
et al., 2011; see below) similarly to its binding to certain eukary-
otic protein phosphatases. It seems likely that the toxic effect of
microcystin (due to inhibition of these phosphatases) reﬂects a
recent evolution of these proteins rather than its primary role.
In this respect it is worth mentioning that a recent bioinformatic
study suggested that the sxt genes encoding saxitoxin, a cyanobac-
terial neurotoxin, are also ancient and that potassium rather than
sodium channels was the original target of this toxin (Murray et al.,
2011).

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 138 | 3

Kaplan et al.

Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF M. AERUGINOSA AND
MICROCYSTIN-DEFICIENT MUTANTS
As mentioned above, strain-speciﬁc differences in the rate of
microcystin production are a major problem for the interpreta-
tion and comparison of studies on the impact of environmental
stimuli. Moreover, comparative growth or feeding assays with toxic
and non-toxic strains are biased by other strain-speciﬁc differences
in addition to toxicity. The elucidation of microcystin biosyn-
thesis genes provided the possibility to construct mutants that
are deﬁcient in microcystin production, but otherwise identical
to the corresponding wild-type strains (Dittmann et al., 1997).
The use of these mutants in comparative studies has signiﬁ-
cantly advanced our understanding about the biological role of
microcystin.

−2 s

The microcystin-deﬁcient mutant ΔmcyB and the correspond-
ing wild-type strain were used in feeding studies with Daphnia.
These studies revealed that different Daphnia sp. could not distin-
guish between the wild-type and the microcystin-deﬁcient mutant;
both strains were ingested in similar rates (Rohrlack et al., 1999,
2001). These ﬁnding argued against a primary role as feeding
deterrent as was widely accepted at the time. Wild-type and
mutant were also compared for their growth and pigmentation
under different light regimes (Hesse et al., 2001). The growth
rates of the mutant and the WT were similar when grown at
−1 but the absorp-
light intensities of 4–110 μmol photons m
tion spectra in the range of photosynthetic active radiance varied
signiﬁcantly. The mutant cells possessed lower contents of chloro-
phyll a and of several carotenoids under these conditions (Hesse
et al., 2001). Furthermore, a lower capability of mutant ΔmcyB to
acclimate to low inorganic carbon concentrations was proposed
(Jahnichen et al., 2007). These results were supported by growth
competition studies using M. aeruginosa PCC7806 and mutant
ΔmcyB. The microcystin-producing wild-type had a strong selec-
tive advantage under low CO2 conditions (Van de Waal et al.,
2011). A spontaneous Microcystis mutant, strain MG-J, bearing
a deletion in mcy and unable to produce microcystins was iso-
lated from a toxic wild-type strain MG-K (Schatz et al., 2005).
Laboratory and ﬁeld experiments comparing the wild-type with
this spontaneous mutant indicated an advantage of the toxic
strain over its non-toxic successor. When grown separated by
a membrane, which allowed passage of the media but not the
cells, MG-K severely inhibited the growth of MG-J. In addition,
when MG strains were placed in dialysis bags in Lake Kinneret
(Sea of Galilee), Israel, during the season in which Microcystis is
often observed, cells of MG-J lysed but not MG-K (Schatz et al.,
2005). Taken together, the data support the notion that micro-
cystins play an important physiological role in the producing
strains.

This, however, is difﬁcult to accommodate with the observa-
tion that under natural conditions non-toxic colonies are present,
sometimes in large proportion, together with toxic ones. What
determines the proportion of microcystins-producing-cells in the
natural Microcystis population is not clear. A thorough direct
analysis of single colonies revealed that most of the colonies in
the examined lake did not produce microcystins (Fastner et al.,
2001).

TOWARD CLARIFICATION OF THE MECHANISTIC ROLE OF
MICROCYSTIN-EXTRACELLULAR ROLE
The availability of the microcystin-deﬁcient mutant also offered
the possibility for a more detailed analysis of the role of micro-
cystin at the molecular level. Proteomic comparisons between
wild-type and mutant strains revealed the differential accumu-
lation of a prominent protein spot. The protein identiﬁed by
a reverse genetic approach was designated MrpA (microcystin-
related protein A) and shows some similarity to the RhiA pro-
tein of the symbiotic strain Rhizobium leguminosarum biovar
viciae (Dittmann et al., 2001). Moreover, the mrpA gene was co-
transcribed with a second gene, mrpB that codes for a protein
with high similarity to the RhiB protein encoded as part of the
same rhiABC operon (Dittmann et al., 2001). The Rhi proteins
were implicated in symbiotic nodule formation. Interestingly, the
operon is under the control of extracellular acylhomoserine lac-
tone (AHL) type signals in Rhizobium (Rodelas et al., 1999). This
raised the possibility of a role of microcystin as an intercellular
signal. Indeed, microcystin is released from Microcystis cells, in
particular above a critical light threshold (Wiedner et al., 2003).
Transport of microcystin through the inner membrane might be
mediated by the activity of McyH, which shows homology to ABC
transporter (Figure 1). A knock-out of the corresponding gene
mcyH, however, leads to a complete loss of toxin production (Pear-
son et al., 2004) and thus the mutant could not be used to study the
impact of McyH on internal microcystin level or assess a speciﬁc
role in sensing of extracellular microcystin.

A possible extracellular role could nevertheless be assessed by an
external addition of microcystin. Schatz et al. (2007) could show
that addition of supernatants from cells lysed either mechanically
or because of stress conditions leads to a strong upregulation of
microcystin biosynthesis genes in the remaining cells. A less pro-
nounced autoinduction effect could also be seen after addition of
pure microcystin or other peptides, micropeptin, and microginin,
produced by Microcystis which, together with microcystin, formed
the stronger effect of the cell-free supernatant. Noticeably, the
response of the remaining cells is strongly affected by the age
of the culture but was hardly detected in older cultures. Analy-
sis of the abundance of mcy transcripts clearly indicated a large
accumulation at stationary phase thereby reducing the response
to externally provided microcystin. On the other hand, mcy tran-
scripts were hardly detected in cultures maintained in early log
phase for several generations, but these cells responded strongly to
the addition of microcystins or the cell-free supernatant by upreg-
ulating the expression of mcy genes. It was therefore suggested
that microcystins serve as infochemicals; their release to the media
by lysing cells due to various stressors is sensed by the rest of the
Microcystis cells which upregulate mcy transcription (Figure 1;
Schatz et al., 2007). Larger production of microcystin may pro-
mote the ﬁtness of the Microcystis cells and their competitiveness
with other phytoplankton species (reviewed by Pﬂugmacher, 2002;
Babica et al., 2006).

Furthermore, several studies have supported a microcystin role
in Microcystis colony formation. The expression pattern of two
extracellular proteins, the lectin MVN (Kehr et al., 2006) and the
glycoprotein MrpC (Zilliges et al., 2008) were strongly altered in

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 138 | 4

Kaplan et al.

Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites

mutant strains lacking microcystin. MrpC is the dominant extra-
cellular protein in Microcystis and directly implicated in cell–cell
contacts between Microcystis cells (Zilliges et al., 2008). Both MVN
and MrpC seem to be speciﬁc for certain Microcystis ecotypes. It is
not clear yet, if microcystin is directly involved in morphotype for-
mation and the mechanism whereby it inﬂuences the cell surface
proteins (Figure 1).

therefore be the main biotic parameters distinguishing toxic from
non-toxic strains. This is at least partly supported by growth exper-
iments that revealed an advantage of natural toxic over non-toxic
strains under low (Schatz et al., 2005) but not under high carbon
concentrations (Van de Waal et al., 2011), and an advantage of
toxic strains under elevated temperatures (Dziallas and Grossart,
2011).

EXPERIMENTAL SUPPORT FOR AN INTRACELLULAR ROLE OF
MICROCYSTIN
As indicated, physiological experiments using wild-type and
mutants suggested that the ability to produce microcystin is ben-
eﬁcial for the Microcystis cells. Elucidation of the M. aeruginosa
PCC7806 genome enabled a more comprehensive analysis of mol-
ecular differences between wild-type and microcystin-deﬁcient
mutant such as via proteomic comparisons in cells maintained
under various conditions such as high light and darkness (Zilliges
et al., 2011). Remarkably, under all the conditions examined loss of
microcystin led to considerable alteration in the protein pattern.
Noticeably, a large number of spots could be assigned to Calvin–
Benson cycle proteins, the phycobilisome, to redox-dependent
reductases, and unidentiﬁed proteins (Zilliges et al., 2011). In par-
ticular, the differences in protein isoform formation were striking.
Generally, the wild-type showed more protein isoforms than the
microcystin-deﬁcient mutant (Zilliges et al., 2011). In addition,
it was shown that microcystin binds covalently to many of the
differentially accumulating proteins in vitro and in vivo including
phycobilisome antennae proteins and RbcL, the large subunit of
Rubisco. This may at least partly explain the additional isoforms
for proteins in the microcystin-producing wild-type (Figure 1; Zil-
liges et al., 2011) and the change in pigmentation during growth
experiments (Hesse et al., 2001). Microcystin attachment to pro-
teins was strongly enhanced under high light and oxidative stress
conditions, raising the possibility of a consequent effect on their
activity and stability. Many of the differentially accumulating pro-
teins are indeed “cysteine-sensitive,” i.e., subject to degradation
upon oxidation of their cysteines following oxidative stress. A sta-
bilizing effect of the microcystin binding was conﬁrmed in the case
of RbcL that was clearly more resistant to protease digestion in the
wild-type (Zilliges et al., 2011). Moreover, growth experiments
performed under oxidative stress or very high light conditions
revealed a clear advantage for the microcystin-producing wild-
type (Zilliges et al., 2011) and electron microscopy showed the
localization of microcystin in the thylakoid and carboxysome areas
(Gerbersdorf, 2006). These data may explain the differences in
pigmentation and adaptation to low inorganic carbon concentra-
tions discussed above and explain some of the controversial issues
in earlier physiological studies. The fact that high light conditions
lead to an increase in mcy transcription but not microcystin pro-
duction is likely due to strong bias in microcystin detection due to
covalent binding to proteins.

Another proteomic study revealed similar differences in the
protein patterns between six different natural toxic and non-toxic
strains, particularly in nine spots differentially accumulated in all
toxic strains. Those were assigned to carbon–nitrogen metabolism
and redox maintenance (Alexova et al., 2011). Differences in the
acclimation to changing redox or light or carbon conditions may

CYLINDROSPERMOPSIN
OCCURRENCE AND TOXICITY
Cylindrospermopsin (CYN) is an alkaloid toxin produced by
several ﬁlamentous cyanobacteria including Aphanizomenon oval-
isporum (hereafter Aphanizomenon), Cylindrospermopsis raci-
borskii, Oscillatoria sp. PCC 6506, Anabaena bergii, Umezkia
nathans, Aphanizomenon ﬂos-aquae, and others (Banker et al.,
1997; Kaebernick and Neilan, 2001; Schembri et al., 2001; Preussel
et al., 2006; Mazmouz et al., 2010). CYN was shown to accumulate
in the environment (Kinnear, 2010) and inhibit protein and glu-
tathione synthesis leading to cell death (Runnegar and Lu, 1994;
Runnegar et al., 1995, 2002; Froscio et al., 2001; Metcalf et al.,
2004). Effects of genotoxicity and on cholesterol levels have also
been reported (Humpage et al., 2000, 2005; Shen et al., 2002; Reis-
ner et al., 2004). Activity of cytochrome P450 enzyme system is
apparently essential for the development of CYN toxicity (Run-
negar et al., 1995). Damage to DNA (Straser et al., 2011) and
carcinogenic activity were also suggested (Humpage et al., 2000;
Murphy and Thomas, 2001). The role of speciﬁc residues essen-
tial for CYN toxicity is emerging in that the uracil moiety and the
hydroxyl at position C7 are essential (Banker et al., 2001).

Due to its practical importance, emphasis was placed on abi-
otic conditions under which blooms of CYN-forming organisms
may occur (Hadas et al., 1999, 2002; Burford and Davis, 2011; De
Figueiredo et al., 2011) and to assessment of the effect of abiotic
parameters on CYN production under ﬁeld and laboratory con-
ditions such as S and P limiting conditions (Bacsi et al., 2006).
A comprehensive description of the many excellent studies on
bloom conditions in various water bodies is beyond the scope
of this paper. One example is the case of Aphanizomenon pop-
ulation in Lake Kinneret that showed close agreement between
the optimal conditions for its growth in the laboratory and those
which occurred during its bloom in 1994 (Hadas et al., 2002).
An important aspect is the size of the inoculum; formation of
akinetes; and their germination thereby raising the new popula-
tion is poorly understood and requires further research (Sukenik
et al., 2007). Maximal CYN formation in C. raciborskii is observed
under light intensity higher than required for optimal growth
(Dyble et al., 2006), suggesting that the redox state of the cells
is involved. Apparently the status of the C. raciborskii culture,
logarithmic, or stationary, is also critical to the rate of CYN
formation. In both diazotrophic and nitrate supplied log phase
cultures, CYN accumulation is linear with the growth rate but
decoupling between the two parameters is observed at stationary
phase (Hawkins et al., 2001). Similarly, differential effects of tem-
perature on growth and CYN production in various C. raciborskii
strains were observed (Saker and Grifﬁths, 2000). Taken together,
the bulk of the data indicate that little is known about the cel-
lular mechanisms involved in the regulation of CYN formation

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 138 | 5

Kaplan et al.

Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites

and their interaction with the abiotic conditions experienced by
the cells. Furthermore, as in the case of microcystin discussed
above, comparison of published data is rather difﬁcult because of
lack of information on the exact conditions and the very different
conditions in ﬁeld and laboratory experiments.

THE aoa/cyr GENE CLUSTERS AND CYN BIOSYNTHESIS
The mechanism of CYN biosynthesis was partly resolved by fol-
lowing production in C. raciborskii cultures that were supple-
mented with stable 13C, 18O, 15N, and 3H isotopes, suggesting
that ﬁve molecules of acetate are catalytically condensed by a
polyketide-synthase (PKS) to form the carbon skeleton of CYN.
Two other carbons and one of the nitrogen atoms of the guanidine
moiety are probably donated by glycine. Guanidinoacetic acid was
proposed as a source for two nitrogen atoms of the guanidino moi-
ety used as a starter unit that initiates the biosynthetic process. The
guanidinoacetic acid is probably formed by amidination of glycine
by amidinotransferase but the exact donor of the other N atoms in
the guanidino moiety, most likely arginine, has not been resolved
(Burgoyne et al., 2000; Murphy and Thomas, 2001; Shalev-Alon
et al., 2002; Pearson et al., 2010). Following the recognition that
PKS and amidinotransferase are involved, Shalev-Alon et al. (2002)
identiﬁed a genomic region in Aphanizomenon likely involved in
CYN biosynthesis; recognition of a similar genomic region in C.
raciborskii (Mihali et al., 2008) and Oscillatoria sp. strain PCC 6506
(Mazmouz et al., 2010) followed (Figure 2). It should be noted,
however, that we are missing unequivocal evidence that the aoa/cyr
gene clusters in these organisms are engaged in CYN biosynthesis.
Although genes essential for CYN biosynthesis are present in these
clusters, since these organisms are, so far, not amenable to genetic
manipulations it was not possible to inactivate these genes and
thereby provide a critical evidence that we have been seeking.

Support to the notion that the aoa/cyr gene cluster is indeed
involved in CYN biosynthesis rests on the observation that a
sulfotransferase-encoding gene essential for CYN synthesis, cyrJ,
is present only in CYN-producing C. raciborskii strains (Mihali
et al., 2008; Alster et al., 2010). Similarly, cyrJ is detected in
four CYN-producing Oscillatoria strains but lacking in a non-
CYN-producing strain (Mazmouz et al., 2010). Finally, non-toxic
Aphanizomenon isolated from Lake Kinneret possess aoaA and
aoaC but is missing aoaJ (Ballot et al., 2011).

Following the identiﬁcation of the gene clusters putatively
involved in CYN biosynthesis (Figure 2 and below), an attractive
(and most likely) scheme of the cascade of events leading to CYN
formation was proposed (Mihali et al., 2008; Pearson et al., 2010;
the reader is referred to these publications for a comprehensive
discussion of the proposed scheme). However, decisive evidence
that this is indeed the case must await biochemical conﬁrma-
tion. Furthermore, the proposed scheme does not account for the
formation of two CYN analogs, 7-deoxycylindrospermopsin (7-
deoxy-CYN) and 7-epicylindrospermopsin (7-epi-CYN) whose
relative abundance varies in different cyanobacterial species (see
Mazmouz et al., 2011), suggesting alterations in the activity and
regulation of various steps in CYN production. It was suggested
that CyrI, a 2-oxoglutarate-dependent iron oxygenase performs
the last step of CYN biosynthesis from 7-deoxy-CYN (Mazmouz
et al., 2011). These authors raised the possibility that a relaxed

FIGURE 2 | The aoa/cyr clusters putatively involved in
cylindrospermopsin biosynthesis in four cyanobacterial species. The
scheme was constructed based on data for Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii
(Mihali et al., 2008), Oscillatoria sp. PCC 6506C (Mazmouz et al., 2010),
Aphanizomenon strain 10E6 (Accession Number, WOS, 000281239600017;
Stuken and Jakobsen, 2010), and Aphanizomenon ovalisporum strain
ILC146 (draft, yet unpublished sequence). Open reading frames without
designation represent hypothetical proteins. Note the transposase (trp)
genes and transcription factor (XRE TF) in the sequence of Aphanizomenon
strain ILC146. The high sequence similarity between genes in the four
species suggests a common ancestor but the signiﬁcant differences in
gene organization may indicate lateral gene transfers and transposases
involvement (see text). Note that despite the presence of genes essential
for CYN biosynthesis, we are still missing experimental evidence for the
role of this cluster.

stereospeciﬁcity of CyrI produces both stereoisomers at position 7.
Alternatively, an unidentiﬁed hydroxylase produces the 7-epi-CYN
from 7-deoxy-CYN. The levels of CyrI or its activity in various
CYN-producing cyanobacteria should be examined to account
for the variability in the abundance of 7-deoxy-CYN compared
to CYN; 7-deoxy-CYN is a minor product in C. raciborskii and
Raphidiopsis curvata (Li et al., 2001) but a major one in Lyngbya
wollei (Seifert et al., 2007). On the other hand 7-epi-CYN was
detected only in Aphanizomenon in small quantities.

Figure 2 shows the genomic organization of the aoa/cyr in four
CYN-producing cyanobacteria. In the absence of a detailed phylo-
genetic analysis it is hard to assess the development of these clusters
but high similarity between the genes does indicate that they are
evolutionarily related, possibly from a common ancestor, and that
an horizontal gene transfer was involved (Stuken and Jakobsen,
2010). The differences in the gene organization clearly indicate
divergence from this ancestor; shufﬂing of the aoa/cyr genes is sub-
stantial. The two Aphanizomenon clusters are quite similar but with
two main exceptions. Two aoaO genes can be identiﬁed in strain
ILC146 (draft, yet unpublished sequence) but we could not detect
it in strain 10E6 (Accession Number, WOS, 000281239600017;

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 138 | 6

Kaplan et al.

Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites

Stuken and Jakobsen, 2010). Altogether, the role of aoaO/cyrO in
CYN production, if any, is not clear due to its low homology to
other genes in the data bases. Again, a genetic approach could
resolve this question. Compared with strain ILC146, the region of
aoaH-K underwent reorganization in strain 10E6 with the aoaK
encoded on the opposite strand and precedes aoaH. The presence
of several transposase encoding genes is noted and they may be
involved in the reorganizations.

REGULATION OF TRANSCRIPTION
Following the identiﬁcation of the genomic regions putatively
involved in CYN biosynthesis in Aphanizomenon (Shalev-Alon
et al., 2002), C. raciborskii (see Neilan et al., 2008), and Oscilla-
toria strain PCC 6506 (Mazmouz et al., 2010), it became possible
to study their regulation. In both Aphanizomenon species but not
in C. raciborskii and Oscillatoria sp. (Figure 2) the amidinotrans-
ferase and polyketide-synthase encoding genes, aoaA and aoaC,
respectively, are transcribed on the reverse strands. Analysis of
the genomic region between them identiﬁed two transcription
start points for each of these genes, differentially expressed under
nitrogen and light-stress conditions (Shalev-Alon et al., 2002)
and by phosphate availability (Bar-Yosef et al., 2010). Gel shift
assays and DNA afﬁnity columns isolated a protein that speciﬁ-
cally binds to a 150-bp DNA fragment from the region between
aoaA and aoaC in Aphanizomenon ILC146 and MS/MS analyses
identiﬁed similarity to AbrB in other cyanobacteria and in Bacillus
sp. Comparison of the native AbrB isolated from A. ovalisporum
with that obtained after cloning and over-expression of abrB in
E. coli identiﬁed speciﬁc post-translational modiﬁcations in the
native cyanobacterial AbrB. This includes N-acetylation of residue
T2 and methylation of speciﬁc residues, which are all missing in the
protein expressed in E. coli. A gene encoding a putative acetylase
was identiﬁed in the draft genomic sequence of Aphanizomenon
ILC146 (yet unpublished) but, as mentioned with respect to the
role of aoa genes, failure to genetically modify or inactivate genes
in this organism does not enable recognition of the signiﬁcance of
these modiﬁcations to aoaA/C expression. The exact role of these
post-translational modiﬁcations to the regulation of CYN forma-
tion is yet to be established. It is worth mentioning that AbrB-like
proteins were thereafter recognized in various cyanobacteria. In
Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 they were implicated in the regulation
of several genes belonging to inorganic carbon uptake (Lieman-
Hurwitz et al., 2009), nitrogen metabolism and C–N regulation
(Yamauchi et al., 2011), the bidirectional hydrogenase (Oliveira
and Lindblad, 2008), and in iron superoxide dismutase in Nostoc
sp. strain PCC 7120 (Agervald et al., 2010). However, as much
as information gained from these ﬁelds may contribute to our
understanding of the involvement of these AbrB-like (designated
CyAbrB) in CYN formation, a comprehensive analysis is beyond
the scope of the present review.

THE BIOLOGICAL ROLE OF CYN
Laboratory and ﬁeld experiments revealed the biological role
and function of CYN (Bar-Yosef et al., 2010). Many microor-
ganisms, from bacteria to yeast, respond to inorganic phosphate
(Pi) limitation by expressing their PHO regulon and excretion of
alkaline phosphatase (APase) thereby enhancing the supply of Pi

from organic compounds and improving their competitiveness for
resources and domination. Analysis of the abundance of Aphani-
zomenon and APase activity in Lake Kinneret during the summers
of 1994–2009 showed strong correlation between these parame-
ters, suggesting that APase emerged from Pi-limited ﬁlaments,
but closer analysis clearly indicated this was not the case (Bar-
Yosef et al., 2010). Application of enzyme labeled ﬂuorescence
(ELF) on lake samples showed APase in various organisms but
not in Aphanizomenon, and staining by DAPI revealed high level
of polyphosphate bodies (PPBs) in Aphanizomenon. ELF-APase
signals were detected in Aphanizomenon only after it exploited
the PPBs under prolonged Pi deprivation in laboratory cultures
or toward the end of its natural bloom, in the autumn (Bar-Yosef
et al., 2010). Aphanizomenon cultures respond to removal of exter-
nal Pi by fast induction of CYN production and only part of its
PHO regulon, including the high afﬁnity Pi uptake system, PstS,
and phoD, encoding an internal APase. In contrast, transcripts
encoding extracellular APase and its activity were observed only
after 5–7 days during which it consumes the internal Pi.

Addition of spent media from Aphanizomenon or CYN to var-
ious phytoplankton species (Chlamydomonas reinhardtii used as a
model organism) led to induction of genes typically up-regulated
by Pi-limitation (Bar-Yosef et al., 2010) and a large rise in the
extracellular APase activity despite the presence of ample Pi in
the medium. Using ELF-APase to stain mixed cultures of Apha-
nizomenon with Chlamydomonas or Debarya sp. showed APase in
the latter two but not in Aphanizomenon. These data suggested
that CYN induces the excretion of APase by other phytoplank-
tons in the water body. Aphanizomenon can then compete for
the Pi released consequent to APase activity from other organ-
isms. Apparently Aphanizomenon does it quite successfully, grows
rapidly, and dominates in the seasonal bloom. CYN is used to
“enslave” other organisms to fulﬁll the Pi demands of the “toxic”
strains. It explains the observed rise in APase activity in the water
body during the early phase of Aphanizomenon bloom and reveals
a mechanism whereby it can form massive blooms despite limiting
Pi conditions.

Noticeably, the response of target organisms to Aphanizomenon
spent medium was greater than observed following application
of puriﬁed CYN, although its concentration in the used media
was considerably smaller. This suggests a synergistic involvement
of other secondary metabolites in the used media, the nature of
which is not known. It resembles the stronger induction of mcy
genes in Microcystis sp. by its own spent medium rather than by
isolated microcystin, discussed above.

Naturally we expect other CYN producers such as C. raciborskii
to induce APase in other organisms. Lack of ELF-APase staining
in lake samples of Anabaena sp., Planktothrix sp., and Planktolyn-
gbya sp. (Rengefors et al., 2003) and delayed APase secretion in
Pi-deprived Trichodesmium sp. (Orchard et al., 2009) may indi-
cate similar capabilities in other cyanobacterial lineages that are
not known to produce CYN.

Finally, there are numerous reports over the last decade showing
a signiﬁcant rise in the abundance of toxic ﬁlamentous N2 ﬁxing
cyanobacteria in freshwater bodies (See Sukenik et al., this issue).
The reason is not known, particularly as it occurs simultaneously
with intensive efforts of lake management authorities to reduce

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 138 | 7

Kaplan et al.

Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites

nutrient inﬂow from the watershed. The rise in cyanobacterial
abundance has been attributed to various causes, including global
warming, but in view of the role attributed to CYN we raise an
alternative possibility that superior competitiveness for Pi enables
these organisms to ﬂourish in such lakes. In terms of competitive-
ness, it is worth mentioning that N allocation to produce CYN is
cheaper for the cells than APase secretion (Bar-Yosef et al., 2010).

OUTLOOK: THE MAIN OPEN QUESTIONS
Here we focused on the biological role of two cyanobacterial
toxins, microcystin and cylindrospermopsin, but many open ques-
tions need to be resolved. We proposed external and internal roles
of microcystin and presented experimental evidence to support
our view. Given the phylogenetic analysis that revealed that mcy
(and sxt ) are ancient but were lost in most of the present-day
cyanobacterial strains, we raise the question what, if any, fulﬁlls
these biological roles in the other cyanobacterial strains lack-
ing microcystin. What were the evolutional drivers that led to
the deletion of mcy genes from most strains? We are missing an
experiment whereby spent media, and/or supernatant from bro-
ken cells of one of the strains for which genetic information and
tools (such as microarray) are available, will be applied to its own
population. This will be followed by an analysis of the transcript
abundances. Perhaps some other secondary metabolites perform
these roles, as do micropeptin and microginin for the infochemi-
cal task in Microcystis. Furthermore, given the advantage of toxic
over non-toxic Microcystis strains in growth competition experi-
ments, why do we often ﬁnd them inhabiting the same habitat,
indoor as well as outdoor? Is it possible that while saving the
resources necessary to produce microcystin, the non-toxic strains
use microcystin produced by the toxic ones? What is in fact the
role of McyH, which shows homology to ABC transporters but
its inactivation blocks microcystin biosynthesis? Does it, like some

other transporters, serve as the sensor for microcystin presence in
the environment?

For CYN, with the emergence of more aoa/cyr sequences, it
is becoming possible to perform a phylogenetic analysis for these
gene clusters as well but the main task is to develop the means
to make at least one of the CYN-producing strains amenable to
genetic manipulations. We are still missing experimental evidence
that this gene cluster is involved in CYN production. What are
the mechanisms whereby presence of CYN induces the PHO reg-
ulon in other phytoplankton species even in the presence of ample
Pi externally? What are the mechanisms enabling the differential
expression of some of the PHO regulon genes in Aphanizomenon
whereby external alkaline phosphatase is blocked as long as inter-
nal P is available in the form of polyphosphate bodies? What is
the nature of the other components in the spent medium from
Aphanizomenon that act synergistically with CYN? Is this ability
to improve its own P supply by enslaving other organisms unique
to Aphanizomenon? Can a similar mechanism be found in other
organisms for P or other nutrients? These are just some of the
open questions ensuring an exciting research period ahead of us.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. R. Reinhardt and Dr. M. Kube from Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, for their guidance and
support with the molecular analysis of A. ovalisporum genome.
Research in our laboratories is supported by grants from the Israel
Science Foundation to Aaron Kaplan; Israeli Science and Technol-
ogy Ministry (MOST) to Aaron Kaplan and Assaf Sukenik; the
German Research Foundation (Di910/3-1) to Elke Dittmann; the
Hebrew University of Jerusalem to Aaron Kaplan; the Israel Water
Authority to Assaf Sukenik and Aaron Kaplan; the Yohai Ben-
Noon Foundation to Moshe Harel; and by the EU-NEST program
to Assaf Sukenik, Ora Hadas, and Ruth N. Kaplan-Levy.

REFERENCES
Abraham, E. R. (1998). The generation
of plankton patchiness by turbulent
stirring. Nature 391, 577–580.

Agervald, A., Baebprasert, W., Zhang, X.
H., Incharoensakdi, A., Lindblad, P.,
and Stensjo, K. (2010). The CyAbrB
transcription factor CalA regulates
the iron superoxide dismutase in
Nostoc sp. strain PCC 7120. Environ.
Microbiol. 12, 2826–2837.

Alexova, R., Haynes, P. A., Ferrari, B.
C., and Neilan, B. A. (2011). Com-
parative protein expression in dif-
ferent strains of the bloom-forming
cyanobacterium Microcystis aerugi-
nosa. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 10, M110
003749.

Alfonso, M., Perewoska, I., and Kir-
ilovsky, D. (2001). Redox control of
ntcA gene expression in Synechocys-
tis sp. PCC 6803: nitrogen availabil-
ity and electron transport regulate
the levels of the NtcA protein. Plant
Physiol. 125, 969–981.

Alster, A., Kaplan-Levy, R. N.,
Sukenik, A.,
and Zohary, T.
(2010). Morphology and phylogeny

a non-toxic

invasive Cylin-
of
drospermopsis
from a
Mediterranean Lake. Hydrobiologia
639, 115–128.

raciborskii

Annila, A., Lehtimaki, J., Mattila, K.,
Eriksson, J. E., Sivonen, K., Rantala,
T. T., and Drakenberg, T. (1996).
Solution structure of nodularin.
An inhibitor of serine/threonine-
speciﬁc protein phosphatases. J. Biol.
Chem. 271, 16695–16702.

Babica, P., Blaha, L., and Marsalek, B.
(2006). Exploring the natural role
of microcystins – a review of effects
on photoautotrophic organisms. J.
Phycol. 42, 9–20.

Bacsi, I., Vasas, G., Suranyi, G., Hamvas,
M., Mathe, C., Toth, E., Grigorszy,
I., Gaspar, A., Toth, S., and Borbely,
G. (2006). Alteration of cylindros-
permopsin production in sulfate- or
phosphate-starved cyanobacterium
ovalisporum.
Aphanizomenon
FEMS Microbiol.
Lett.
259,
303–310.

Ballot, A., Ramm,

J., Rundberget,
T., Kaplan-Levy, R. N., Hadas,
O., Sukenik, A.,
and Wiedner,

(2011). Occurrence of non-

C.
cylindrospermopsin-producing
Aphanizomenon ovalisporum and
Anabaena bergii
in Lake Kin-
neret (Israel). J. Plankton Res. 33,
1736–1746.

Banker, R., Carmeli, S., Hadas, O.,
Teltsch, B., Porat, R., and Sukenik,
A. (1997). Identiﬁcation of cylin-
drospermopsin in the cyanobac-
terium Aphanizomenon ovalispo-
rum (Cyanophyceae) isolated from
Lake Kinneret, Israel. J. Phycol. 33,
613–616.

Banker, R., Carmeli, S., Werman, M.,
Teltsch, B., Porat, R., and Sukenik,
A. (2001). Uracil moiety is required
for
the cyanobacter-
ial hepatotoxin cylindrospermopsin.
J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 62,
281–288.

toxicity of

Bar-Yosef, Y., Sukenik, A., Hadas, O.,
Viner-Mozzini, Y., and Kaplan, A.
(2010). Enslavement in the water
body by toxic Aphanizomenon oval-
isporum,
inducing alkaline phos-
phatase in phytoplanktons. Curr.
Biol. 20, 1557–1561.

Botes, D. P., Tuinman, A. A., Wessels,
P. L., Viljoen, C. C., Kruger, H.,
Williams, D. H., Santikarn, S., Smith,
R. J., and Hammond, S. J. (1984).
The structure of cyanoginosin-LA, a
cyclic heptapeptide toxin from the
cyanobacterium Microcystis aerugi-
nosa. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Trans. I 1,
2311–2318.

Burford, M. A., and Davis, T. W. (2011).
Physical and chemical processes pro-
moting dominance of
the toxic
cyanobacterium Cylindrospermopsis
raciborskii. Chin. J. Oceanol. Limnol.
29, 883–891.

Burgoyne, D. L., Hemscheidt, T. K.,
Moore, R. E., and Runnegar, M.
T. C. (2000). Biosynthesis of cylin-
drospermopsin, J. Org. Chem. 65,
152–156.

Carmichael, W. W. (1997). The cyan-

otoxins. Adv. Bot. Res. 9, 211–256.

Christiansen, G., Fastner, J., Erhard,
M., Borner, T., and Dittmann,
E. (2003). Microcystin biosynthe-
sis in Planktothrix: genes, evolution,
and manipulation. J. Bacteriol. 185,
564–572.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 138 | 8

Kaplan et al.

Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites

Christiansen, G., Molitor, C., Philmus,
B., and Kurmayer, R. (2008). Non-
toxic strains of cyanobacteria are
the result of major gene dele-
tion events induced by a transpos-
able element. Mol. Biol. Evol. 25,
1695–1704.

De Figueiredo, D. R., Goncalves, A.
M. M., Castro, B. B., Goncalves, F.,
Pereira, M. J., and Correia, A. (2011).
Differential inter- and intra-speciﬁc
responses of Aphanizomenon strains
to nutrient
limitation and algal
growth inhibition. J. Plankton Res.
33, 1606–1616.

Dittmann, E., Neilan, B. A., and Borner,
T. (2001). Molecular biology of
peptide and polyketide biosynthe-
sis in cyanobacteria. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 57, 467–473.

Dittmann, E., Neilan, B. A., Erhard, M.,
von Doehren, H., and Boerner, T.
(1997). Insertional mutagenesis of
a peptide synthetase gene that is
responsible for hepatotoxin produc-
tion in the cyanobacterium Micro-
cystis aeruginosa PCC 7806. Mol.
Microbiol. 26, 779–787.

Dittmann, E., and Wiegand, C. (2006).
Cyanobacterial toxins – occurrence,
biosynthesis and impact on human
affairs. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 50, 7–17.
Dyble, J., Tester, P. A., and Litaker, R.
W. (2006). Effects of light intensity
on cylindrospermopsin production
in the cyanobacterial HAB species
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii. Afr. J.
Mar. Sci. 28, 309–312.

Dziallas, C., and Grossart, H. P.
(2011). Temperature and biotic fac-
tors inﬂuence bacterial communities
associated with the cyanobacterium
Microcystis sp. Environ. Microbiol.
13, 1632–1641.

Engene, N., Choi, H., Esquenazi, E.,
Rottacker, E. C., Ellisman, M. H.,
Dorrestein, P. C., and Gerwick, W.
H. (2011). Underestimated biodiver-
sity as a major explanation for the
perceived rich secondary metabo-
lite capacity of the cyanobacterial
genus Lyngbya. Environ. Microbiol.
13, 1601–1610.

Fastner,

J., Erhard, M.,

and von
Dohren, H. (2001). Determination
of oligopeptide diversity within a
natural population of Microcystis
spp. (cyanobacteria) by typing sin-
gle colonies by matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization-time of ﬂight
mass spectrometry. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 67, 5069–5076.

Froscio, S. M., Humpage, A. R., Bur-
cham, P. C., and Falconer, I. R.
(2001). Cell-free protein synthesis
inhibition assay for the cyanobacte-
rial toxin cylindrospermopsin. Envi-
ron. Toxicol. 16, 408–412.

Gerbersdorf, S. U. (2006). An advanced
technique for immuno-labelling of
microcystins in cryosectioned cells
of Microcystis aeruginosa PCC 7806
(cyanobacteria),
implementations
of an experiment with varying light
scenarios
and culture densities.
Toxicon 47, 218–228.

Ginn, H. P., Pearson, L. A., and Neilan,
B. A. (2010). NtcA from Microcystis
aeruginosa PCC 7806 is autoregula-
tory and binds to the microcystin
promoter. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
76, 4362–4368.

Grifﬁths, D. J., and Saker, M. L. (2003).
The palm island mystery disease 20
years on: a review of research on
the cyanotoxin cylindrospermopsin.
Environ. Toxicol. 18, 78–93.

Hadas, O., Pinkas, R., Delphine, E.,
Vardi, A., Kaplan, A., and Sukenik,
A. (1999). Limnological and eco-
physiological aspects of Aphani-
zomenon ovalisporum bloom in
Lake Kinneret. J. Plankton Res. 21,
1439–1453.

Hadas, O., Pinkas, R., Malinsky-
Roshansky, N., Shalev-Alon, G., Del-
phine, E., Berner, T., Sukenik, A.,
and Kaplan, A. (2002). Physiologi-
cal variables determined under lab-
oratory conditions may explain the
bloom of Aphanizomenon ovalispo-
rum in Lake Kinneret. Eur. J. Phycol.
37, 259–267.

Hawkins, P. R., Putt, E., Falconer, I., and
Humpage, A. (2001). Phenotypical
variation in a toxic strain of the phy-
toplankter, Cylindrospermopsis raci-
borskii (Nostocales, Cyanophyceae)
during batch culture. Environ. Toxi-
col. 16, 460–467.

Hesse, K., Dittmann, E., and Boerner,
T. (2001). Consequence of impaired
microcystin production for light-
dependent growth and pigmenta-
tion of Microcystis aeruginosa PCC
7806. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 37,
39–43.

Humpage,A. R., Fenech, M., Thomas, P.,
and Falconer, I. R. (2000). Micronu-
cleus induction and chromosome
loss in transformed human white
cells indicate clastogenic and aneu-
genic action of the cyanobacterial
toxin, cylindrospermopsin. Mutat.
Res. 472, 155–161.

Humpage, A. R., Fontaine, F., Froscio,
S., Burcham, P., and Falconer, I. R.
(2005). Cylindrospermopsin geno-
toxicity and cytotoxicity: role of
cytochrome P-450 and oxidative
stress. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health A
68, 739–753.

Jahnichen, S., Ihle, T., Petzoldt, T., and
Benndorf, J. (2007). Impact of inor-
ganic carbon availability on micro-
cystin production by Microcystis

aeruginosa PCC 7806. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 73, 6994–7002.

Jochimsen, E. M., Carmichael, W. W.,
An, J. S., Cardo, D. M., Cookson, S.
T., Holmes, C. E., Antunes, M. B., de
Melo Filho, D. A., Lyra, T. M., and
Barreto, V. S. (1998). Liver failure
and death after exposure to micro-
cystins at a hemodialysis center in
Brazil. N. Engl. J. Med. 338, 873–878.
Jones, A. C., Monroe, E. A., Podell, S.,
Hess, W. R., Klages, S., Esquenazi,
E., Niessen, S., Hoover, H., Roth-
mann, M., Lasken, R. S., Yates, J. R.,
Reinhardt, R., Kube, M., Burkart, M.,
Allen, E. E., Dorrestein, P. C., Ger-
wick, W. H., and Gerwick, L. (2011).
Genomic insights into the physi-
ology and ecology of the marine
ﬁlamentous cyanobacterium Lyng-
bya majuscula. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 108, 8815–8820.

Kaebernick, M., Dittmann, E., Boerner,
T., and Neilan, B. A. (2002). Mul-
tiple alternate
transcripts direct
the biosynthesis of microcystin, a
cyanobacterial nonribosomal pep-
tide. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68,
449–455.

Kaebernick, M., Neilan, B. A., Boerner,
T., and Dittmann, E. (2000). Light
and the transcriptional response of
the microcystin biosynthetic gene
cluster. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66,
3387–3392.

Kaebernick, M., and Neilan, B. A.
(2001). Ecological and molecular
investigations of cyanotoxin pro-
duction. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 35,
1–9.

Kehr, J. C., Zilliges, Y., Springer, A., Dis-
ney, M. D., Ratner, D. D., Bouchier,
C., Seeberger, P. H., de Marsac, N. T.,
and Dittmann, E. (2006). A mannan
binding lectin is involved in cell-cell
attachment in a toxic strain of Micro-
cystis aeruginosa. Mol. Microbiol. 59,
893–906.
S.

(2010). Cylindrosper-
mopsin: a decade of progress on
bioaccumulation
research. Mar.
Drugs 8, 542–564.

Kinnear,

Li, R., Carmichael, W. W., Brittain,
S., Eaglesham, G. K., Shaw, G.
R., Mahakhant, A., Noparatnara-
porn, N., Yongmanitchai, W., Kaya,
K., and Watanabe, M. M. (2001).
Isolation and identiﬁcation of the
cyanotoxin cylindrospermopsin and
deoxy-cylindrospermopsin from a
Thailand strain of Cylindrospermop-
sis raciborskii (cyanobacteria). Toxi-
con 39, 973–980.

Lieman-Hurwitz, J., Haimovich, M.,
Shalev-Malul, G., Ishii, A., Hihara,
Y., Gaathon, A., Lebendiker, M., and
Kaplan, A. (2009). A cyanobacte-
rial AbrB-like protein affects the

by modulating

apparent photosynthetic afﬁnity for
low-CO2-
CO2
induced gene expression. Environ.
Microbiol. 11, 927–936.

Liu, L., and Rein, K. S. (2010). New pep-
tides isolated from lyngbya species: a
review. Mar. Drugs 8, 1817–1837.

Long, B. M., Jones, G. J., and Orr, P.
T. (2001). Cellular microcystin con-
tent in N-limited Microcystis aerugi-
nosa can be predicted from growth
rate. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67,
278–283.

Lopez-Gomollon, S., Hernandez, J. A.,
Pellicer, S., Angarica, V. E., Peleato,
M. L., and Fillat, M. F. (2007). Cross-
talk between iron and nitrogen reg-
ulatory networks in Anabaena (Nos-
toc) sp. PCC 7120, identiﬁcation of
overlapping genes in FurA and NtcA
regulons. J. Mol. Biol. 374, 267–281.
Lukac, M., and Aegerter, R. (1993).
Inﬂuence of trace-metals on growth
and toxin production of Microcystis
aeruginosa. Toxicon 31, 293–305.

Martin-Luna, B., Sevilla, E., Hernan-
dez, J. A., Bes, M. T., Fillat, M.
F., and Peleato, M. L. (2006). Fur
from Microcystis aeruginosa binds
in vitro promoter regions of the
microcystin biosynthesis gene clus-
ter. Phytochemistry 67, 876–881.

Mazmouz, R., Chapuis-Hugon, F.,
Mann, S., Pichon, V., Mejean, A.,
and Ploux, O. (2010). Biosynthe-
sis of cylindrospermopsin and 7-
epicylindrospermopsin in Oscillato-
ria sp. strain PCC 6506, Identiﬁca-
tion of the cyr gene cluster and toxin
analysis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
76, 4943–4949.

Mazmouz, R., Chapuis-Hugon, F.,
Pichon, V., Mejean, A., and Ploux,
the
O. (2011). The last step of
biosynthesis of
cyanotoxins
cylindrospermopsin
7-epi-
and
cylindrospermopsin is catalysed by
CyrI, a 2-oxoglutarate-dependent
iron oxygenase. Chembiochem 12,
858–862.

the

Mejean, A., Mazmouz, R., Mann, S., Cal-
teau, A., Medigue, C., and Ploux,
O. (2010). The genome sequence
of
the cyanobacterium Oscillato-
ria sp. PCC 6506 reveals several
gene clusters responsible for the
biosynthesis of
toxins and sec-
ondary metabolites. J. Bacteriol. 192,
5264–5265.

Metcalf, J. S., Barakate, A., and Codd,
G. A. (2004). Inhibition of plant
protein synthesis by the cyanobac-
terial hepatotoxin,
cylindrosper-
mopsin. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 235,
125–129.

Mihali, T. K., Kellmann, R., Muench-
hoff, J., Barrow, K. D., and Neilan,
B. A. (2008). Characterization of the

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 138 | 9

Kaplan et al.

Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites

gene cluster responsible for cylin-
drospermopsin biosynthesis. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 74, 716–722.

Mofﬁtt, M. C., and Neilan, B. A.
(2004). Characterization of
the
nodularin synthetase gene cluster
and proposed theory of the evo-
lution of cyanobacterial hepatotox-
ins. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 70,
6353–6362.

Murphy, P. J., and Thomas, C. W. (2001).
The synthesis and biological activity
of
the marine metabolite cylin-
drospermopsin. Chem. Soc. Rev. 30,
303–312.

Murray, S. A., Mihali, T. K., and Neilan,
B. A. (2011). Extraordinary con-
servation, gene loss, and positive
selection in the evolution of an
ancient neurotoxin. Mol. Biol. Evol.
28, 1173–1182.

“The

(2008).

genetics

Neilan, B. A., Pearson, L. A., Mofﬁtt,
M. C., Mihali, K. T., Kaebemick,
M., Kellmann, R., and Pomati,
F.
and
genomics of cyanobacterial toxicity,”
in Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal
Blooms, State of
the Science and
Research Needs, Vol. 619, ed. H.
K Hudnell (New York: Springer),
417–452.

Nishizawa, T., Asayama, M., Fujii, K.,
Harada, K., and Shirai, M. (1999).
Genetic analysis of the peptide syn-
thetase genes for a cyclic heptapep-
tide microcystin in Microcystis spp.
J. Biochem. 126, 520–529.

Nishizawa, T., Ueda, A., Asayama, M.,
Fujii, K., Harada, K., Ochi, K., and
Shirai, M. (2000). Polyketide syn-
thase gene coupled to the peptide
synthetase module involved in the
biosynthesis of the cyclic heptapep-
tide microcystin. J. Biochem. 127,
779–789.

Ogawa, Y. (1988). Net increase rates and
dynamics of phytoplankton popu-
lations under hypereutrophic and
eutrophic conditions. Jpn. J. Limnol.
49, 261–268.

Oliveira, P., and Lindblad, P. (2008).
An AbrB-like protein regulates
the expression of the bidirectional
hydrogenase in Synechocystis
sp.
strain PCC 6803. J. Bacteriol. 190,
1011–1019.

Orchard, E. D., Webb, E. A., and
Dyhrman, S. T. (2009). Molecular
analysis of
the phosphorus star-
vation response in Trichodesmium
spp.
11,
2400–2411.

Environ. Microbiol.

Orr, P. T., and Jones, G. J. (1998). Rela-
tionship between microcystin pro-
duction and cell division rates in
nitrogen-limited Microcystis aerugi-
nosa cultures. Limnol. Oceanogr. 43,
1604–1614.

Paerl, H. W., and Huisman, J. (2009).
Climate change, a catalyst for global
expansion of harmful cyanobacter-
ial blooms. Environ. Microbiol. Rep.
1, 27–37.

Pearson, L., Hisbergues, M., Dittmann,
E., Boerner, T., and Neilan, B. A.
(2004).
Inactivation of an ABC
transporter, McyH, results in loss
of microcystin production in the
cyanobacterium Microcystis aerug-
inosa PCC 7806. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 70, 6370–6378.

Pearson, L., Mihali, T., Mofﬁtt, M., Kell-
mann, R., and Neilan, B. (2010).
On the chemistry, toxicology and
genetics of the cyanobacterial tox-
ins, microcystin, nodularin, saxi-
toxin and cylindrospermopsin. Mar.
Drugs 8, 1650–1680.

Pﬂugmacher, S. (2002). Possible allelo-
pathic effects of cyanotoxins, with
reference
in
aquatic ecosystems. Environ. Toxicol.
17, 407–413.

to microcystin-LR,

I., and Fastner,

Preussel, K., Stuken, A., Wiedner,
C., Chorus,
J.
(2006). First report on cylindrosper-
mopsin producing Aphanizomenon
ﬂos-aquae (Cyanobacteria) isolated
from two German lakes. Toxicon 47,
156–162.

Rantala, A., Fewer, D. P., Hisbergues,
M., Rouhiainen, L., Vaitomaa, J.,
Borner, T., and Sivonen, K. (2004).
Phylogenetic evidence for the early
evolution of microcystin synthesis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101,
568–573.

Rapala, J., Sivonen, K., Lyra, C., and
Niemela, S.-I. (1997). Variation of
microcystins, cyanobacterial hepa-
totoxins, in Anabaena spp. as a func-
tion of growth stimuli. Appl. Envi-
ron. Microbiol. 63, 2206–2212.

Reisner, M., Carmeli, S., Werman,
M., and Sukenik, A. (2004). The
cylindros-
cyanobacterial
pyrimidine
permopsin
nucleotide
and alters
cholesterol distribution in mice.
Toxicol. Sci. 82, 620–627.

toxin
inhibits
synthesis

Rengefors, K., Ruttenberg, K. C., Hau-
pert, C. L., Taylor, C., Howes, B.
L., and Anderson, D. M. (2003).
Experimental investigation of taxon-
speciﬁc response of alkaline phos-
phatase activity in natural freshwater
phytoplankton. Limnol. Oceanogr.
48, 1167–1175.

Rodelas, B., Lithgow, J. K., Wisniewski-
Dye, F., Hardman, A., Wilkinson,
A., Economou, A., Williams, P., and
Downie, J. A. (1999). Analysis of
quorum-sensing-dependent control
of rhizosphere-expressed (rhi) genes
in Rhizobium leguminosarum bv.
viciae. J. Bacteriol. 181, 3816–3823.

Rohrlack, T., Dittmann, E., Boerner,
T., and Christoffersen, K. (2001).
Effects of cell-bound microcystins
on survival and feeding of Daph-
nia spp. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67,
3523–3529.

Rohrlack, T., Dittmann, E., Henning,
M., Borner, T., and Kohl, J. G.
(1999). Role of microcystins in poi-
soning and food ingestion inhibition
of Daphnia galeata caused by the
cyanobacterium Microcystis aerugi-
nosa. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65,
737–739.

Rouhiainen, L., Vakkilainen, T., Siemer,
B. L., Buikema, W., Haselkorn, R.,
and Sivonen, K. (2004). Genes cod-
ing for hepatotoxic heptapeptides
(microcystins)
in the cyanobac-
terium Anabaena strain 90. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 70, 686–692.

Runnegar, M., and Lu, S.

(1994).
The role of glutathione (Gsh) in
the hepatotoxicity caused by the
cyanobacterial alkaloid cylindros-
permopsin (Cy). FASEB J. 8, A419.

Runnegar, M. T., Kong, S. M., Zhong,
Y. Z., and Lu, S. C. (1995). Inhibi-
tion of reduced glutathione synthe-
sis by cyanobacterial alkaloid cylin-
drospermopsin in cultured rat hepa-
tocytes. Biochem. Pharmacol. 49,
219–225.

Runnegar, M. T., Xie, C. Y., Snider, B.
B., Wallace, G. A., Weinreb, S. M.,
and Kuhlenkamp, J. (2002). In vitro
hepatotoxicity of the cyanobacter-
ial alkaloid cylindrospermopsin and
related synthetic analogues. Toxicol.
Sci. 67, 81–87.

Saker, M. L., and Grifﬁths, D.

J.
(2000). The effect of
tempera-
ture on growth and cylindrosper-
mopsin content of seven isolates of
Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii (Nos-
tocales, Cyanophyceae) from water
bodies in northern Australia. Phy-
cologia 39, 349–354.

Schatz, D., Keren, Y., Hadas, O.,
Carmeli, S., Sukenik, A., and Kaplan,
A. (2005). Ecological implications
of
the emergence of non-toxic
subcultures from toxic Microcys-
tis strains. Environ. Microbiol. 7,
798–805.

Schatz, D., Keren, Y., Vardi, A.,
Sukenik, A., Carmeli, S., Boerner, T.,
Dittmann, E., and Kaplan, A. (2007).
Towards clariﬁcation of the biolog-
ical role of microcystins, a family
of cyanobacterial toxins. Environ.
Microbiol. 9, 965–970.

Schembri, M. A., Neilan, B. A., and
Saint, C. P. (2001). Identiﬁcation of
genes implicated in toxin production
in the cyanobacterium Cylindrosper-
mopsis raciborskii. Environ. Toxicol.
16, 413–421.

Seifert, M., McGregor, G., Eaglesham,
G., Wickramasinghe, W., and Shaw,
G. (2007). First evidence for the
production of cylindrospermopsin
and deoxy-cylindrospermopsin by
the freshwater benthic cyanobac-
terium, Lyngbya wollei (Farlow ex
Gomont) Speziale and Dyck. Harm-
ful Algae 6, 73–80.

Sevilla, E., Martin-Luna, B., Vela, L., Bes,
M. T., Fillat, M. F., and Peleato, M.
L. (2008). Iron availability affects
mcyD expression and microcystin-
LR synthesis in Microcystis aerugi-
nosa PCC7806. Environ. Microbiol.
10, 2476–2483.

Sevilla, E., Martin-Luna, B., Vela, L., Bes,
M. T., Peleato, M. L., and Fillat, M.
F. (2010). Microcystin-LR synthesis
as response to nitrogen, transcrip-
tional analysis of the mcyD gene
in Microcystis aeruginosa PCC780.
Ecotoxicology 19, 1167–1173.

Shalev-Alon, G., Sukenik, A., Livnah, O.,
Schwarz, R., and Kaplan,A. (2002). A
novel gene encoding amidinotrans-
ferase in the cylindrospermopsin
producing cyanobacterium Aphani-
zomenon ovalisporum. FEMS Micro-
biol. Lett. 209, 87–91.

Shen, X. Y., Lam, P. K. S., Shaw,
G. R., and Wickramasinghe, W.
investiga-
(2002). Genotoxicity
tion of
toxin,
cylindrospermopsin. Toxicon 40,
1499–1501.

a cyanobacterial

Sivonen, K. (2008). “Emerging high
throughput analyses of cyanobac-
terial toxins and toxic cyanobacte-
ria,” in Cyanobacterial Harmful Algal
Blooms, State of
the Science and
Research Needs, Vol. 619, ed. H.
K. Hudnell (New York: Springer),
539–557.

Sivonen, K., Carmichael, W. W.,
Namikoshi, M., Rinehart, K. L.,
Dahlem, A. M., and Niemela, S. I.
(1990).
Isolation and characteri-
zation of hepatotoxic microcystin
homologs
from the ﬁlamentous
fresh-water cyanobacterium Nos-
toc sp. strain-152. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 56, 2650–2657.

Sivonen, K., and Jones, G. (1999).
“Cyanobacterial
toxins,” in Toxic
Cyanobacteria in Water, eds I. Cho-
rus and J. Bartram (London: E & FN
Spon), 41–111.

Straser, A., Filipic, M., and Zegura,
B. (2011). Genotoxic effects of the
cyanobacterial hepatotoxin cylin-
drospermopsin in the HepG2 cell
line. Arch. Toxicol. 85, 1617–1626.

Straub, C., Quillardet, P., Vergalli, J.,
Tandeau de Marsac, N., and Hum-
bert, J.-F. (2011). A day in the life
of Microcystis aeruginosa strain PCC
7806 as revealed by a transcriptomic

Frontiers in Microbiology | Aquatic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 138 | 10

Kaplan et al.

Cyanobacterial secondary metabolites

analysis. PLoS ONE 6, e16208.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016208

Stuken, A.,

and Jakobsen, K.

S.
cylindrospermopsin
(2010). The
gene
cluster of Aphanizomenon
sp strain 10E6, organization and
recombination. Microbiology 156,
2438–2451.

Sukenik, A., Beardall, J., and Hadas,
O. (2007). Photosynthetic character-
ization of developing and mature
akinetes of Aphanizomenon ovalispo-
rum (Cyanoprokaryota). J. Phycol.
43, 780–788.

Tillett, D., Dittmann, E., Erhard, M.,
von Dohren, H., Borner, T., and
Neilan, B. A. (2000). Structural orga-
nization of microcystin biosynthesis
in Microcystis aeruginosa PCC7806,
an integrated peptide- polyketide
synthetase system. Chem. Biol. 7,
753–764.

Tonk, L., Visser, P. M., Christiansen,
G., Dittmann, E., Snelder, E. O.,
Wiedner, C., Mur, L. R., and Huis-
man, J. (2005). The microcystin
composition of the cyanobacterium
Planktothrix
changes
toward a more toxic variant with
increasing
intensity. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 71, 5177–5181.

agardhii

light

Utkilen, H., and Gjolme, N. (1992).
Toxin production by Microcystis
aeruginosa as a function of light
in continuous cultures and its eco-
logical signiﬁcance. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 58, 1321–1325.

Van de Waal, D. B., Verspagen, J. M.,
Finke, J. F., Vournazou, V., Immers,
A. K., Kardinaal, W. E., Tonk, L.,
Becker, S., Van Donk, E., Visser, P.
M., and Huisman, J. (2011). Reversal
in competitive dominance of a toxic
versus non-toxic cyanobacterium in
response to rising CO2. ISME J. 5,
1438–1450.

Vanderwesthuizen, A. J., and Eloff, J. N.
(1985). Effect of temperature and
light on the toxicity and growth
of the blue-green-alga Microcystis
aeruginosa (UV-006). Planta 163,
55–59.

Vezie, C., Rapala,

J.,

J., Vaitomaa,

J.,
Seitsonen,
and Sivonen, K.
(2002). Effect of nitrogen and
phosphorus on growth of
toxic
and nontoxic Microcystis
strains
and on intracellular microcystin
concentrations. Microb. Ecol. 43,
443–454.

I.

Via-Ordorika, L., Fastner, J., Kurmayer,
R., Hisbergues, M., Dittmann, E.,
Komarek, J., Erhard, M., and Cho-
rus,
(2004). Distribution of
microcystin-producing and non-
microcystin-producing Microcystis
sp in European freshwater bod-
ies: detection of microcystins and
microcystin genes
in individual
colonies. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 27,
592–602.

Walsby, A. E. (1997). Numerical inte-
gration of phytoplankton photosyn-
thesis through time and depth in

a water column. New Phytol. 136,
189–209.

Welker, M., and von Dohren, H.
(2006). Cyanobacterial peptides –
nature’s own combinatorial biosyn-
thesis. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 30,
530–563.

Wiedner, C., Visser, P. M., Fastner, J.,
Metcalf, J. S., Codd, G. A., and Mur,
L. R. (2003). Effects of
light on
the microcystin content of Microcys-
tis strain PCC 7806. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 69, 1475–1481.

roles of

Yamauchi, Y., Kaniya, Y., Kaneko, Y.,
and Hihara, Y. (2011). Physiolog-
ical
the cyAbrB tran-
scriptional regulator pair Sll0822
and Sll0359 in Synechocystis
sp.
strain PCC 6803. J. Bacteriol. 193,
3702–3709.

Zegura, B., Straser, A., and Filipic,
M. (2011). Genotoxicity and poten-
tial carcinogenicity of cyanobacterial
toxins – a review. Mutat. Res. 727,
16–41.

Zilliges, Y., Kehr, J. C., Meissner, S.,
Ishida, K., Mikkat, S., Hagemann,
M., Kaplan, A., Borner, T., and
Dittmann, E. (2011). The cyanobac-
terial hepatotoxin microcystin binds
to proteins andi increases the ﬁt-
ness of Microcystis under oxida-
tive stress conditions. PLoS ONE 6,
e17615. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0017615

Zilliges,Y., Kehr, J. C., Mikkat, S., Bouch-
ier, C., de Marsac, N. T., Borner,

T., and Dittmann, E. (2008). An
extracellular glycoprotein is impli-
cated in cell-cell contacts in the toxic
cyanobacterium Microcystis aerugi-
nosa PCC 7806. J. Bacteriol. 190,
2871–2879.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 21 January 2012; accepted: 23
March 2012; published online: 18 April
2012.
Citation: Kaplan A, Harel M, Kaplan-
Levy RN, Hadas O, Sukenik A and
Dittmann E (2012) The languages spoken
in the water body (or the biological role of
cyanobacterial toxins). Front. Microbio.
3:138. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00138
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Aquatic Microbiology, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Kaplan, Harel,
Kaplan-Levy, Hadas,
and
Dittmann. This is an open-access article
distributed under
the
Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits
non-commercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in other forums, provided
the original authors and source are
credited.

terms of

Sukenik

the

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 138 | 11

