Tracing lifestyle adaptation in prokaryotic genomes

Eric Altermann1,2*

1 Rumen Microbiology, Animal Nutrition and Health Capability Group, Grasslands Research Centre, AgResearch Limited, Palmerston North, New Zealand
2 Riddet Institute, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand

METHODS ARTICLE
published: 21 February 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00048

Edited by:
Jacques Ravel, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, USA
Reviewed by:
David Nelson, Indiana University
Bloomington, USA
Bing Ma, The Institute for Genome
Sciences, USA
*Correspondence:
Eric Altermann, Grasslands Research
Centre, AgResearch Limited, Tennent
Drive, Private Bag 11008, Palmerston
North, New Zealand.
e-mail: eric.altermann@
agresearch.co.nz

Lifestyle adaptation of microbes due to changes in their ecological niches or acquisition of
new environments is a major driving force for genetic changes in their respective genomes.
Moving into more specialized niches often results in the acquisition of new gene sets via
horizontal gene transfer to utilize previously unavailable metabolites, while genetic ballast is
shed by gene loss and/or gene inactivation. In some cases, larger genome rearrangements
can be observed, such as the incorporation of whole genetic islands, providing a range of
new phenotypic capabilities. Until recently these changes could not be comprehensively
followed and identiﬁed due to the lack of complete microbial genome sequences. The
advent of high-throughput DNA sequencing has dramatically changed the scientiﬁc land-
scape and today microbial genomes have become increasingly abundant. Currently, more
than 2,900 genomes are published and more than 11,000 genome projects are listed in the
Genomes Online Database‡. Although this wealth of information provides many new oppor-
tunities to assess microbial functionality, it also creates a new array of challenges when
a comparison between multiple microbial genomes is required. Here, functional genome
distribution (FGD) is introduced, analyzing the diversity between microbes based on their
predicted ORFeome. FGD is therefore a comparative genomics approach, emphasizing
the assessments of gene complements. To further facilitate the comparison between two
or more genomes, degrees of amino-acid similarities between ORFeomes can be visual-
ized in the Artemis comparison tool, graphically depicting small and large scale genome
rearrangements, insertion and deletion events, and levels of similarity between individual
open reading frames. FGD provides a new tool for comparative microbial genomics and
the interpretation of differences in the genetic makeup of bacteria.

Keywords: functional genomics, genome comparison, lifestyle adaption, horizontal gene transfer, genome plasticity

INTRODUCTION
Microbial genomes range in size from the smallest microbial
genome known to date of Candidatus Tremblaya princeps with
just under 139,000 nt (McCutcheon and von Dohlen, 2011) to
large genomes with over 13,000,000 nt such as Sorangium cellulo-
sum SO ce56 (Schneiker et al., 2007). With an average gene size of
about 1,000 nt, microbial genomes harbor between 140 and 13,000
genes.

Lifestyle adaptation is one of the major driving forces for micro-
bial genome re-arrangement processes such as gene loss and gene
acquisition, genome rearrangements, and the movement of whole
genetic islands. Until recently, such processes could not be mon-
itored comprehensively and observations were limited to either
a few select genes (typing) or the analysis of large scale genome
re-arrangement events.

Typing methods such as multi-locus sequence typing (MLST;
Chan et al., 2001), are based on the selection of a few widely
distributed and conserved house-keeping genes. Today, MLST uti-
lizes whole microbial genome predominantly to identify new select
target regions for ampliﬁcation, rather than analyzing the whole
nucleotide sequence (Maiden, 2006).

‡http://genomesonline.org/cgi-bin/GOLD/bin/gold.cgi

With the advent of high-throughput DNA sequencing tech-
niques such as automated capillary sequencing, solid-state
sequencing1, or pyrosequencing2 or sequencing by synthesis3,
access to high-quality draft, and complete bacterial genomes
has become feasible and is a commonly used technique. Cur-
rently 2,943 complete genomes (including eukaryotic organisms)
have been reported, with another 184 archeal and 5,490 bacte-
rial genome projects in progress4. The availability of complete
or nearly complete genomes triggered attempts to incorporate
selected larger genetic subsets (Makarova et al., 2006; Makarova
and Koonin, 2007) or complete genomes (Rohwer and Edwards,
2002; Henz et al., 2005) to infer evolutionary lineages, while less
progress has been made in analysis of multiple whole microbial
genomes from functional and comparative genomic perspectives.
One of the most prominent examples of whole genome compara-
tive analyses is based on Blast Score Ratios (Rasko et al., 2005).

Here, we introduce a new analysis tool, functional genome
distribution (FGD). FGD does not attempt to represent the

1http://www.appliedbiosystems.com
2http://454.com/
3http://www.illumina.com
4http://genomesonline.org/cgi-bin/GOLD/bin/gold.cgi

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 1

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

evolutionary path a genome has taken, since different genes will
have been acquired by different routes. Instead, FGD investigates
the overall levels of similarity between microbial genomes based
on amino-acid sequences of the predicted complete ORFeomes.
This reﬂects the impact the evolutionary force has had on genome
makeup in the past, resulting in the current level of niche adapta-
tion (Thomson et al., 2003). Thus presence, absence, or modiﬁca-
tion of individual genes or genetic islands deﬁnes the phenotypic
potential of a given organism at a given temporal snapshot. The
comparison of these ORFeomes to each other ultimately deﬁnes
the level of similarity of the genomes. This approach then also takes
into account important genetic adaptations to speciﬁc ecological
niches or even to human made environments such as industrial fer-
mentation processes. Such common genotype adaptations might
render organisms more similar by FGD analyses than their respec-
tive evolutionary heritage would indicate. The presented approach
of a FGD is a BLAST-based ORF-position-independent algorithm,
implemented in the compACTor software. In the context of FGD
analyses the term “functional” is used in the sense of functionality
based on sequence and sequence similarity and is not based on
annotation classiﬁcation [i.e., such as implied by COG (Tatusov
et al., 2003) or KEGG (Kanehisa, 2002; Kanehisa et al., 2008)
databases].

Research in functional genomics (deﬁned as the investigation
of gene function by gene inactivation, gene complementation, and
in silico analyses) relies heavily on the identiﬁcation of differ-
ences between two or more genomes, identifying differences in
the presence or absence of individual genes. The compACTor soft-
ware also creates all-vs.-all ORFeome distance data ﬁles which,
in combination with the respective GenBank ﬁles of the query
microbes and the Artemis comparison tool (ACT; Carver et al.,
2005), facilitate visual qualitative comparative in silico analyses
of complete and draft phase microbial genomes for the sub-
sequent analysis of changes to gene synteny and operon struc-
tures. Furthermore, to identify genes shared and unique between
selected clusters a mining tool, FGDﬁnder, is provided, facilitat-
ing rapid identiﬁcation of relevant gene sets for further in vitro
analyses.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
GENERAL WORKFLOW OF THE compACTor SOFTWARE
A pool of genomes in GenBank format represents the query space
for compACTor (Figure 1). Gene models embedded and subse-
quently retrieved from the GenBank ﬁles of each query genome
are parsed and the resulting ORFeome is translated into individual
amino-acid sequences. The parsing algorithm considers both gene
and CDS features for any given start position, while giving pref-
erence to CDS entries. Nucleotide sequences are retrieved from
the genome sequence and translated into amino-acid sequence.
Gene model errors such as unbalanced number of nucleotides,
unrecognized amino-acid codons, or multiple stop-codons are
reported but treated as non-critical. The translated ORFeome is
then used to build query-speciﬁc amino-acid BLAST databases
(DBs) using formatdb (Altschul et al., 1990). In subsequent runs
previously build BLAST databases can be re-used (Figure 1),
reducing the overall runtime of the compactor software. The
pooled ORFeomes of all query entries are hashed for subsequent

all-vs.-all analyses. Levels of similarities are inferred for each pre-
dicted query ORF by an all-vs.-all analysis, submitting sequence-
database combinations to a non-ﬁltered gapped BLASTP (Altschul
et al., 1997) pipeline. Brieﬂy, the deduced amino-acid sequence for
each open reading frame (ORF) of each query entry is compared
to all subject databases generated from the entry pool. Individ-
ual BLAST results are parsed and collated in ORF-speciﬁc ASCII
result ﬁles. The total number of BLAST analyses performed is a
direct function of the number of individual ORFeomes and the
pool size.

The collated ﬂatﬁle database is the basis for all subsequent cal-
culations such as the generation of ACT (Carver et al., 2005) pMSP-
dataﬁles, the prediction of putative strain-speciﬁc genes, and the
generation of FGD trees. It is also possible to add new query entries
to existing analyses. The compACTor software tests for the pres-
ence of respective ORF-database BLAST results and omits the
BLAST pipeline where possible. This signiﬁcantly reduces run-
time requirements and facilitates future expansions of existing
comparative analyses.

GENERATION OF ACT COMPARISON DATA FILES (pMSP)
Based on the all-vs.-all principle, all genome–genome pair com-
binations are analyzed. A bi-directional BLASTP approach was
implemented for the creation of ORF-speciﬁc ACT comparison
ﬁles. Genome pairs analyzed in respective comparison ﬁles are
reﬂected within the ﬁlename which features both ﬁlenames in
the order query-to-subject. Each predicted ORF of the query
genome was allowed a maximum of 20 similarity hits to ORFs
present in the respective subject genome. ACT allows two qual-
ity parameters, namely “Score cutoff ” and “Percent ID cutoff ”
in its comparison ﬁle format. These two cutoffs determine the
stringency of sequence similarities, and were replaced in the com-
pACTor software output by the alternative parameters of “e-value”
(“Percent ID”) and “weighted score” (“Score”). The parameter “e-
value” is derived from individual e-values which are grouped into
empirically determined trust level ranges (Table A1 in Appendix).
Similarly, for the second parameter, a weighted score is calcu-
lated, placing additional emphasis on alignment quality and length
(Eq. 1). Brieﬂy, the initial alignment-centric local BLAST score is
reﬂecting the maximum level of sequence similarity between a
given ORF pair (ς, Eq. 1). To account for changes outside the local
alignment and to further assess the alignment quality, the score
is then subjected to three penalty blocks, assessing the quality of
amino-acid similarity [(P − Id/2)+ Id/λ, Eq. 1], the size of gaps
(1− G/A, Eq. 1), and the length of the BLAST alignment in rela-
tion to the query ORF length (A − G/λ, Eq. 1). These penalty
parameters take into account differences in amino-acids sequence
alignments which are not or insufﬁciently covered by the regular
BLAST score. This process effectively reduces the level of simi-
larity between both ORFs when the BLAST alignment covers only
partial ORF sequences and/or the alignments show signiﬁcant lev-
els of insertions or deletions and results in a weighted BLAST
score ψ.

The weighted score is a sub-parameter of the distance calcu-
lation between two genomes (see Eq. 2) and allows for strin-
gency shifting in ACT while maintaining continuity to the FGD
algorithm.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 2

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

FIGURE 1 | Graphical workﬂow of the compACTor software. Schematic
representation of the algorithm structure. Symbols used are consistent with
standard ﬂowchart icons. Abbreviations: DB, database; pMSPs, ORFeome
based MSPcrunch comparison format (Sonnhammer and Durbin, 1994) data

ﬁles. Oval symbol: data pools, diamond symbol: internal decision points,
square boxes: internal processes and functions, hourglass symbol: central
parsing algorithm, Multidocument symbol: external ﬂatﬁle databases created
by compACTor.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 3

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

genome, n = current query ORF, and ρORF = ORF number ratio

(cid:5)

as described in Eq. 3.

(cid:2)

Weighted BLAST score
+ Id

P−Id
2

(cid:3)

ψ = ς ×

×

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

(cid:4)

×

A − G

1 − G
A

λ

λ

(1)
with: ψ= weighted score, ς= BLAST score between query
sequence and respective BLAST hit, λ= length of deduced amino-
acid in query sequence, P = identiﬁed positives in BLAST align-
ment, Id= identiﬁed identities in BLAST alignment, A = length of
BLAST alignment, G = number of gaps in BLAST alignment

Artemis comparison tool compatible comparison ﬁles (pMSP)
created with the compACTor software adhere to the MSPcrunch
(Sonnhammer and Durbin, 1994) format. An example dataset
of a two-way genome-to-genome comparison is provided in the
Appendix.

FUNCTIONAL GENOME DISTRIBUTION
In prokaryotes, genome plasticity (re-arrangement of genomic
regions between species), the presence of metabolic islands (clus-
ters of genes with deﬁned and speciﬁc metabolic functions),
gene acquisition via horizontal gene transfer (HGT), and varied
distribution of mobile genetic elements are well described and
contribute signiﬁcantly to phenotypic differences (Desiere et al.,
2001; Makarova et al., 2006; Berger et al., 2007; Nicolas et al.,
2007). Also, adaptation to new ecological niches and the result-
ing genetic drift can lead to rapid acquisition or the shedding of
genetic elements without changes in selected sequence or gene
subsets used in typing analyses (Makarova et al., 2006). Organ-
isms, virtually indistinguishable based on selected individual gene
(set) evolutionary analyses, may be markedly different in their
complete genetic blueprint. To reﬂect this widespread diversity,
a new algorithm, FGD, was empirically developed to distinguish
organisms in the multi-dimensional genome space. Here, the focus
distinctly lies on a snapshot picture of a current genome and
how the genotype relates to other organisms. From a functional
genomics perspective, the presence, absence, or modiﬁcation of a
gene determines a potential metabolic capability, while the respec-
tive position with the genome may inﬂuence the respective levels
of gene expression (Sousa et al., 1997). Therefore, a position inde-
pendent approach was embraced that investigates the phenotypic
potential (absence/presence/similarity of genes) at the cost of loci
dependent modulations of gene expression.

Each predicted ORF of a given query genome is analyzed
via gapped BLASTP to a subject organism speciﬁc BLAST data-
base. Result parameters of the best BLAST hit are applied to the
following equations (Eqs 2 and 3).

Distance between two genomes
δGquery → Gsubject =

(cid:6)

(cid:8)
T ORFquery

T ORFquery(cid:7)

× ρORF

ψ

λ(n)

n=1

(2)

ORFeome ratio between query and subject genome

(cid:4)

ρORF =

(cid:5)

(cid:4)

∨

T ORFquery
T ORFsubject

(cid:2)(cid:2) 1

T ORFsubject
T ORFquery

(cid:5)

(3)

with: ρORF = ORF number ratio between query and subject
genome, always≤ 1, T ORFquery = total number of ORFs in query
genome, T ORFsubject = total number of ORFs in subject genome.

MOTIVATION OF THE FGD ALGORITHM
The FGD algorithm initially investigates the level of similarity for
each predicted ORF in a query genome to a subject ORF and is
based on the BLAST score. This score describes the overall qual-
ity of the best local alignment found for a given query–subject
sequence alignment. However, the score alone does not necessarily
reﬂect the overall level of similarity between two sequences outside
the local alignment. Also, from a functional genomics perspective,
insertion, and deletion events in individual amino-acid sequences
may change the properties of the gene product, thus decreasing the
level of similarity. Furthermore, the relation of the local alignment
to the overall sequence is an important factor. While stretches of
highly conserved sequence contribute to a higher BLAST score, the
presence of unique sequence outside the local alignment is likely
to contribute to changing the properties of respective gene prod-
ucts. Therefore, the maximum level of similarity as described by
the BLAST score will be decreased by the FGD algorithm if inser-
tion/deletion events and imbalanced alignment/deduced sequence
ratios are detected.

The FGD analysis then summarizes individual similarity scores
determined for each ORF in the ORFeome. The presence of unique
strain-speciﬁc genes and differences in the overall number of pre-
dicted ORFs in respective microbial genome pairs contribute to
different genotypes and consequently decrease the level of overall
functional similarity between genome pairs.

The initial alignment BLAST score is subjected to quality assess-
ments as described above for Eq. 1. In Eq. 2 the resulting weighted
score is normalized by the number of deduced amino-acids of the
query ORF, resulting in a score per amino-acid [ψ/λ(n)]. Indi-
vidual similarity scores are then are summed up over the query
ORFeome and normalized over total number of predicted ORFs,
resulting in a weighted score per ORF. Assessing differences in
ORFeome sizes by calculating the ratio between query and subject
ORFeomes (Eq. 3), the similarity score is adjusted to result in a

ﬁnal genome similarity score (δGquery→ Gsubject ).

Genome similarity scores for each query–subject combination
are entered into a distance matrix. A symmetrical distance matrix,
based on the geometrical means of each genome–genome pair
combination is calculated according to Eq. 4.

with: δ= ﬁnal similarity score between two genomes, ψ= weighted
BLAST score as described in Eq. 1, λ= length of deduced amino-
acid query sequence, T ORFquery = total number of ORFs in query

Symmetrical distance matrix

Δsym = δGquery → Gsubject + δGsubject → Gquery

2

(4)

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 4

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

with: Δsym = ﬁnal score for symmetrical distance matrix between a
given genome–genome pair and δGquery→ Gsubject = similarity

score between a given genome–genome combination.

Distance matrices of larger datasets become increasingly com-
plex to read directly. Therefore a traditional tree representation
was used as a visual aid to the underlying data structure. The
resulting symmetrical distance matrix can be imported into soft-
ware packages such as Mega4 (Tamura et al., 2007). Genome
clusters are approximated using the Unweighted Pair Group
Method with Arithmetic mean (UPGMA) algorithm (Sneath
and Sokal, 1962). Approximated branch lengths, representing
the level of similarity between genomes are depicted by dis-
tance units (du). Although similar in appearance to phylogenetic
trees, the resulting functional distribution tree (FDT) depicts
a different concept, clustering organisms by their respective
ORFeome similarities rather than by their inferred evolutionary
line.

IDENTIFICATION OF PUTATIVE STRAIN-SPECIFIC GENES
A key interest in comparative functional genomics is the identi-
ﬁcation of strain and cluster speciﬁc and shared gene sets, iden-
tifying the genetic differences, and similarities between selected
microbial genomes. These gene sets can then be used to inves-
tigate potentially unique metabolic capabilities of microbes and
may reveal speciﬁc genome adaptation to lifestyle changes. Clus-
ter speciﬁc genes or genes shared between clusters are identiﬁed
using the ﬂatﬁle BLAST database created by compACTor. Query
ORFs exhibiting a minimum e-value threshold with respect to
a given subject genome are identiﬁed and stored if they fulﬁll
the stringency restriction. Stringency between selected clusters
can be set by selecting the number of allowable mismatches. A
mismatch is deﬁned as an ORF in the query cluster that has at
least one ORF–ORF pairing above the minimum e-value thresh-
old to the subject cluster. Objects implemented in the output
are: name of the query GenBank ﬁle, respective ORF identi-
ﬁer, the name of the subject GenBank ﬁle, annotation of the
subject ORF, and the corresponding e-value, query ORF length,
score, query ORF start and stop positions, and gene, locus_tag,
product, and note annotation. Data for each query ORFeome –
subject genome combination are collated and summarized in a
tab-delimited ASCII ﬁle. The individual data ﬁles can easily be
imported into spreadsheet programs such as MS Excel or OpenOf-
ﬁce Calc and then be further re-grouped and analyzed. For exam-
ple, grouping by query ORF number quickly identiﬁes the degree
to which a respective ORF is unique among the pool of genome
entries.

IMPLEMENTATION
The compACTor and FGDﬁnder software has been realized as
PERL scripts (ActivePerl version 5.8.8.822), using the ofﬁcial
NCBI BLAST distribution5. The software is freely available for
non-commercial use (commercial use requires a license).

The algorithms and BLAST utilities used in compACTor render
the application CPU intensive. compACTor is multi-threaded and

5ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/blast/executables/LATEST

support multiple CPUs/cores to reduce runtime in a near linear
fashion. For the analysis depicted in Figure 2, 39 genomes, ranging
from ∼1.7 to ∼6.6 Mbp, were analyzed. A total number of 113,397
ORFs resulted in ∼4,300,000 individual BLAST queries. Artemis
Comparison Files, the prediction of putative strain-speciﬁc ORFs
and the phylogenetic tree were calculated using a collated and
parsed BLAST ﬂatﬁle database of >11 Gb. 1,560 Artemis compar-
ison ﬁles were generated, reﬂecting all possible genome–genome
combinations (a datapool of >2.5 Gb).

KNOWN LIMITATIONS
Known limitations of the algorithm at this time are the lack of
integrated support for extrachromosomal genetic elements such
as plasmids and additional chromosomes. A workaround exists by
concatenating DNA sequences of all genetic information present
in the respective organism and then performing an automated
annotation using pipelines such as GAMOLA (Altermann and
Klaenhammer, 2003). The implemented GenBank parser currently
ignores joined features. In prokaryotes, joined features such as
introns [e.g., the mobilization protein MobA E1 (genome posi-
tion 1344187.0.1345428, 1347858.0.1348370) in Lactococcus lactis
subsp. cremoris MG1363 (GI:124491690)] are very rare and usu-
ally do not interfere with the analyses. Also, identical genomes still
incur a distance to each other, resulting in a small branching when
visualizing the dissimilarity matrix. A normalization algorithm
will be implemented in the next release to address this issue. com-
pACTor and FGDﬁnder are actively developed and future releases
will resolve those issues.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
EVALUATION OF FUNCTIONAL DISTRIBUTION TREES
To assess the FGD concept 35 completed and four draft phase
genomes from different phyla, including several archeal genomes,
were selected (Table A2 in Appendix). The purpose of this
diverse taxonomy is to investigate how FGD places individual
genomes into clusters and how similar these genomes are to
each other on a functional level. The majority of the genomes
selected are members of the family Lactobacillaceae in the order
Lactobacillales (12 genomes). To investigate the discriminatory
power of the FGD algorithm, the range was expanded and ﬁve
genomes of the family Bacillaceae (order Bacillales), three genomes
of the family Streptococcaceae (order Lactobacillales) and two
genomes of the family Leuconostocaceae (order Lactobacillales)
were added. Eight more distantly related genomes of the order
Clostridiales (class Clostridia) were chosen to broaden the tax-
onomic selection to different classes. All of these genomes are
members of the phylum Firmicutes. Three representatives of
the class Gammaproteobacteria, (phylum Proteobacteria) were
included to investigate inter-phylum relationships. As a ﬁnal out-
lier, six genomes of archeal Euryarchaeota were included in the
analysis.

Figure 2 represents the functional distribution of the selected
taxa within an FDT. To test the inﬂuence of early, incomplete
draft phase genomes on functional placement, the draft phase
sequence of Anaerostipes caccae DSM14662 (Schwiertz et al.,
2002) which consisted of ∼1.69 Mbp at the time of analysis was
included. FGD penalized the missing genetic information and

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 5

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

FIGURE 2 | Functional genome distribution of 39 taxa. Publicly available
complete genomes were downloaded in GenBank format from the NCBI
genome database. Publicly available draft phase genomes were downloaded
in FASTA format, concatenated using a universal spacer-stop-spacer sequence
and automatically annotated using GAMOLA (Altermann and Klaenhammer,
2003). The in-house draft phase genome of Butyrivibrio proteoclasticus was
assembled into an artiﬁcial genome and annotated using GAMOLA

(publication in preparation). Predicted ORFeomes of all genomes were
subjected to an FGD analysis and the resulting distance matrix was imported
into MEGA4. The functional distribution was visualized using the UPGMA
method (Sneath and Sokal, 1962). The optimal tree with the sum of branch
length= 133.1 is shown. The tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths in the
same units as those of the functional distances used to infer the distribution
tree.

set A. caccae apart from the Clostridiales as a separate cluster.
When the updated genome sequence of A. caccae encompassing

∼3.6 Mbp was included instead, A. caccae shifted its position and
clustered with Ruminococcus obeum and Ruminococcus gnavus

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 6

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

(branch length 1.99 du), while showing a deeper branching
to Butyrivibrio proteoclasticus (branch length 3.13 du; data not
shown). This clearly highlights the necessity of obtaining high-
coverage genome sequence data for FGD analyses. However, with
high-throughput genome sequencing techniques currently avail-
able, initial draft phase genomes usually encompass 85–95% of
the genome, thus allowing an initial representative functional
placement.

Subsequent analysis of complete genomes included in the
FDT revealed the deepest branching (20.6 du) for euryarcheal
genomes. The selected methanogens form two distinct genome
clusters (node at 5.3 du), separating Methanococcoides burtonii
and Methanosarcina mazei (Deppenmeier et al., 2002) from the
remaining four taxa. Initial comparisons of habitat, growth tem-
perature, and GC content did not indicate a consistently shared
denominator between the two groups. Further analyses will be nec-
essary to determine the imminent functional similarities indicated
by the FGD approach.

Interestingly, Clostridiaceae, Bacillaceae, and a subcluster com-
prised of Rumincocci and B. proteoclasticus B316 formed a new
functional node within the FDT (branch depth from node to
Lactobacillales was 7.8 du), combining the taxonomic families
into one genome cluster. Although the genomes of members of
Clostridiaceae and Bacillaceae are still placed into distinct func-
tional groups (internal cluster branch depth was 4 du) and no
taxon shufﬂing was observed between both sub-clusters, it appears
that lifestyle adaptation has led to similar genome content, poten-
tially indicative of a high level of HGT between both families or
from one family to the other.

A survey of the nine ORFeomes of the Bacillus and Clostrid-
ium clusters revealed 154 ORFs that are highly conserved in both
groups (e-value threshold 1e-100). As expected, most ORFs could
be assigned to central house-keeping functions such as DNA syn-
thesis and repair (21%), tRNA genes and related processes (12%),
central metabolism (35%), transcription and translation (6%),
cellular processes (9%), and molecule transport (8%). However,
besides these central functions, a signiﬁcant number of ORFs
related to sporulation were present and highly conserved in both
clusters (8%). Based on the algorithms used, it is reasonable to
hypothesize that the presence of these highly conserved sporula-
tion genes may be one of the key drivers for the observed clustering
of bacilli and true clostridia.

When compared to the Ruminococcus subcluster a similar
conserved gene set was found with the notable absence of
most sporulation genes (e-value threshold 1e-60). This is in
agreement with the observed non-sporulating phenotype. It is
noteworthy, that two conserved genes involved in sporulation
(stage V sporulation protein D, spoVD, and Sporulation initi-
ation inhibitor protein, soj) were identiﬁed in the Ruminococ-
cus and Butyrivibrio genomes. This may indicate an ongo-
ing genetic loss in response to adaptation to a new envi-
ronment (rumen) where sporulation is no longer offering an
advantage in ﬁtness. The other identiﬁed shared genes are
likely to be present in most of the other microbial genomes
analyzed, and thus would contribute to higher-level genome
clustering.

In addition, the ORFeomes were analyzed for predicted genes
which are conserved in one genome cluster but not in the other –
and vice versa (threshold conserved: 1e-100; threshold unique:
1e-10). Overall, 84 ORFs were identiﬁed to be group speciﬁc. Sev-
enty of these were found only in genomes assigned to the Bacillus
cluster and 14 in genomes in the Clostridium group. Remark-
ably, genes involved in heme and cytochrome biogenesis (hemE,
hemH, hemY, resB, and resC), cytochrome reduction (gcrB, gcrC,
cypD), and cytochrome oxidation (qoxB, cydA, ctaB, ctaD, cydA)
were identiﬁed, indicating a Bacillus-speciﬁc electron transport
chain. It is thus tempting to speculate that, functionally, Bacilli
are aerobic Clostridia, having acquired the capability of oxidative
phosphorylation. Furthermore, a subset of the propionate metab-
olism pathways identiﬁed to be Bacillus-speciﬁc. This subset is
involved in the conversion of propanoyl-CoA to succinate and
succinyl-CoA (prpD, prpB, pccB, sucD, sucC) and might present
an additional energy conversion option for Bacilli which is absent
in Clostridia.

Only a few ORFs were identiﬁed to be Clostridium cluster spe-
ciﬁc. Among those a cobyric acid synthase cobQ was identiﬁed to
be Clostridium speciﬁc. CobQ is part of the porphyrin metabolic
pathway, involved in converting cobyrinic acid into coenzyme vit-
amin B12. Notably, a central branching point in this pathway leads
to the synthesis of hemes and cytochromes found in Bacilli (see
above). Interestingly, CobQ is also absent in the Ruminococcus
subcluster, providing further support for the proposed ongo-
ing adaptation to the new rumen environment. In contrast, the
Ruminococcus subcluster acquired a number of membrane and
sugar utilization (e.g., beta-glucosidases bgl3A, bgl3B, and bgl3D
and an l-fucose isomerase) which may aid in the adhesion to and
degradation of plant ﬁbers in the rumen (threshold conserved:
1e-60; threshold unique: 1e-10; Kelly et al., 2010).

While the function of these genes has been well described in
the past, they deliver the proof-of-concept that FGD analyses are
able to identify gene sets involved in lifestyle adaptation processes.
Because the initial similarity analysis does not rely on existing
gene annotation, uncharacterized ORFs (e.g., genes annotated as
“conserved hypothetical”) can be identiﬁed as potential targets to
contributing to respective phenotypes. This is particular impor-
tant for poorly annotated microbial genomes with a high level of
conserved hypothetical ORFs.

In summary, results obtained from the test dataset provide
strong support for the usefulness of FGD analyses, by illustrating
the ability of the method to draw together groups into common
nodes based on shared core (shared by all genomes in a speciﬁc
cluster) and lifestyle elements, yet distinguishing them into distinct
sub-clusters based on relevant genotypic differences and lifestyle
adaptation processes. Importantly, FGD subsequently allows iden-
tifying gene sets likely to be responsible for the observed clus-
tering, providing meaningful new target selections for functional
genomics analyses independent of other means of classiﬁcation or
prior annotation.

Furthermore, distinct placements in genome clustering of Leu-
conostoc mesenteroides and Oenococcus oeni (Ze-Ze et al., 2000;
Makarova et al., 2006; Leuconostocaceae) were observed in the
FDT. Both genera can be found epiphytically on fruits, fruit

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 7

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

mashes, and vegetables and are used in industrial and food fer-
mentation processes. Interestingly, Functional Distribution placed
L. casei and L. plantarum into a separate cluster, branching deeply
within the Bacilli (Figure A1 in Appendix). Both genomes are
signiﬁcantly larger than the average Lactobacillus genome of 1.8–
2.0 Mbp with 2.8 and 3.3 Mbp, respectively. The signiﬁcantly
increased genome size likely reﬂects a more generalized lifestyle,
capable of thriving in a variety of habitats such as raw and fer-
mented dairy products, plants, and the intestinal and reproductive
tracts of animals and humans. In contrast, the smaller genomes
of other lactobacilli often reﬂect the more specialized lifestyle to
one habitat such as the human or animal gastrointestinal system
or speciﬁc fermentation processes.

These results may indicate that lifestyle adaptation can lead
to a similar genetic makeup of taxa deﬁned as being distinctively
different by heritage based phylogeny.

LIMITS OF THE FGD RESOLUTION
In the previous example microbial genomes from a wider range of
species were investigated. To determine if the algorithm can dis-
criminate strains from the same species, 23 Chlamydia trachomatis
genomes (host: human), three Chlamydia muridarum genomes
(host: members of the family Muridae), and one Chlamydia pneu-
moniae genome (host: varied; see Table A3 in Appendix) were
subjected to an FGD analysis. It is interesting to note that until
1999 C. muridarum, infecting only members of the family Muri-
dae, was designated as C. trachomatis (Everett et al., 1999). C.
pneumoniae, which can infect a wide variety of different hosts and
causes atypical pneumonia, clusters away from both C. trachomatis
and C. muridarum genomes, indicating a different – and possible
more ﬂexible – genome makeup (Figure A2 in Appendix). In con-
trast to the other Chlamydia genomes, C. pneumoniae harbors an
additional ∼200 kb of genetic information, and a more detailed
analysis will be necessary to determine whether gene loss or gene
acquisition is the major driving force. Similarly, the C. muridarum
group is clearly forming its own cluster, albeit indicating a higher-
level of similarity to C. trachomatis than to C. pneumoniae. On this
high level, FGD can clearly resolve genomic differences and sup-
port observed host speciﬁcities (varied hosts – Muridae – human).
Within the C. trachomatis cluster, three distinct sub-clusters could
be identiﬁed with little reshufﬂing observed. Cluster 1 comprises
serotypes E, F, G, and J (and C. trachomatis Ds2923), Cluster 2 har-
bors serotypes A, B, D, and L (and C. trachomatis E Sweden2), and
Cluster 3 groups two serotype L and one serotype A (Figure A2
in Appendix). The observed positioning of the serovar D strain C.
trachomatis Ds2923 into Cluster 1 supports the pairwise alignment
of several chlamydial isolates (Jeffrey et al., 2010) which identiﬁed
the least number of nucleotide substitutions between Ds/2926 and
E/11023. In contrast, different major groups were identiﬁed in this
nucleotide based analysis; two major clades (D/G/J and E/F; Jeffrey
et al., 2010) are contrasted by three clusters (E/F/G/J, A/B/D/L, and
L/A).

Overall, the FGD analysis was able to resolve strains from the
same species to a similar level and with similar results as other
whole genome comparative approaches. However, one of the lim-
itations seen in the analysis of very similar genomes from the

same species was the difﬁculty in identifying cluster speciﬁc gene
sets based on e-value using FGDﬁnder [only three hypothetical
ORFs were found to be cluster speciﬁc to Cluster 3 (see Figure A2
in Appendix, threshold conserved: 1e-20; threshold unique: 1e-
10)]. In its current version FGDﬁnder uses calculated e-values
to determine respective conserved or cluster speciﬁc gene sets. A
future version of the software will incorporate the FGD scoring
algorithm, increasing the power of resolution when very similar
ORFeome sets are compared.

TOPOGRAPHICAL STABILITY OF FUNCTIONAL DISTRIBUTION TREES
The overall stability of inferred trees and respective genome clus-
ters was tested by a Jackknife analysis (James and McCulloch,
1990). Individual observations (genome entries) from the cal-
culated distance matrix were removed sequentially and resulting
UPGMA-based FDTs were approximated. This was done for each
genome in the dataset, resulting in 39 subset trees. Respective
topologies were assessed individually. To investigate the impact
of whole genome clusters on tree robustness, a Jackknife analysis
was performed deﬁning observed genome clusters as individual
observations. Again, FDTs were approximated and evaluated for
each resulting subset (data not shown). In summary, tree topology
remained stable and only a swapping of neighboring branches was
observed while in no instance shufﬂing was found for individual
genome entries between genome clusters in either Jackknife analy-
sis. This strongly supports the overall stability and discriminatory
power of the FGD analysis.

Similarly, a Jackknife analysis was performed for the narrow
strain FGD analysis (Figure A2 in Appendix). Individual entries,
individual clusters, and complete serotypes were removed and the
resulting tree topology investigated. Removal of individual entries
and complete clusters did not change the topology of the FGD tree.
Only minor reshufﬂing was observed within a respective cluster
when complete serotypes were removed from the analyses (e.g.,
removal of serotype L caused a repositioning of C. trachomatis D
UW3 CX into the serotype D subcluster within Cluster 2.

As expected, the removal of individual entries reduces discrim-
inatory power, resulting in grouping together previously more
separated genome clusters, without any entry-reshufﬂing.

COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS USING THE ARTEMIS COMPARISON TOOL
Comparison of the degree of genome similarity between two or
more genomes relies on analyses of presence/absence of genes
and their respective syntenies in an operon or genome-wide
context. In combination with ORFeome based (ORF-to-ORF
comparison on amino-acid level, a maximum of 20 similar-
ity hits per ORF is permitted) MSPcrunch (Sonnhammer and
Durbin, 1994) comparison format data ﬁles (pMSPs) created
by the compACTor software and annotated GenBank ﬁles, the
ACT (Carver et al., 2005) provides an excellent visualization plat-
form for mobility through the entire genome. Figure 3 illustrates
the differences and similarities found between closely related
strains such as between members of the acidophilus-complex
of the Lactobacilli or between subspecies as well as between
less similar genomes of more distantly related microbes. For
example, small scale [inversion of a speciﬁc gene locus between

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 8

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

FIGURE 3 | ORFeome based comparative ACT visualization of 11
Lactobacillus genomes. Based on the distribution observed in Figure 2, 11
Lactobacillus genomes and their ORFeome similarities were visualized in ACT
using pMSP-dataﬁles. Respective genome designations are indicated on the
left hand side of each genome line. Genomes are shown in full and drawn to
scale. Genomic nucleotide sequences are represented by gray lines indicating
sense and anti-sense strands and position markers are shown in between.

Predicted ORFs are shown on each strand in their respective orientation as
arrowed boxes. Direct amino-acid similarity between individual ORFs of
neighboring genomes are shown as red lines, inverted similarities are
indicated by blue lines. Color shadings indicate the level of similarity, the more
saturated a similarity line the more conserved are two ORF-pairs. A trust level
value of 40 was employed as display threshold to visualize similarity hits
below an e-value of 1e-60.

both L. delbrueckii ssp. bulgaricus genomes (Makarova et al.,
2006; van de Guchte et al., 2006)] and large scale (double

inversion ∼700 and ∼150 kb, respectively) of the terminus of
DNA replication between L. gasseri (Azcarate-Peril et al., 2008)

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 9

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

and L.
johnsonii (Pridmore et al., 2004) genome inversions,
deletion, and insertion events [between L. acidophilus (Altermann
et al., 2005) and L. delbrueckii ssp. bulgaricus], localized gene
synteny (between L. delbrueckii ssp. bulgaricus and L. brevis),
general presence/absence of individual genes and larger synteny
trends (between L. casei and L. plantarum) can be immediately
identiﬁed.

COMPARISON OF THE FGD ALGORITHM TO ALTERNATIVE METHODS
Although similar algorithms exist to investigate phylogenetic rela-
tionships based on whole (or partial) genomes sequences (Snel
et al., 1999; Wolf et al., 2001; Henz et al., 2005; Khiripet, 2005; Can-
chaya et al., 2006; Fuchsman and Rocap, 2006; Berger et al., 2007;
Felis and Dellaglio, 2007; Blaiotta et al., 2008), their focus remains
mostly to infer a heritage based phylogeny. Furthermore, often
only subsets of ORFeomes are chosen for these analyses. These are
then analyzed individually (with or without weighting) or as con-
catenated sequences. Thus an artiﬁcial restriction is introduced
that may bias the analysis. An example of such a method has been
published by Konstantinidis and Tiedje (2005). There, genome
information to infer taxonomy of prokaryotes is used, calculating
an average amino-acid identity of shared gene subsets. Only few
publications investigate the functional relationship of microbial
genomes, such as the development of the Blast Score Ratio which
analyzes the complete ORFeome but is limited to three genomes at
a time (Rasko et al., 2005). Other methods investigating the func-
tional relationship and similarities between gene clusters have been
used to address the problem of genomes with different sizes. One
example of such a method, GRAST, explores the ongoing genome
reductions and rearrangements by identifying clusters of function-
ally related genes (Toft and Fares, 2006). Subsets of orthologous
gene pairs are identiﬁed to determine conserved genetic loci. Sim-
ilar to Blast Score Ratio analyses, the number of input genomes is
limited to two at a time. While the output in part shows similar-
ity to FGD analyses (visual representation of a genome plot and
the determination of common and non-common genes), the pur-
pose of this method is distinctly different in speciﬁcally identifying
genome plasticity trends. A combination of genome analysis and
visualization tool, GeneComp, has been published earlier (Yang
et al., 2003). GeneComp is able to use different BLAST ﬂavors
and then visualize the textual output with varying levels of align-
ment length stringencies. While this solution offers the advantage
of providing a combined analysis and visualization package, a
number of limitations exist when compared to FGD. Like BSR
and GRAST, GeneComp is restricted to a maximum number of
three genomes. Furthermore, the algorithm is sequence based,
highlighting genome variations such as repeat regions, insertions,
deletions, and rearrangements rather than speciﬁc similarities to
predicted ORFs.

Non-sequence based methods such as MLST use only a rela-
tively small number of conserved genome loci with the primary
aim to establish a highly discriminating (microbial) typing system
(Chan et al., 2001; Maiden, 2006; Diancourt et al., 2007). Notewor-
thy, the ability of FGD analyses to identify cluster-conserved gene
sets may provide a high-quality starting point for the selection of
MLST targets.

CONCLUSION
16S rRNA and other gene subset analyses mainly focus on the
determination of the line of descendants of a given gene or organ-
ism (Zhang et al., 2009) or on the identiﬁcation of protein families
(Enright and Ouzounis, 2000; Enright et al., 2002; Kelil et al., 2007).
Such phylogenetic studies aim to reconstruct the relationship
between organisms and are paramount to analyze the (changing)
community structures of complex biological ecosystems. While
this type of phylogenetic analysis is well accepted and widely
used, it does not reﬂect the respective comprehensive genotypes.
In contrast, FGD provides a different view of microbial similari-
ties to each other. The example data set demonstrated the effects
of lifestyle adaptation on genome content. FGD has shown the
potential to provide new insights into the relationships between
microbes from a comparative genomics perspective. The algo-
rithm has already been used in a variety of analyses ranging
from microbial (Goh et al., 2011) and archeal (Leahy et al., 2010)
genomes to bacteriophage (Lu et al., 2010) which describe the
impact of FGD analyses in more detail within their respective
scopes.

Functional genome distribution in combination with the
graphical visualization in ACT using ORFeome distance ﬁles
(pMSPs) and functionally annotated GenBank ﬁles offers a pow-
erful tool for comparative genomics that allows comparisons
of whole genomes within genome space, encompassing heritage
based (vertical transmission), lateral gene transfer (HGT), and
lifestyle-driven change (adaptation) in a single analysis. There-
fore, rather than attempting to reconstruct the evolution of the
core genome with its set of commonly shared genes, FGD allows a
representation of whole genome similarity at the functional level.
It will be possible to add further functionality to the algorithm,
such as the ability to mask deﬁned or dynamically created gene
clusters within groups of organisms, thus identifying potentially
important genetic elements independent from otherwise over-
powering gene sets, such as central house-keeping or metabolism
genes.

AVAILABILITY
The complete software suite consisting of the compACTor and
the FGDﬁnder software is freely available upon email request for
academic use. Commercial use is subject to a license agreement.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Special thanks go to Peter Janssen for helpful and critical discus-
sions during the development of the FGD algorithm, the sub-
sequent interpretation of the data and the critical review of the
manuscript. I also thank Sinead Leahy, Graeme Attwood, and Bill
Kelly for their scientiﬁc contributions to this manuscript. This
work was funded by the New Economic Research Fund programs
C10× 0314 and PROJ-13812-LNNR-AGR and supported by the
Pastoral Greenhouse Gas Research Consortium (PGgRc).

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at
http://www.frontiersin.org/Evolutionary_and_Genomic_Microbi
ology/10.3389/fmicb.2012.00048/abstract

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 10

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

REFERENCES
Altermann, E., and Klaenhammer, T.
R. (2003). GAMOLA: a new local
solution for sequence annotation
and analyzing draft and ﬁnished
prokaryotic genomes. OMICS 7,
161–169.

Altermann, E., Russell, W. M., Azcarate-
Peril, M. A., Barrangou, R., Buck, B.
L., Mcauliffe, O., Souther, N., Dob-
son, A., Duong, T., Callanan, M.,
Lick, S., Hamrick, A., Cano, R., and
Klaenhammer, T. R. (2005). Com-
plete genome sequence of the probi-
otic lactic acid bacterium Lactobacil-
lus acidophilus NCFM. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 3906–3912.

Altschul, S. F., Gish, W., Miller, W.,
Myers, E. W., and Lipman, D. J.
(1990). Basic local alignment search
tool. J. Mol. Biol. 215, 403–410.

Altschul, S. F., Madden, T. L., Schaf-
fer, A. A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z.,
Miller, W., and Lipman, D. J. (1997).
Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a
new generation of protein database
search programs. Nucleic Acids Res.
25, 3389–3402.

Azcarate-Peril, M. A., Altermann, E.,
Goh,Y. J., Tallon, R., Sanozky-Dawes,
R. B., Pfeiler, E. A., O’ﬂaherty, S.,
Buck, B. L., Dobson, A., Duong,
T., Miller, M.
J., Barrangou, R.,
and Klaenhammer, T. R. (2008).
Analysis of the genome sequence
of Lactobacillus gasseri ATCC 33323
reveals
the molecular basis of
an autochthonous intestinal organ-
ism. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74,
4610–4625.

Berger, B., Pridmore, R. D., Barretto,
C., Delmas-Julien, F., Schreiber, K.,
Arigoni, F., and Brussow, H. (2007).
Similarity and differences in the Lac-
tobacillus acidophilus group identi-
ﬁed by polyphasic analysis and com-
parative genomics. J. Bacteriol. 189,
1311–1321.

Blaiotta, G., Fusco, V., Ercolini, D.,
Aponte, M., Pepe, O., and Vil-
lani, F. (2008). Diversity of Lac-
tobacillus
strains based on par-
tial HSP60 gene sequences and
design of PCR-RFLP assays
for
species identiﬁcation and differenti-
ation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74,
208–215.

Canchaya, C., Claesson, M. J., Fitzgerald,
G. F., Van Sinderen, D., and O’toole,
P. W. (2006). Diversity of the genus
Lactobacillus revealed by compara-
tive genomics of ﬁve species. Micro-
biology 152, 3185–3196.

Carver, T. J., Rutherford, K. M., Berri-
man, M., Rajandream, M. A., Bar-
rell, B. G., and Parkhill, J. (2005).
ACT: the Artemis comparison tool.
Bioinformatics 21, 3422–3423.

Chan, M.-S., Maiden, M. C. J., and
Spratt, B. G.
(2001). Database-
driven multi locus sequence typing
(MLST) of bacterial pathogens.
Bioinformatics 17, 1077–1083.

Deppenmeier, U., Johann, A., Hartsch,
T., Merkl, R., Schmitz, R. A.,
Martinez-Arias, R., Henne, A.,
Jacobi,
Wiezer, A., Baumer, S.,
C., Bruggemann, H.,
Lienard,
T., Christmann, A., Bomeke, M.,
Steckel,
S., Bhattacharyya, A.,
Lykidis, A., Overbeek, R., Klenk,
H. P., Gunsalus, R. P., Fritz, H. J.,
and Gottschalk, G.
(2002). The
genome of Methanosarcina mazei:
evidence for lateral gene transfer
between bacteria
and archaea.
J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 4,
453–461.

J.

Desiere, F., Mcshan, W. M., Van
Sinderen, D., Ferretti,
J., and
Brussow, H. (2001). Comparative
genomics reveals close genetic rela-
tionships between phages from dairy
bacteria and pathogenic Strepto-
cocci: evolutionary implications for
prophage-host interactions. Virology
288, 325–341.

Diancourt, L., Passet, V., Chervaux, C.,
Garault, P., Smokvina, T., and Brisse,
S. (2007). Multilocus sequence typ-
ing of Lactobacillus casei (L. para-
casei) reveals a clonal population
structure with low levels of homolo-
gous recombination. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 73, 6601–6611.

Enright, A. J., and Ouzounis, C. A.
(2000). GeneRAGE: a robust algo-
rithm for sequence clustering and
domain detection. Bioinformatics
16, 451–457.

Enright, A. J., Van Dongen, S., and
Ouzounis, C. A. (2002). An efﬁcient
algorithm for large-scale detection
of protein families. Nucleic Acids Res.
30, 1575–1584.

Everett, K. D., Bush, R. M., and
Andersen, A. A. (1999). Emended
description of the order Chlamydi-
ales, proposal of Parachlamydiaceae
fam. nov. and Simkaniaceae fam.
nov., each containing one mono-
typic genus, revised taxonomy of
the family Chlamydiaceae, including
a new genus and ﬁve new species,
and standards for the identiﬁcation
of organisms. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol.
49(Pt 2), 415–440.

Felis, G. E., and Dellaglio, F. (2007).
Taxonomy of Lactobacilli and Biﬁ-
dobacteria. Curr. Issues Intest. Micro-
biol. 8, 44–61.

Fuchsman, C. A., and Rocap, G. (2006).
Whole-genome reciprocal BLAST
analysis reveals that planctomycetes
do not share an unusually large
number of genes with eukarya and

archaea. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72,
6841–6844.

Goh, Y., Goin, C., O’ﬂaherty, S., Alter-
mann, E., and Hutkins, R. (2011).
Specialized adaptation of a lactic
acid bacterium to the milk environ-
ment: the comparative genomics of
Streptococcus thermophilus LMD-9.
Microb. Cell Fact.10, S22.

Henz, S. R., Huson, D. H., Auch, A. F.,
Nieselt-Struwe, K., and Schuster, S.
C. (2005). Whole-genome prokary-
otic phylogeny. Bioinformatics 21,
2329–2335.

James, F. C., and McCulloch, C. E.
(1990). Multivariate analysis in ecol-
ogy and systematics: panacea or Pan-
dora’s box? Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 21,
129–166.

Jeffrey, B. M., Suchland, R. J., Quinn,
K. L., Davidson,
J. R., Stamm,
W. E., and Rockey, D. D. (2010).
Genome sequencing of recent clin-
ical Chlamydia trachomatis strains
identiﬁes loci associated with tis-
sue tropism and regions of apparent
recombination. Infect. Immun. 78,
2544–2553.
Kanehisa, M.

(2002). The KEGG
database. Novartis Found. Symp.
247, 91–101; discussion 101–103,
119–128, 244–152.

Kanehisa, M., Araki, M., Goto, S., Hat-
tori, M., Hirakawa, M., Itoh, M.,
Katayama, T., Kawashima, S., Okuda,
S., Tokimatsu, T., and Yamanishi, Y.
(2008). KEGG for linking genomes
to life and the environment. Nucleic
Acids Res. 36, D480–D484.

Kelil, A., Wang, S., Brzezinski, R.,
and Fleury, A.
(2007). CLUSS:
clustering of protein sequences
based on a new similarity mea-
sure. BMC Bioinformatics 8, 286.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-8-286

Kelly, W. J., Leahy, S. C., Altermann,
E., Yeoman, C. J., Dunne, J. C.,
Kong, Z., Pacheco, D. M., Li, D.,
Noel, S. J., Moon, C. D., Cookson,
A. L., and Attwood, G. T. (2010).
The glycobiome of
rumen
bacterium Butyrivibrio proteoclas-
ticus B316(T) highlights adapta-
tion to a polysaccharide-rich envi-
ronment. PLoS ONE 5, e11942.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0011942

the

Khiripet, N. (2005). “Bacterial whole
genome phylogeny using proteome
comparison and optimal reversal
distance,” in Computational Systems
Bioinformatics Conference, Stanford.
Konstantinidis, K. T., and Tiedje, J.
M. (2005). Towards a genome-based
taxonomy for prokaryotes. J. Bacte-
riol. 187, 6258–6264.

Leahy, S. C., Kelly, W.

J., Alter-
mann, E., Ronimus, R. S., Yeo-
man, C.
J., Pacheco, D. M., Li,

D., Kong, Z., Mctavish, S., Sang,
C., Lambie, S. C.,
Janssen, P.
H., Dey, D., and Attwood, G. T.
(2010). The genome sequence of the
rumen methanogen Methanobre-
vibacter ruminantium reveals new
possibilities for controlling rumi-
nant methane
emissions. PLoS
ONE 5, e8926. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0008926

Lu, Z., Altermann, E., Breidt, F.,
and Kozyavkin, S. (2010). Sequence
analysis of Leuconostoc mesenteroides
bacteriophage {Phi}1-A4 isolated
from an industrial vegetable fermen-
tation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76,
1955–1966.

Maiden, M. C. J. (2006). Multilocus
sequence typing of bacteria. Annu.
Rev. Microbiol. 60, 561–588.

Makarova, K., Slesarev, A., Wolf, Y.,
Sorokin, A., Mirkin, B., Koonin, E.,
Pavlov, A., Pavlova, N., Karamy-
chev, V., Polouchine, N., Shakhova,
V., Grigoriev, I., Lou, Y., Rohksar,
D., Lucas, S., Huang, K., Good-
stein, D. M., Hawkins, T., Plengvid-
hya, V., Welker, D., Hughes, J., Goh,
Y., Benson, A., Baldwin, K., Lee,
J. H., Diaz-Muniz, I., Dosti, B.,
Smeianov, V., Wechter, W., Barabote,
R., Lorca, G., Altermann, E., Barran-
gou, R., Ganesan, B., Xie, Y., Raw-
sthorne, H., Tamir, D., Parker, C.,
Breidt, F., Broadbent, J., Hutkins, R.,
O’sullivan, D., Steele, J., Unlu, G.,
Saier, M., Klaenhammer, T., Richard-
son, P., Kozyavkin, S., Weimer, B.,
and Mills, D. (2006). Comparative
genomics of the lactic acid bacte-
ria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103,
15611–15616.

Makarova, K. S., and Koonin, E. V.
(2007). Evolutionary genomics of
lactic acid bacteria. J. Bacteriol. 189,
1199–1208.

McCutcheon, J. P., and von Dohlen, C.
D. (2011). An interdependent meta-
bolic patchwork in the nested sym-
biosis of mealybugs. Curr. Biol. 21,
1366–1372.

Nicolas, P., Bessieres, P., Ehrlich, S.
D., Maguin, E.,
and Van De
Guchte, M. (2007). Extensive hor-
izontal
transfer of core genome
genes between two Lactobacillus
species found in the gastrointesti-
nal tract. BMC Evol. Biol. 7, 141.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-7-141

Pridmore, R. D., Berger, B., Desiere,
F., Vilanova, D., Barretto, C., Pit-
tet, A. C., Zwahlen, M. C., Rou-
vet, M., Altermann, E., Barrangou,
R., Mollet, B., Mercenier, A., Klaen-
hammer, T., Arigoni, F., and Schell,
M. A. (2004). The genome sequence
of the probiotic intestinal bacterium
Lactobacillus
johnsonii NCC 533.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 11

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101,
2512–2517.

Rasko, D. A., Myers, G. S., and Ravel,
J. (2005). Visualization of compar-
ative genomic analyses by BLAST
score ratio. BMC Bioinformatics 6, 2.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-6-2

Rohwer, F., and Edwards, R. (2002). The
phage proteomic tree: a genome-
based taxonomy for phage. J. Bac-
teriol. 184, 4529–4535.

Schneiker, S., Perlova, O., Kaiser, O.,
Gerth, K., Alici, A., Altmeyer, M.
O., Bartels, D., Bekel, T., Beyer, S.,
Bode, E., Bode, H. B., Bolten, C. J.,
Choudhuri, J. V., Doss, S., Elnakady,
Y. A., Frank, B., Gaigalat, L., Goes-
mann, A., Groeger, C., Gross, F., Jels-
bak, L., Kalinowski, J., Kegler, C.,
Knauber, T., Konietzny, S., Kopp,
M., Krause, L., Krug, D., Linke,
B., Mahmud, T., Martinez-Arias, R.,
Mchardy, A. C., Merai, M., Meyer,
F., Mormann, S., Munoz-Dorado,
J., Perez, J., Pradella, S., Rachid, S.,
Raddatz, G., Rosenau, F., Ruckert,
C., Sasse, F., Scharfe, M., Schuster,
S. C., Suen, G., Treuner-Lange, A.,
Velicer, G. J., Vorholter, F. J., Weiss-
man, K. J., Welch, R. D., Wenzel, S.
C., Whitworth, D. E., Wilhelm, S.,
Wittmann, C., Blocker, H., Puhler,
A., and Muller, R. (2007). Complete
genome sequence of the myxobac-
terium Sorangium cellulosum. Nat.
Biotechnol. 25, 1281–1289.

Schwiertz, A., Hold, G. L., Duncan,
S. H., Gruhl, B., Collins, M. D.,

Lawson, P. A., Flint, H.
J., and
Blaut, M. (2002). Anaerostipes caccae
gen. nov., sp. nov., a new saccha-
rolytic, acetate-utilising, butyrate-
producing bacterium from human
faeces. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 25,
46–51.

Sneath, P. H., and Sokal, R. R. (1962).
Numerical taxonomy. Nature 193,
855–860.

Snel, B., Bork, P., and Huynen, M. A.
(1999). Genome phylogeny based
on gene content. Nat. Genet. 21,
108–110.

Sonnhammer, E. L., and Durbin, R.
(1994). A workbench for
large-
scale sequence homology analy-
sis. Comput. Appl. Biosci.
10,
301–307.

Sousa, C., De Lorenzo, V., and Cebolla,
(1997). Modulation of gene
chromoso-
in Escherichia
6),

A.
expression
mal positioning
coli. Microbiology
2071–2078.

through

143(Pt

Tamura, K., Dudley, J., Nei, M., and
Kumar, S. (2007). MEGA4: molec-
ular evolutionary genetics analysis
(MEGA) software version 4.0. Mol.
Biol. Evol. 24, 1596–1599.

Tatusov, R., Fedorova, N., Jackson, J.,
Jacobs, A., Kiryutin, B., Koonin, E.,
Krylov, D., Mazumder, R., Mekhe-
dov, S., Nikolskaya, A., Rao, B. S.,
Smirnov, S., Sverdlov, A., Vasude-
van, S., Wolf, Y., Yin,
J., and
Natale, D. (2003). The COG data-
base: an updated version includes

eukaryotes. BMC Bioinformatics 4,
41. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-4-41

Thomson, N., Bentley, S., Holden,
M., and Parkhill, J. (2003). Fit-
ting the niche by genomic adap-
tation. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 1,
92–93.

Toft, C., and Fares, M. A. (2006).
GRAST: a new way of genome
reduction analysis using compar-
ative genomics. Bioinformatics 22,
1551–1561.

van de Guchte, M., Penaud, S., Grimaldi,
C., Barbe, V., Bryson, K., Nicolas, P.,
Robert, C., Oztas, S., Mangenot, S.,
Couloux, A., Loux, V., Dervyn, R.,
Bossy, R., Bolotin, A., Batto, J. M.,
Walunas, T., Gibrat, J. F., Bessieres,
P., Weissenbach, J., Ehrlich, S. D.,
and Maguin, E. (2006). The com-
plete genome sequence of Lacto-
bacillus bulgaricus reveals extensive
and ongoing reductive evolution.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103,
9274–9279.

Wolf, Y., Rogozin,

I., Grishin, N.,
Tatusov, R.,
and Koonin, E.
(2001). Genome trees constructed
using ﬁve different
approaches
suggest
bacterial
clades. BMC Evol. Biol. 1, 8.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-1-8

new major

Yang, J., Wang, J., Yao, Z.-J., Jin, Q.,
Shen, Y., and Chen, R. (2003).
GenomeComp: a visualization tool
for microbial genome compari-
son.
54,
423–426.

J. Microbiol. Methods

the

and

physical
of

Ze-Ze, L., Tenreiro, R., and Paveia,
H. (2000). The Oenococcus oeni
genome:
genetic
strain GM and
mapping
genome
comparison with
of
a ‘divergent’
strain, PSU-1.
Microbiology 146(Pt 12), 3195–3204.
Zhang, H., Zhong, Y., Hao, B., and Gu,
X. (2009). A simple method for phy-
logenomic inference using the infor-
mation of gene content of genomes.
Gene 441, 163–168.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 08 November 2011; accepted:
30 January 2012; published online: 21
February 2012.
Citation: Altermann E (2012) Trac-
ing lifestyle adaptation in prokaryotic
genomes. Front. Microbio. 3:48. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00048
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology,
a specialty of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Altermann. This is an
open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 12

Altermann

APPENDIX

Functional genome distribution

FIGURE A1 | Functional distribution tree of 17 closely related taxa
within the class Bacilli. The tree represents a subset of the one shown
in Figure 2. Predicted ORFeomes of all genomes were subjected to an
FGD analysis and the resulting distance matrix was imported into

MEGA4. The functional distribution was visualized using the UPGMA
method (32). The tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths in the same
units as those of the functional distances used to infer the distribution
tree.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 13

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

FIGURE A2 | A functional distribution tree comprising of 23 Chlamydia
trachomatis genomes (host: human), three C. maridarum genomes
(host: members of the family Muridae), and one C. pneumoniae genome
were used to investigate genome similarities and the
FGD-power-of-resolution on strain level. Entries in red depict Chlamydia

trachomatis serotypes A–C (trachoma), entries in black represent serotypes
D–K (sexually transmitted pathovars) and entries in green show serotype LGV
(L1–L3; lymphogranuloma venereum). Chlamydia muridarum entries are
shown in blue and Chalmydia pneumoniae is depicted in gray. Functional
clusters and subclusters are indicated by square brackets.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 14

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

Table A1 | e-Value range based trust levels.

e-Value range

<0.1
0.1 ≤ e-value > 1e−10
1e−10 ≤ e-value > 1e−40
1e−40 ≤ e-value > 1e−50
1e−50 ≤ e-value > 1e−60
1e−60 ≤ e-value > 1e−70
1e−70 ≤ e-value > 1e−80
1e−80 ≤ e-value > 1e−90
1e−90 ≤ e-value > 1e−100
1e−100 ≤ e-value > 1e−110
1e−110 ≤ e-value > 1e−120
1e−120 ≤ e-value > 1e−130
1e−130 ≤ e-value > 1e−160
1e−160 ≤ e-value ≥ 0

Trust value

0
1
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
85
90
95
100

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 15

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

Table A2 | Genomes used for assessment of functional genome distribution.

Designation*

Domain/family

Genome size [bp]

ORFeome size

Accession number

Lactobacillus plantarum WCFS1
Lactobacillus brevis ATCC 367
Pediococcus pentosaceus ATCC 25745
Lactobacillus sakei subsp. sakei 23K
Lactobacillus casei ATCC 334
Lactobacillus salivarius UCC118
Lactobacillus reuteri F275
Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC 533
Lactobacillus gasseri ATCC 33323
Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM
Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp.
bulgaricus ATCC 11842
Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp.
bulgaricus ATCC BAA-365
Bacillus cereus ATCC 14579

Bacillus thuringiensis serovar konkukian
str. 97-27
Bacillus pumilus SAFR-032
Bacillus licheniformis ATCC 14580
Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis 168
Streptococcus pneumoniae R6
Streptococcus pyogenes SSI-1
Streptococcus thermophilus LMD-9
Leuconostoc mesenteroides subsp.
mesenteroides ATCC 8293
Oenococcus oeni PSU-1
Clostridium perfringens ATCC 13124
Clostridium botulinum ATCC 3502
Clostridium kluyveri DSM 555
Clostridium difﬁcile ATCC 9689
Ruminococcus obeum ATCC 29174
Anaerostipes caccae L1-92
Ruminococcus gnavus ATCC 29149
Butyrivibrio proteoclasticus B316
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA7
Escherichia coli O157:H7
Escherichia coli K12 K-12
Methanococcoides burtonii DSM 6242
Methanosarcina mazei Goe1
Methanocaldococcus jannaschii DSM
2661
Methanosphaera stadtmanae DSM 3091
Methanobrevibacter smithii ATCC 35061
Methanothermobacter
thermautotrophicus DeltaH

Bacteria/Lactobacillaceae
Bacteria/Lactobacillaceae
Bacteria/Lactobacillaceae
Bacteria/Lactobacillaceae
Bacteria/Lactobacillaceae
Bacteria/Lactobacillaceae
Bacteria/Lactobacillaceae
Bacteria/Lactobacillaceae
Bacteria/Lactobacillaceae
Bacteria/Lactobacillaceae
Bacteria/Lactobacillaceae

Bacteria/Lactobacillaceae

Bacteria/Bacillaceae

Bacteria/Bacillaceae

Bacteria/Bacillaceae
Bacteria/Bacillaceae
Bacteria/Bacillaceae
Bacteria/Streptococcaceae
Bacteria/Streptococcaceae
Bacteria/Streptococcaceae
Bacteria/Leuconostocaceae

Bacteria/Leuconostocaceae
Bacteria/Clostridiaceae
Bacteria/Clostridiaceae
Bacteria/Clostridiaceae
Bacteria/Clostridiaceae
Bacteria/Lachnospiraceae
Bacteria/Lachnospiraceae
Bacteria/Lachnospiraceae
Bacteria/Lachnospiraceae
Bacteria/Pseudomonadaceae
Bacteria/Enterobacteriaceae
Bacteria/Enterobacteriaceae
Archaea/Methanosarcinaceae
Archaea/Methanosarcinaceae
Archaea/Methanocaldococcaceae

Archaea/Methanobacteriaceae
Archaea/Methanobacteriaceae
Archaea/Methanobacteriaceae

3308274
2291220
1832387
1884661
2895264
1827111
1999618
1992676
1894360
1993561
1864998

1856951

5411809

5237682

3704465
4222645
4214630
2038615
1894275
1856368
2038396

1780517
3256683
3886916
3964618
4290252
3626304
1691947
3501953
3936787
6588339
5528445
4639675
2575032
4096345
1664970

1767403
1853160
1751377

*Color coding used in the table corresponds to the color scheme shown in Figure 2 and Figure A1.

3051
2314
1847
1886
2909
1738
1944
1857
1811
1979
2218

2040

5490

5168

3737
4379
4106
2046
1861
2003
2073

1864
2997
3648
3926
3680
4175
1582
3913
3477
6371
6006
4403
2446
3371
1682

1588
1795
1918

AL935263
CP000416
NC_008525
CR936503
CP000423
CP000233
CP000705
AE017198
CP000413
CP000033
CR954253

CP000412

AE016877.1

AE017355

CP000813
AE017333.1
AL009126
NC_003098
BA000034
CP000419
NC_008531

NC_008528
CP000246
AM412317
CP000673
AM180355
AAVO00000000; draft
ABAX00000000; draft
AAYG00000000; draft
Unpublished draft
CP000744
AE005174
NC_000913
NC_007955
NC_003901
NC_000909

NC_007681
NC_009515
NC_000916

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 16

Altermann

Functional genome distribution

Table A3 | Genomes used for assessment of functional genome distribution on strain level.

Designation*

Serotype

Chlamydia trachomatis A2497
Chlamydia trachomatis A HAR-13
Chlamydia trachomatis B TZ1A828
OT Chlamydia trachomatis B Jali20 OT
Chlamydia trachomatis D UW3 CX
Chlamydia trachomatis D-LC
Chlamydia trachomatis D-EC
Chlamydia trachomatis Ds2923
Chlamydia trachomatis E Sweden2
Chlamydia trachomatis E 150
Chlamydia trachomatis E 11023
Chlamydia trachomatis F 70
Chlamydia trachomatis F 70s
Chlamydia trachomatis G 11074
Chlamydia trachomatis G 9301
Chlamydia trachomatis G 9768
Chlamydia trachomatis G 11222
Chlamydia trachomatis J 6276
Chlamydia trachomatis J 6276s
Chlamydia trachomatis L2-434 Bu
Chlamydia trachomatis L2b UCH1 proctitis
Chlamydia trachomatis L2c
Chlamydia trachomatis L2tet1
Chlamydia muridarum MopnTet14 draft
Chlamydia muridarum Nigg
Chlamydia muridarum Weiss.cb
Chlamydia pneumoniae

A
A
B
B
D
D
D
D
E
E
E
F
F
G
G
G
G
J
J
L
L
L
L

Host

Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Human
Muridae
Muridae
Muridae
Varied

Genome status

Accession number

Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Draft
Complete

347974781
76788711
231272648
231273667
15604717
297749010
297748130
222356764
289525045
296434583
296438301
222444350
222444349
296437374
297139873
296435514
296436438
222444352
222444351
166153973
352951305
339625373
301334996
311788820
29337300
NC_002620.2
340215159

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 48 | 17

