MINI REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 08 May 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00174

Suitability of a probiotic Lactobacillus paracasei strain as a
starter culture in olive fermentation and development of
the innovative patented product “probiotic table olives”
Angelo Sisto and Paola Lavermicocca*

Institute of Sciences of Food Production, National Research Council, Bari, Italy

Edited by:
Aldo Corsetti, University of Teramo,
Italy
Reviewed by:
Maria Guadalupe Vizoso Pinto, Max
von Pettenkofer Institute of the
Ludwig Maximilian University of
Munich, Germany
Francisco Noé Arroyo López, Instituto
de la Grasa (Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas), Spain
Luca Settanni, Università degli Studi
di Palermo, Italy
Svetoslav Todorov, University of Sao
Paulo, Brazil
*Correspondence:
Paola Lavermicocca, Institute of
Sciences of Food Production, National
Research Council, Via Amendola
122/O, 70126 Bari, Italy. e-mail:
paola.lavermicocca@ispa.cnr.it

Probiotic bacteria are generally available for consumers as concentrated preparations or
incorporated in milk-based foods. Due to an increased interest of the market for probiotic
foods as well as to meet a demand of industry for innovation, a new kind of probiotic food
has been developed using table olives as a carrier. Green table olives, produced according to
the Spanish-style, are obtained by a fermentation which can be carried out by spontaneous
microﬂora, even if the use of starter cultures is desirable to obtain a more controlled
process. In this regard, the selected strain Lactobacillus paracasei IMPC 2.1 of human
origin was used in the dual role of starter and probiotic culture, and here we describe
the different aspects which have been evaluated and solved to utilize that strain for the
development of a new table olive-based probiotic food. These aspects include selection of
the strain on the basis of its probiotic properties, molecular characterization, compatibility
with the carrier food, and efﬁcacy as starter. The ﬁnal product meets commercial and
functional requirements throughout its shelf-life.

Keywords: functional food, probiotic food, lactic acid bacteria, olive surface

Green table olives are obtained from fruits of the cultivated olive
tree (Olea europaea L.) harvested during the ripening period when
the ﬁnal size is reached but the color is still green. After har-
vesting, olives contain phenols and oleuropein which makes the
fruits unpalatable due to their bitter taste. According to the most
well-known method of processing (de Castro et al., 2002), i.e.,
the “Spanish-style,” bitterness in the fruits can be almost com-
pletely eliminated by alkaline hydrolysis of oleuropein (Ciafardini
et al., 1994) treating olives with a sodium hydroxide solution
(lye). The next step is a washing process to remove the excess
alkali. Then, olive fruits are submerged into a brine (aqueous
solution of up to 12–13% NaCl, w/v) where a lactic acid fermen-
tation takes place and in which a rapid initiation of growth of
lactic acid bacteria (LAB) is required to avoid product spoilage
by undesirable bacteria. Spontaneous fermentation of Spanish-
style preparations of green olives includes three different phases
of microbial succession. The ﬁrst phase is dominated by Gram-
negative bacteria (Enterobacteriaceae). These bacteria decrease in
the second phase characterized by a progressive growth of LAB
belonging to Leuconostoc and Pediococcus genera. The third phase
is characterized by the relevant proliferation of lactobacilli mainly
of the species Lactobacillus plantarum and L. pentosus, but also
L. rhamnosus and L. paracasei have been identiﬁed (Van den Berg
et al., 1993). Lactic acid fermentation performed by these bac-
teria produces mainly lactic acid causing a pH decrease. At the
end of the process, when fermentation is complete, the ﬁnal
product is stable and can be stored in brine under appropriate

conditions (NaCl > 5%; pH < 3.5) without refrigeration. Even
if the fermentation of table olives can be carried out by the
spontaneous microbiota, the use of starter cultures is an advis-
able practice. Generally, the starter is a selected strain which
belong to a species component of the spontaneous microbiota.
At the end of fermentation, table olives are a natural product
still hosting on their surface a viable microbiota (Lavermicocca
et al., 1998).

The evidence that the surface of olive fruits is colonized by LAB
paved the way for the use of table olives as a biological carrier
for beneﬁcial strains such as probiotics (Lavermicocca et al., 2003,
2005). The recent interest for the beneﬁcial health effects that foods
may have beyond their basic nutritional value has recently led to
a worldwide increase in consumer interest for functional prod-
ucts, including probiotic foods, and to a huge increase in their
commercial value. Probiotic products contain selected microbial
strains which – if they reach the gastrointestinal (GI) tract in
viable form and adequate amounts – can improve GI function,
and thus, the health of the host (FAO/WHO, 2001). Species of
the genera Biﬁdobacterium and Lactobacillus are widely marketed
for human consumption as probiotics in concentrated prepara-
tions available as capsules, powders, or liquid products, or else
incorporated into milk-based functional foods. But the market of
functional food industries is currently interested in new non-dairy
foods which could have the potential to attract more consumers
to functional products allowing also a more regular intake of pro-
biotics. In this regard, the cited studies (Lavermicocca et al., 2005)

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 174 | 1

“fmicb-03-00174” — 2012/5/5 — 13:00 — page 1 — #1

Sisto and Lavermicocca

A probiotic strain for olive fermentation

have demonstrated that table olives are an excellent alternative
food carrier suitable for delivering probiotics to humans. Since
a probiotic strain has to be administered in adequate amount to
exert its beneﬁcial effect, it should be also able to survive and
ﬁrmly establish itself on table olives competing with the other
microorganisms and in particular with the starter strain. There-
fore, the selection and the use of a probiotic strain even able
to act as a starter to pilot the fermentation would be highly
advisable.

In this review we highlight the different aspects which have been
evaluated and solved to develop a new table olive-based probiotic
food with the Lactobacillus paracasei strain IMPC 2.1, of human
origin, playing the dual role of starter and probiotic culture. The
ﬁnal product is an innovative patented probiotic food which meets
all commercial and functional requirements throughout its shelf-
life of several months and received the marketing authorization
from the Italian Ministry of Health.

CHARACTERIZATION AND SELECTION OF THE
PROBIOTIC STRAIN
The selection of a probiotic strain requires the evaluation of a
number of characteristics which enable the strain to cause bene-
ﬁcial effects after its administration. Probiotics are administered
orally and need to survive through the complex physical–chemical
environment of the GI tract. Since probiotic bacteria only tran-
siently colonize the intestinal tract, large populations have to be
ingested on a daily basis to obtain beneﬁcial effects (Reid et al.,
2001, 2003) and 109 viable cells per serving is the minimal dose
recommended (FAO/WHO, 2001, 2002; Maukonen et al., 2006;
Health Canada, 2009). Each new proposed probiotic strain must
be characterized since it is widely recognized that probiotic fea-
tures are strictly strain-speciﬁc and cannot be considered as typical
characteristics of a bacterial species. The ability of a strain to sur-
vive passage through the GI tract is generally the ﬁrst evaluated
aspect in the selection of a probiotic strain and can be mainly
attributed to its acid and bile tolerance. Moreover, the adhesion
to intestinal mucosa is relevant as it seems to be related to the
ability of a bacterial strain to persist in the gut (Servin and Cocon-
nier, 2003). A number of in vitro tests of simulated digestion and
adhesion have been proposed and used to preliminarily evaluate
the ability of a probiotic strain to survive the passage through
and to colonize the GI tract; however,
in a next phase these
characteristics have to be ascertained by in vivo experiments. In
vivo tests are very important also because strain survival partially
depends on the potential protective action of the associated car-
rier food which is due in some way to its chemical composition. In
fact, Charalampopoulos et al. (2003) demonstrated that the pres-
ence of wheat, barley, and malt extracts increased the viability of
L. plantarum, L. acidophilus, and L. reuteri strains under acidic
conditions simulating the gastric tract. The authors attributed
this result to the composition of cereal extracts and mainly to
the presence of soluble sugars. The protective effect of metaboliz-
able sugars was conﬁrmed by Corcoran et al. (2005) who found
that the presence of glucose and fructose highly increased the sur-
vival of some strains of L. rhamnosus, L. gasseri, and L. paracasei
treated with simulated gastric juice and that viability varied among
species. These results demonstrate that, when the ﬁnal aim is the

formulation of a new probiotic food, the interaction between the
probiotic strain and the carrier food has to be taken into account
in evaluating the compatibility between the strain and the carrier
food as well as the potential protective action of the carrier under
GI conditions.

In the case of the selection of L. paracasei IMPC 2.1 its charac-
teristics were compared with those of three strains of L. rhamnosus
(including the well-characterized probiotic strain GG), ﬁve strains
of L. plantarum, and one strain of the species L. paracasei, L. ali-
mentarius, and L. fermentum. It was preliminarily ascertained by in
vitro tests its resistance to simulated gastric juice and to bile salts as
well as its adhesion to pig mucus. Strain IMPC 2.1 was also demon-
strated to be strongly adhesive to enterocyte-like Caco-2 cells
(Lavermicocca et al., 2003, 2008) as it showed a better adhesion
than the probiotic strain L. rhamnosus GG, which has strong adhe-
sive properties to human intestinal epithelial cells (Elo et al., 1991).
The survival on table olives of strain IMPC 2.1 was also evaluated
and compared with that of strains of the species L. rhamnosus,
L. paracasei, Biﬁdobacterium biﬁdum, and B. longum. The results
clearly indicated the compatibility between table olives and strain
IMPC 2.1 which showed the highest viability, with more than
107 CFU/g, throughout the 3-month experiment; the adhesion of
strain IMPC 2.1 to olive surface was also demonstrated by scan-
ning electron microscopy (Lavermicocca et al., 2005; Figure 1).
Moreover, in vitro experiments demonstrated that the presence of
olive fruits had a protective effect on strain IMPC 2.1 during sim-
ulated gastric and intestinal digestion since the survival of strain
IMPC 2.1 was markedly increased (Valerio et al., 2006). Although
the above-described results suggested that table olives are a suit-
able biological carrier for delivering strain IMPC 2.1 in the GI
tract, actually a deﬁnitive evidence was obtained only by an in
vivo study. In fact, populations of strain IMPC 2.1 were detected
in fecal samples of human volunteers fed with 10–15 olives/day
carrying about 109 to 1010 viable cells per serving of strain IMPC
2.1 for 10 days (Lavermicocca et al., 2005).

In this regard, detection of a probiotic strain within a com-
plex microbiota, such as those of fecal or vegetable samples,

FIGURE 1 | Adhesion of Lactobacillus paracasei IMPC 2.1 cells to the
surface of an olive fruit (scanning electron microscopy observation by
Maria Luisa Callegari).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Food Microbiology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 174 | 2

“fmicb-03-00174” — 2012/5/5 — 13:00 — page 2 — #2

Sisto and Lavermicocca

A probiotic strain for olive fermentation

requires the development of a strain-speciﬁc method of identi-
ﬁcation. The identiﬁcations of a probiotic strain at the species as
well as at the strain levels are important aspects which need to
be considered also because both identiﬁcation and strain recog-
nition are required to obtain the authorization, from national
or international health authorities, to use a probiotic strain for
human feeding. Nowadays, a strain-speciﬁc identiﬁcation can be
obtained using a wide range of molecular tools which also need
to obtain a certain identiﬁcation at the species level. L. paracasei
strain IMPC 2.1 was identiﬁed and characterized at molecular level
by using methods such as 16S rRNA gene sequencing, REP–PCR,
and the ampliﬁed fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) analy-
sis. Moreover, based on a strain-speciﬁc AFLP molecular marker, a
strain-speciﬁc PCR test was developed allowing differentiation of
strain IMPC 2.1 also from other strains belonging to the same bac-
terial species (Sisto et al., 2009). In fact, the development of new
probiotic foods requires a frequent monitoring of the probiotic
strain’s survival in those products within an ecosystem character-
ized by a complex microbiota. An approach similar to the one
used for strain IMPC 2.1 could be adopted to develop easy and
rapid detection methods for monitoring also other probiotic bac-
teria in complex microbiota, mainly when frequent evaluations are
required.

BENEFICIAL EFFECTS OF THE PROBIOTIC STRAIN
Beneﬁcial effects of probiotic bacteria are the results of the com-
plex interactions occurring among probiotic bacteria, human
host and its intestinal microbiota (Lebeer et al., 2008). Generally,
the health promoting capacities of probiotic bacteria are based
on one of the following, sometimes overlapping, mechanisms:
(i) pathogen inhibition, (ii) restoration of microbial homeosta-
sis through microbe–microbe interactions, (iii) enhancement
of epithelial barrier function, and (iv) modulation of immune
responses. Taking into account the complexity of these mecha-
nisms it is not unexpected that each probiotic strain can determine
a different response in the host. Therefore, results with one spe-
ciﬁc strain cannot be generalized and the strain-speciﬁc properties
must be studied and ascertained. In the case of L. paracasei IMPC
2.1, the ability of this strain to antagonize the growth of the food-
borne human pathogen Yersinia enterocolitica was demonstrated as
well as its ability to inhibit the pathogen ureolytic activity leading
to the production of ammonia (Lavermicocca et al., 2008). Studies
also showed that strain IMPC 2.1, administered with artichokes to
volunteers suffering from constipation, gave rise to an overall posi-
tive effect on symptom proﬁle of the participants. Moreover, strain
IMPC 2.1 successfully colonized the human gut and positively
inﬂuenced fecal biochemical parameters and bacteria. In fact, this
probiotic strain caused the inhibition of potentially harmful bac-
teria (Escherichia coli and Clostridium spp.) and stimulated the
growth of LAB and of lactobacilli and biﬁdobacteria. The human
trials also conﬁrmed that the introduction of vegetables enriched
with probiotics such as artichokes, likewise olives, represents a
way to achieve the target “functional diet” (Valerio et al., 2010,
2011; Riezzo et al., 2012).

Among the other mechanisms by which probiotic bacteria
cause beneﬁcial effects on the host, modulation of immune
responses has been particularly studied and extensively reviewed

(Delcenserie et al., 2008; Borchers et al., 2009; Yan and Polk, 2011).
Immunomodulatory properties of strain IMPC 2.1 were evaluated
in two studies which highlighted its interesting characteristics.
In particular, the ﬁrst study (D’Arienzo et al., 2009) was car-
ried out to analyze immunomodulatory approaches potentially
useful for Celiac disease, a common food-sensitive enteropathy
with an autoimmune basis caused by the lack of oral tolerance to
wheat gluten and related prolamines (Maki et al., 2003). In this
regard, the effects of different bacterial strains were evaluated on
transgenic mice sensitive to gluten (gliadin), which represent a
well-characterized model of sensitivity to food antigen useful to
study in vivo the inﬂuence of probiotics on intestinal antigen-
speciﬁc immune responses (Black et al., 2002; Senger et al., 2005).
The results of in vivo challenge with strain IMPC 2.1 indicated
its ability in enhancing the gliadin-speciﬁc production of the pro-
inﬂammatory cytokine TNF-α, thus highlighting the ability of
the probiotic to exert inductive rather than suppressive effects.
In a second study (D’Arienzo et al., 2011), the immunomodula-
tory properties of strain IMPC 2.1 were compared with those of
other strains belonging to the same species L. paracasei. In this
study, the interactions between those bacterial strains and cells
of the immune system were considered, in particular evaluating
the ability of the strains to cause cytokine secretion by dendritic
cells, which play an essential role in both innate and adaptive
immunity (Borchers et al., 2009) and are important in earliest
bacterial recognition and in determining the subsequent T cell
responses. The results revealed the different immunomodulatory
properties of strains belonging to the same bacterial species. Pro-
biotic strains IMPC 2.1 and LMG P-17806 (= F19; Crittenden
et al., 2002; Ohlson et al., 2002) were characterized by a simi-
lar and intermediate ability to induce cytokine secretion. In fact,
they induced a low pro-inﬂammatory response, not resulting in
an inﬂammatory outcome (but enough to induce a state of host
immune system alertness) and were clearly differentiated from
the non-probiotic strain LMG 23554 (= YS8866441; Daniel et al.,
2006) which showed a low ability to stimulate cytokine secretion.
Therefore, for each new potential probiotic strain, the proﬁles of
the cytokines whose secretion is induced should be established
to deﬁne its pro- or anti-inﬂammatory properties and the more
appropriate clinical use.

SUITABILITY OF THE PROBIOTIC STRAIN AS A STARTER
IN OLIVE FERMENTATION AND TECHNOLOGICAL
PROPERTIES
Although olive fermentation can be carried out by the sponta-
neous microﬂora, since the natural microﬂora of olives is mainly
destroyed by the lye treatment that precedes the fermentation
step, the use of LAB as starter cultures is an advisable prac-
tice that offers the advantage to induce a suitable development
of the fermentation process allowing a faster pH decrease with
respect to the spontaneous process. Moreover, the use of a starter
favors a better standardization of the organoleptic properties of the
ﬁnal product. From the technological point of view, an efﬁcient
starter strain should possess some physiological characteristics
including: (i) good resistance to high levels of salt as well as to
extreme alkaline or acidic pH values, (ii) the ability to utilize
completely the fermentable substrates causing a rapid pH decrease

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 174 | 3

“fmicb-03-00174” — 2012/5/5 — 13:00 — page 3 — #3

Sisto and Lavermicocca

A probiotic strain for olive fermentation

due to organic acid production, (iii) ability to compete with the
spontaneous microbiota, (iv) potential inhibitory effects against
spoilage (or pathogenic) microorganisms, and (v) good character-
istics of survival and revitalization after storage as a freeze-dried
culture. Generally, the starter microorganism is a selected strain
which belong to a Lactobacillus species component of the spon-
taneous microbiota. In fact, the use of strains belonging mainly
to L. plantarum/L. pentosus species successfully improved green
olive processing hampering the effect of spoilage microorgan-
isms (Garrido-Fernández et al., 1997; Sánchez et al., 2001; Panagou
et al., 2003; Vega Leal-Sánchez et al., 2003). Moreover, strains of the
species L. paracasei have been isolated from olive fermentations
(Van den Berg et al., 1993) and to our knowledge, at least experi-
mentally, a strain of L. paracasei from dairy origin was successfully
used in green olive fermentation (Panagou et al., 2007). Probi-
otic strain L. paracasei IMPC 2.1 is of human origin, therefore,
it is better adapted than strains isolated from different environ-
ments to colonize the human intestine. This strain was originally
selected on the basis of its probiotic properties; then, its suitabil-
ity as a starter was ﬁrst studied at a laboratory level and then
in an industrial plant (De Bellis et al., 2010). The study allowed
to assess the persistence and the efﬁcacy of strain IMPC 2.1 as a
starter throughout the fermentation process, and to ascertain the
dynamics of microbial populations associated with olive surface
in industrial fermentation sets at 4 or 8% NaCl and at room tem-
◦
perature or 4
C. The results indicated that the probiotic strain
successfully colonized the olive surface and persisted in high num-
bers allowing the reduction of pH of brines to values lower than 5.0
after 30 days and until the end of fermentation. The dynamics of
microbial populations associated with olive surface and belonging
to different groups indicated that olives inoculated with the pro-
biotic did not host Enterobacteriaceae at the end of fermentation,
while yeast populations were present in a low number throughout
the process. The results also revealed a considerable genetic diver-
sity of LAB species colonizing the olive surface and the effect of
the probiotic strain on LAB populations. In fact, species of the
Enterococcus casseliﬂavus group, mainly forming LAB popula-
tions before the fermentation process, were not identiﬁed in
sets inoculated with the probiotic strain already at the begin-
ning of fermentation. Moreover, in inoculated sets the number of

L. pentosus was signiﬁcantly reduced during the process, while
it was the dominant species from 20 days up to the end of the
process in control sets. Although our results indicate that, at the
end of fermentation, probiotic olives host a signiﬁcant genetic
diversity of LAB species on their surface together with probiotic
strain IMCP 2.1, they are considered a natural probiotic product
as they provide to the consumer more than 109 CFU/serving of
a probiotic strain as required by recognized standards for probi-
otic foods. With regard to the organoleptic proﬁle, the process for
preparing probiotic table olives allows to obtain a ﬁnal low-salt
product with improved ﬂesh texture and ﬂavors that meets com-
mercial and functional requirements throughout its shelf-life of
several months.

CONCLUSIONS
Technological aspects approached for the development of probi-
otic table olives demonstrated that the human isolate L. paracasei
IMPC 2.1 is a good example of a probiotic strain suitable for
industrial fermentation of de-bittered table olives. In fact, it com-
bines the positive characteristics of a probiotic culture with the
efﬁcacy of a starter culture which can control the fermentation
process and protect table olives during storage even under adverse
conditions of temperature and salt concentration, leading to a
ﬁnal low-salt-probiotic product with functional appeal and high
organoleptic quality. “Probiotic table olives” are part of a new
probiotic vegetable line of food products which was successfully
developed and patented (Lavermicocca et al., 2004) by cooperative
actions between research institution and food industry, providing
a concrete opportunity to convey in the gastronomy sector pro-
biotic beneﬁts already appreciated by consumers in other market
sectors (yogurt and dairy). Probiotic vegetable preparations will
have the potential to attract more consumers to functional prod-
ucts including also individuals who are intolerant to milk and its
derivatives or require low-cholesterol diets.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the Italian Ministry of Education,
University and Research (art. 12 D.M. 593/2000 - D.D. 3300 –
22 December 2005 - tema 2) Project “Ortobiotici pugliesi” (D.M.
28830).

REFERENCES
Black, K. E., Murray, J. A., and David,
C. S. (2002). HLA-DQ determines
the response to exogenous wheat pro-
teins: a model of gluten sensitiv-
ity in transgenic knockout mice. J.
Immunol. 169, 5595–5600.

Borchers, A. T., Selmi, C., Meyers, F.
J., Keen, C. L., and Gershwin, M. E.
(2009). Probiotics and immunity. J.
Gastroenterol. 44, 26–46.

Charalampopoulos, D., Pandiella, S.
S., and Webb, C. (2003). Evalua-
tion of the effect of malt, wheat
and barley extracts on the viabil-
ity of potentially probiotic lactic
acid bacteria under acidic condi-
tions.
J. Food Microbiol. 82,
133–141.

Int.

Ciafardini, G., Marsilio, V., Lanza, B.,
and Pozzi, N. (1994). Hydrolysis
of oleuropein by Lactobacillus plan-
tarum strains associated with olive
fermentation. Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 60, 4142–4147.

Corcoran, B. M., Stanton, C., Fitzger-
ald, G. F., and Ross, R. P. (2005).
Survival of probiotic lactobacilli in
acidic environments is enhanced in
the presence of metabolizable sug-
ars. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71,
3060–3067.

Crittenden, R., Saarela, M., Mättö, J.,
Ouwehand, A. C., Salminen, S., Pelto,
L., Vaughan, E. E., De Vos, W. M.,
Von Wright, A., Fonden, R., and
Mattila-Sandholm, T. (2002). Lac-
tobacillus paracasei subsp. paracasei

F19: survival, ecology and safety in
the human intestinal tract – a survey
of feeding studies within the PROB-
DEMO project. Microb. Ecol. Health
Dis. S3, 22–26.

and Sisto, A.

D’Arienzo, R., Bozzella, G., Rossi,
M., De Bellis, P., Lavermicocca,
P.,
(2011). Dis-
tinct immunomodulatory properties
of Lactobacillus paracasei strains. J.
Appl. Microbiol. 111, 1482–1491.

D’Arienzo, R., Maurano, F., Lavermic-
occa, P., Ricca, E., and Rossi, M.
(2009). Modulation of the immune
response by probiotic strains in a
mouse model of gluten sensitivity.
Cytokine 48, 254–259.

Daniel, C., Poiret, S., Goudercourt,
D., Dennin, V., Leyer, G., and

Pot, B. (2006). Selecting lactic acid
bacteria for their safety and func-
tionality by use of a mouse colitis
model. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72,
5799–5805.

De Bellis, P., Valerio, F., Sisto, A.,
Lonigro, S. L., and Lavermicocca, P.
(2010). Probiotic table olives: micro-
bial populations adhering on olive
surface in fermentation sets inocu-
lated with the probiotic strain Lac-
tobacillus paracasei IMPC 2.1 in an
industrial plant. Int. J. Food Micro-
biol. 140, 6–13.

de Castro, A., Montano, A., Casado,
F. J., Sanchez, A. H., and Rejano,
L. (2002). Utilization of Enterococcus
casselifavus and Lactobacillus pentosus
as starter cultures for Spanish-style

Frontiers in Microbiology | Food Microbiology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 174 | 4

“fmicb-03-00174” — 2012/5/5 — 13:00 — page 4 — #4

Sisto and Lavermicocca

A probiotic strain for olive fermentation

green olive fermentation. Food Micro-
biol. 19, 637–644.

Delcenserie, V., Martel, D., Lamoureux,
M., Amiot, J., Boutin, Y., and Roy, D.
(2008). Immunomodulatory effects
of probiotics in the intestinal tract.
Curr. Issues Mol. Biol. 10, 37–54.

Elo, S., Saxelin, M., and Salminen, S.
(1991). Attachment of Lactobacillus
casei K strain GG to human colon car-
cinoma cell line Caco-2: comparison
with other dairy strains. Lett. Appl.
Microbiol. 13, 154–156.

FAO/WHO. (2001). Health and Nutri-
tional Properties of Probiotics in Food
Including Powder Milk with Live Lac-
tic Acid Bacteria. Report on Joint
FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on
Evaluation of Health and Nutri-
tional Properties of Probiotics in
Food Including Powder Milk with
Live Lactic Acid Bacteria. Cordoba:
FAO/WHO.

FAO/WHO. (2002). Guidelines for the
Evaluation of Probiotics
in Food.
Report of a Joint FAO/WHO Work-
ing Group on Drafting Guidelines for
the Evaluation of Probiotics in Food.
London, ON: FAO/WHO.

Garrido-Fernández, A.,

Fernández-
Diaz, M. J., and Adams, M. R. (1997).
Table Olives: Production and Process-
ing. London: Chapman & Hall.

Health Canada.

(2009). The Use of
in Food.
Probiotic Microorganisms
Available at: http://www.inspection.
gc.ca/english/fssa/labeti/guide/ch8ae.
shtml#a8_7

Lavermicocca, P., Gobbetti, M., Corsetti,
A., and Caputo, L. (1998). Character-
ization of lactic acid bacteria isolated
from olive phylloplane and table olive
brines. Ital. J. Food Sci. 10, 27–39.

Lavermicocca, P., Lonigro, S. L., Valerio,
F., Visconti, A., Vanadia, S., Calabrese,
N., Di Venere, D., and Morelli, L.
(2004). Process for the preparation of
vegetable preserves containing probi-
otic micro-organisms. Priority date:
Italy, 5.10.2004, no MI2004A001887.
PCT no WO 2006 / 037517 A1; Italian
Patent 001357149 (granted 9.3.2009).
Lavermicocca, P., Lonigro, S. L., Vis-
conti, A., De Angelis, M., Valerio,
F., and Morelli, L. (2003). Table
olives containing probiotic microor-
ganisms. Priority date: 5.12.2003 no
MI2003A002391. European Patent
EP1843664 (granted 8.7.09)

Lavermicocca, P., Valerio, F., Lonigro,
S. L., De Angelis, M., Morelli, L.,
Callegari, M. L., Rizzello, C. G., and
Visconti, A. (2005). Study of adhe-
sion and survival of Lactobacilli and
Biﬁdobacteria on table olives with the
aim of formulating a new probiotic
food. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71,
4233–4240.

S. L., Di Leo, A.,

Lavermicocca, P., Valerio, F., Lon-
igro,
and
Visconti, A. (2008). Antagonistic
activity of potential probiotic lacto-
bacilli against the ureolytic pathogen
Yersinia enterocolitica. Curr. Micro-
biol. 56, 175–181.

Lebeer, S., Vanderleyden, J., and De
Keersmaecker, S. C. J. (2008). Genes
and molecules of
lactobacilli sup-
porting probiotic action. Microbiol.
Mol. Biol. Rev. 72, 728–764.

Maki, M., Mustalahti, K., Kokkonen, J.,
Kulmala, P., Haapalahti, M., Kart-
tunen, T., Ilonen,
J., Laurila, K.,
Dahlbom, I., Hansson, T., Höpﬂ, P.,
and Knip, M. (2003). Prevalence of
Celiac disease among children in Fin-
land. N. Engl. J. Med. 348, 2517–2524.
Maukonen, J., Alakomi, H. L., Nohynek,
L., Hallamaa, K., Leppämäki, S.,
Mättö, J., and Saarela, M. (2006).
Suitability of the ﬂuorescent tech-
niques
enumeration of
probiotic bacteria in commercial
non-dairy drinks and in pharmaceu-
tical products. Food Res.
Int. 39,
22–32.

the

for

Ohlson, K., Björneholm, S., Fonden, R.,
and Svensson, U. (2002). Lactobacil-
lus F19 – A probiotic strain suitable
for consumer products. Microb. Ecol.
Health Dis. S3, 27–32.

Panagou, E. Z., Tassou, C. C., and
Katsaboxakis, C. Z. (2003). Induced
lactic acid fermentation of untreated
green olives of the Conservolea cul-
tivar by Lactobacillus pentosus. J. Sci.
Food Agric. 83, 667–674.

Panagou, E. Z., Tassou, C. C., Sara-
vanos, E. K. A., and Nychas, G. J.
(2007). Application of neural net-
works to simulate the growth pro-
ﬁle of lactic acid bacteria in green
olive fermentation. J. Food Prot. 70,
1909–1916.

Reid, G., Howard,

J., and Gan, B.
S. (2001). Can bacterial interference
prevent infection? Trends Microbiol.
9, 424–428.

Reid, G., Sanders, M. E., Gaskins, H.
R., Gibson, G. R., Mercenier, A.,
Rastall, R., Roberfroid, M., Rowland,
I., Cherbut, C., and Klaenhammer, T.
R. (2003). New scientiﬁc paradigms
for probiotics and prebiotics. J. Clin.
Gastroenterol. 37, 105–118.

Riezzo, G., Orlando, A., D’Attoma,
B., Guerra, V., Valerio, F., Laver-
micocca, P., and De Candia, S.
(2012). Randomised clinical
trial:
efﬁcacy of Lactobacillus paracasei-
enriched artichokes in the treatment
of patients with functional consti-
pation – a double-blind, controlled,
crossover study. Aliment. Pharmacol.
Ther. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2036.2011.
04970.x.

Sánchez, A. H., Rejano, L., Montaño, A.,
and de Castro, A. (2001). Utilisation
at high pH of starter cultures of lac-
tobacilli for Spanish-style green olive
fermentation. Int. J. Food Microbiol.
67, 115–122.

Senger, S., Maurano, F., Mazzeo, M. F.,
Gaita, M., Fierro, O., David, C. S.,
Troncone, R., Auricchio, S., Siciliano,
R. A., and Rossi, M. (2005). Identiﬁ-
cation of immunodominant epitopes
of alpha-gliadin in HLA-DQ8 trans-
genic mice following oral immuniza-
tion. J. Immunol. 175, 8087–8095.

Servin, A. L., and Coconnier, M. H.
(2003). Adhesion of probiotic strains
to the intestinal mucosa and interac-
tion with pathogens. Best Pract. Res.
Clin. Gastroenterol. 17, 741–754.

Sisto, A., De Bellis, P., Visconti, A.,
Morelli, L., and Lavermicocca, P.
(2009). Development of a PCR assay
for the strain-speciﬁc identiﬁcation
of
the probiotic strain Lactobacil-
lus paracasei IMPC 2.1. Int. J. Food
Microbiol. 136, 59–65.

Valerio, F., De Bellis, P., Lonigro, S. L.,
Morelli, L., Visconti, A., and Laver-
micocca, P. (2006). In vitro and in
vivo survival and transit tolerance of
potentially probiotic strains carried
by artichokes in the gastrointestinal
tract. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72,
3042–3045.

Valerio, F., de Candia, S., Lonigro, S. L.,
Russo, F., Riezzo, G., Orlando, A., De
Bellis, P., Sisto, A., and Lavermicocca,
P. (2011). Role of the probiotic strain
Lactobacillus paracasei LMGP22043
carried by artichokes in inﬂuenc-
ing faecal bacteria and biochemical

parameters in human subjects.
Appl. Microbiol. 111, 155–164.

J.

Valerio, F., Russo, F., de Candia, S.,
Riezzo, G., Orlando, A., Lonigro, S. L.,
and Lavermicocca, P. (2010). Effects
of probiotic Lactobacillus paracasei-
enriched artichokes on constipated
patients: a pilot study. J. Clin. Gas-
troenterol. 44(Suppl. 1), S49–S53.

Van den Berg, D. J. C., Smits, A., Pot, B.,
Ledeboer, A. M., Kesters, K., Verbakel,
J. M. A., and Verrips, C. T. (1993). Iso-
lation, screening and identiﬁcation of
lactic acid bacteria from traditional
food fermentation processes and cul-
ture collections. Food Biotechnol. 7,
189–205.

Vega Leal-Sánchez, M., Ruiz-Barba, J. L.,
Sánchez, A. H., Rejano, L., Jiménez-
Díaz, R., and Garrido, A. (2003).
Fermentation proﬁle and optimiza-
tion of green olive fermentation using
Lactobacillus plantarum LPCO10 as
a starter culture. Food Microbiol. 20,
421–430.

Yan, F., and Polk, D. B. (2011). Probi-
otics and immune health. Curr. Opin.
Gastroenterol. 27, 496–501.

Conflict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

25 January 2012;

Received:
paper
pending published: 14 February 2012;
accepted: 19 April 2012; published online:
08 May 2012.
Citation: Sisto A and Lavermicocca P
(2012) Suitability of a probiotic Lacto-
bacillus paracasei strain as a starter cul-
ture in olive fermentation and develop-
ment of the innovative patented product
“probiotic table olives”. Front. Microbio.
3:174. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00174
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Food Microbiology, a specialty of Fron-
tiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Sisto and Laver-
micocca. This is an open-access arti-
cle distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 174 | 5

“fmicb-03-00174” — 2012/5/5 — 13:00 — page 5 — #5

