Editorial
published: 05 January 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00020

Research topic on Pseudomonas aeruginosa, biology, 
genetics, and host–pathogen interactions

Dara W. Frank*

Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Center for Infectious Disease Research, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA
*Correspondence: frankd@mcw.edu

Over the years, Pseudomonas aeruginosa has served as a paradigm 
for the study of gene expression, metabolism, and pathogenesis. The 
large genome, which approaches the complexity and size of lower 
eukaryotes, and an abundance of regulators, facilitates adaptation 
to almost any environment. During evolution, competition with 
other  prokaryotes  and  the  acquisition  of  defensive  mechanisms 
to fend off eukaryotic predators have allowed the maintenance of 
antibiotic-resistance markers, degradative enzymes, and secretion 
systems, which impact upon human infection. Eleven articles, nine 
of  which  are  comprehensive  reviews,  are  presented  to  highlight 
these topics and provide an up-to-date resource.

Genomes, PRoteomes, bioloGy
A perspective on the evolution of genomic diversity is provided in 
the initial article by Klockgether et al. (2011). The core genome of P. 
aeruginosa is highly conserved and collinearly arranged as a single 
chromosome. The mosaic structure of the genome is interrupted by 
the accessory genome being made up of regions of plasticity, inte-
grated islands, transposons, phages, or IS-elements. Comparisons of 
strains from the same clonal complex, yet unrelated geographic origin, 
show a low substitution rate. Versatility is related to a combination of a 
large genome, accessory elements, and a variety of regulatory systems.
Rao et al. (2011) use global proteomic approaches to study the 
differences between a mucoid and a non-mucoid isolate derived 
from  the  same  patient.  Data  from  mass  spectrometry  analyses 
utilizing isobaric tags and 2D-electrophoresis are correlated with 
microarray  results  to  provide  a  snapshot  of  expression  profiles. 
These techniques indicate that the type 6 secretion (T6S) and the 
mucoid phenotype are inversely correlated. Important technical 
considerations make this report a valuable resource for refinements 
of bacterial proteomics.

metAbolism, mAintenAnce of extRAcellulAR 
mAtRices
Targeting  bacteria-specific  metabolic  processes  has  the  promise 
of  eradicating  not  only  actively  growing  cells  but  also  static  or 
slow-growing cells. Arai (2011) provides a review of the terminal 
oxidases, denitrification enzymes, their roles in aerobic/anaerobic 
respiration, and control by inter-related regulatory systems. The 
control of respiratory function is coordinated by RoxSR, which is 
predicted to sense electron flow through the terminal oxidases or 
the redox status of the ubiquinone pool. Overall, control/coordina-
tion occurs through terminal oxidases, nitric oxide, and the redox 
status of the respiratory chain.

The metabolic versatility of P. aeruginosa is highlighted by its 
ability to synthesize extracellular matrices in response to environ-
mental conditions. Franklin et al. (2011) provide a comprehensive 

review of the biosynthetic pathways for three secreted polysaccha-
rides; alginate, Psl, and Pel. The alginate and Pel pathways share 
characteristics of a lipid-carrier-independent mechanism similar to 
the biosynthetic complexes of bacterial cellulose and Pga systems. 
A  lipid-carrier-dependent  mechanism  is  consistent  with  the  Psl 
pathway, comparable to the E. coli capsular synthesis pathways. A 
framework for additional experimentation is described and ques-
tions  regarding  the  biological  implications  of  regulating  three 
pathways are posed.

The plasticity of P. aeruginosa in extracellular polysaccharide 
production is reflected in the ability to produce O-specific anti-
gens that make up the lipopolysaccharides (LPS). Lam et al. (2011) 
describe  the  generation  of  LPS  diversity  through  mechanisms 
involving  horizontal  gene  transfer,  chromosomal  insertions, 
lysogenic  conversion,  genomic  plasticity  in  the  face  of  in  vivo 
selection,  and  quorum  sensing.  The  biological  implications  of 
the complete LPS, O-specific antigens, core oligosaccharide, and 
lipid A domains are addressed relevant to flagellar and twitch-
ing motility, biofilm formation, adherence, recognition by TLR4, 
CTFR, host lectin, complement components, and the expression 
of membrane-associated systems including T3SS and phage recep-
tors. The authors also review the use of LPS components in vac-
cine formulations.

Antibiotic ResistAnce
Multi-drug  resistant  P.  aeruginosa  are  of  clinical  concern  and 
Poole (2011) cautions that pan-resistant isolates, treatable only 
with colistin, are on the rise. The antibiotic-resistance mecha-
nisms  addressed  include  the  acquisition  of  β-lactamases,  par-
ticularly  the  extended-spectrum  enzymes,  carbapenemases, 
aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes, and 16S rRNA methylases. 
Mutational changes causing the upregulation of multi-drug efflux 
pumps, derepression of ampC, modification of antimicrobial tar-
gets, and changes in the outer membrane permeability barrier 
are described with the propensity of P. aeruginosa to exist in vivo 
and in the environment as slow-growing organisms imbedded in 
extracellular matrices. Aspects of hypermutation are discussed 
relative to cystic fibrosis and a lung environment rich in reactive-
oxygen species.

In an effort to identify anti-microbial peptides with properties 
consistent  with  therapeutic  use,  Dean  et  al.  (2011)  measure  the 
susceptibility of P. aeruginosa to several variations of anti- microbial 
peptides belonging to the cathelicidin family. This research arti-
cle  describes  a  series  of  peptides  with  properties  that  not  only 
demonstrate toxic effects to the bacteria but also affect bacterial 
gene  expression,  twitching  motility,  and  biofilm  formation  and 
maintenance.

www.frontiersin.org 

January 2012  |  Volume 3  |  Article 20  |  1

Frank 

Pseudomonas aeruginosa: current perspectives

PRotein secRetion
Filloux (2011) elegantly deconstructs all five of the secretion systems 
that operate in P. aeruginosa. He summarizes the salient features, 
known protein structures, secreted proteins, or injected proteins 
in the case of T3SS and T6SS. The common themes include energy 
requirements, conduit construction, pore formation in the outer 
membrane, and protein targeting. The perspective from overview-
ing all systems leads to insights into universal functions and how 
these systems may have diversified.

Diaz et al. (2011) focus on the T3SS and review the gene regu-
latory circuitry involved in expression of this secretory/intoxica-
tion system. Intrinsic regulation is described with emphasis on 
the partner-switching mechanisms involving ExsA, ExsC, ExsD, 
and ExsE. Also, the various environmental signals and stimuli are 
compiled. The authors provide valuable insights and caveats to 
interpreting microarray data, concerning strains that overexpress 
ExsA,  host–cell  contact,  or  low-calcium  stimuli  used  to  induce 
T3SS  and  the  requirement  for  an  intact  injectisome  relative  to 
T3SS regulation.

The transcriptional control of T3SS is complemented by a review 
of needle-tip proteins that coordinate the assemblage of a translocon 
into the host–cell membrane. Structural and functional properties 

of three needle-tip-protein families are compared with emphasis 
on biophysical and mechanical aspects of regulation including the 
propagation/amplification of signals to the T3S nanomachine, the 
control of energy expenditure, protein secretion, and gene regula-
tion within the bacterium as well as feedback regulation by the 
action of effectors on host–cell physiology. Sato and Frank (2011) 
point out how the injection process and its understanding provide 
a wealth of vaccine and therapeutic targets for P. aeruginosa.

ePitheliAl bARRieRs, cell PolARity
Being an opportunistic pathogen, P. aeruginosa may be unable to 
overcome intact epithelial barriers or innate immunity. The inter-
action of bacteria with intact or wounded epithelium is addressed 
in the final review article by Engel and Eran (2011). Binding of 
the bacteria through their pili to host glycans and heparin-sulfate 
proteoglycans  near  cell–cell  junctions  triggers  a  remodeling  of 
apical surfaces by the recruitment of PI3K resulting in the forma-
tion of protrusions. These basolateral-membrane-like protrusions 
enhance colonization and invasion by this bacterium, suggesting 
that P. aeruginosa subverts epithelial cell regulatory processes that 
maintain apical–basolateral polarity and prevents wound healing 
processes.

RefeRences
Arai, H. (2011). Regulation and function 
of versatile aerobic and anaerobic res-
piratory metabolism in Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa. Front. Microbiol. 2:103. 
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00103

Dean,  S.  N.,  Bishop,  B.  M.,  and  van 
Hoek, M. L. (2011). Susceptibility of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm to 
alpha-helical peptides: D-enantiomer 
of LL-37. Front. Microbiol. 2:128. doi: 
10.3389/fmicb.2011.00128

Diaz, M. R., King, J. M., and Yahr, T. L. 
(2011). Intrinsic and extrinsic regula-
tion of type III secretion gene expres-
sion  in  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa. 
Front. Microbiol. 2:89. doi: 10.3389/
fmicb.2011.00089

Engel, J., and Eran, Y. (2011). Subversion 
of  mucosal  barrier  polarity  by 
Pseudomonas  aeruginosa.  Front. 

Microbiol.  2:114.doi:  10.3389/
fmicb.2011.00114

Filloux,  A.  (2011).  Protein  secretion 
systems in Pseudomonas aeruginosa: 
an essay on diversity, evolution, and 
function. Front. Microbiol. 2:155.doi: 
10.3389/fmicb.2011.00155

Franklin, M. J., Nivens, D. E., Weadge, J. T., 
and Howell, P. L. (2011). Biosynthesis 
of the Pseudomonas aeruginosa extra-
cellular polysaccharides, alginate, Pel, 
and Psl. Front. Microbiol. 2:167. doi: 
10.3389/fmicb.2011.00167

Klockgether, J., Cramer, N., Wiehlmann, 
L., Davenport, C. F., and andTümmler, 
B. (2011). Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
genomic  structure  and  diversity. 
Front. Microbiol. 2:150. doi: 10.3389/
fmicb.2011.00150

Lam, J. S., Taylor, V. L., Islam, S. T., Hao, Y., 
and Kocíncová, D. (2011). Genetic and 

functional diversity of Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa  lipopolysaccharide. 
Front. Microbiol. 2:118. doi: 10.3389/
fmicb.2011.00118

Poole, K. (2011). Pseudomonas aeruginosa: 
resistance to the max. Front. Microbiol. 
2:65. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00065

Rao,  J.,  Damron,  F.  H.,  Basler,  M., 
DiGiandomenico, A.,  Sherman,  N. 
E., Fox, J. W., Mekalanos, J. J., and 
Goldberg, J. B. (2011). Comparisons 
of two proteomic analyses of non-
mucoid  and  mucoid  Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa  clinical  isolates  from  a 
cystic fibrosis patient. Front. Microbiol. 
2:162.doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00162
Sato,  H.,  and  Frank,  D.  W.  (2011). 
Multi-functional  characteristics  of 
the Pseudomonas aeruginosa type III 
needle-tip protein, PcrV; comparison 
to orthologs in other Gram-negative 

bacteria. Front. Microbiol. 2:142. doi: 
10.3389/fmicb.2011.00142

Received:  16  December  2011;  accepted: 
16 December 2011; published online: 05 
January 2012.
Citation:  Frank  DW  (2012)  Research 
topic on Pseudomonas aeruginosa, biol-
ogy, genetics, and host–pathogen interac-
tions. Front. Microbiol. 3:20. doi: 10.3389/
fmicb.2012.00020
This article was submitted to Frontiers in 
Cellular and Infection Microbiology, a spe-
cialty of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Frank. This is an open-
access article distributed under the terms 
of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution 
Non Commercial License, which permits 
non-commercial  use,  distribution,  and 
reproduction in other forums, provided 
the original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology  |  Cellular and Infection Microbiology 

 

January 2012  | Volume 3  |  Article 20  |  2

