REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 03 May 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00165

Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus microRNAs

Eva Gottwein*

Department of Microbiology–Immunology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA

Edited by:
Keiji Ueda, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Japan
Reviewed by:
Keiji Ueda, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Japan
Chris Parsons, LSU Health Sciences
Center, USA
*Correspondence:
Eva Gottwein, Department of
Microbiology–Immunology,
Northwestern University, Morton
6-654, 303 East Chicago Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
e-mail: e-gottwein@northwestern.edu

Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is a human pathogenic γ-herpesvirus
strongly associated with the development of Kaposi’s Sarcoma and B cell proliferative
disorders, including primary effusion lymphoma (PEL). The identiﬁcation and functional
investigation of non-coding RNAs expressed by KSHV is a topic with rapidly emerging
importance. KSHV miRNAs derived from 12 stem-loops located in the major latency locus
have been the focus of particular attention. Recent studies describing the transcriptome-
wide identiﬁcation of mRNA targets of the KSHV miRNAs suggest that these miRNAs have
evolved a highly complex network of interactions with the cellular and viral transcriptomes.
Relatively few KSHV miRNA targets, however, have been characterized at a functional level.
Here, our current understanding of KSHV miRNA expression, targets, and function will be
reviewed.

Keywords: KSHV, herpesvirus, microRNA

INTRODUCTION
Shortly after the discovery of miRNAs as an abundant class of small
RNAs in animals (Lee et al., 1993; Pasquinelli et al., 2000; Reinhart
et al., 2000; Lagos-Quintana et al., 2001; Lau et al., 2001; Lee and
Ambros, 2001), miRNAs of viral origin were identiﬁed in Epstein–
Barr virus (EBV) infected cells (Pfeffer et al., 2004). Since then,
Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) and most other
herpesviruses were found to encode numerous viral microRNAs
(Cai et al., 2005; Pfeffer et al., 2005; Samols et al., 2005; Grundhoff
et al., 2006; Grundhoff and Sullivan, 2011; Skalsky and Cullen,
2011).

miRNAs are ∼22 nucleotide (nt) long non-coding RNAs that
mediate target mRNA recognition by the miRNA-induced silenc-
ing complex (miRISC, referred to as RISC from hereon), which
results in mRNA repression. miRNA biogenesis and RISC loading
are reviewed in detail elsewhere (Kim et al., 2009) and summa-
rized brieﬂy in Figure 1A. The biogenesis of the large majority of
cellular and viral miRNAs, including the KSHV miRNAs, begins
with the transcription of capped and polyadenylated primary RNA
(pri-miRNA) precursors by RNA polymerase II. miRNA matura-
tion involves two sequential cleavage events. In the nucleus, the
endonuclease Drosha excises the ∼65 nt pre-miRNA stem-loop,
which is exported to the cytoplasm. In the cytoplasm, the pre-
miRNA is further processed by the endonuclease Dicer to produce
an imperfect ∼20 nt duplex, with 2 nt 3
overhangs. The strand
with the weaker 5
base pairing is preferentially incorporated as
a mature miRNA into the RISC. The non-incorporated strand,
which is unstable and degraded, is termed the star or passenger
strand. In cases where mature miRNAs are derived from both arms
of the pre-miRNA, these miRNAs are designated -5p and -3p to
reﬂect their location in the pre-miRNA.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

In the RISC complex, miRNAs are loaded into one of four Arg-
onaute proteins (Ago1–4). Imperfect base pairing of the miRNA
with sites in mRNAs, most commonly within the 3
UTR, results
in mRNA repression, caused by mRNA destabilization and/or

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

inhibition of translation (Huntzinger and Izaurralde, 2011).
Canonical miRNA binding sites minimally exhibit perfect base
pairing of the miRNA seed region, i.e. nts 2–7 from the 5
end
of the miRNA, together with base pairing at nt 8 (7mer-m8site),
an adenine (A) across from nt 1 of the miRNA (7mer-A1 site),
or both (Figure 1B; Bartel, 2009). Less commonly, non-canonical
sites with suboptimal seed interactions and 3
compensatory base
pairing or extensive central base pairing confer regulation (Bartel,
2009; Shin et al., 2010). In addition, functional miRNA bind-
(cid:2)
ing sites in 5
UTRs and coding sequences (CDS) have also
been reported (Grey et al., 2010; Lin and Ganem, 2011). While
individual interactions typically have subtle regulatory outcomes,
miRNA-mediated regulation is frequently cooperative with mul-
tiple sites for the same or different miRNAs in a given mRNA.
RISC complexes containing Ago2 can mediate endonucleolytic
cleavage of target mRNAs upon perfect base pairing between the
entire miRNA sequence and its target (Hutvagner and Zamore,
2002). While this property of Ago2 is commonly exploited for
miRNA activity assays, recognition of perfect targets by mam-
malian miRNAs occurs only rarely. Several hundred conserved
human miRNAs have been identiﬁed and each miRNA can target
hundreds of mRNAs, suggesting that most mRNAs and biological
pathways are subject to miRNA-mediated regulation.

The human γ-herpesvirus KSHV is the etiological agent of
Kaposi’s Sarcoma, a complex neoplasm driven by KSHV-infected
endothelial cells. KSHV is also strongly associated with the B cell
proliferative disorder primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) and some
cases of multicentric Castleman’s disease (MCD). Like all her-
pesviruses, KSHV can enter a latency phase with highly restricted
protein expression, thus limiting immune exposure while allow-
ing persistence of the virus. During latency, KSHV expresses viral
miRNAs from 12 pre-miRNAs in addition to a handful of latent
proteins (Cai et al., 2005; Pfeffer et al., 2005; Samols et al., 2005;
Grundhoff et al., 2006). Possible advantages of using miRNA-
mediated regulation for herpesviruses may be that miRNAs are not

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 1

Gottwein

KSHV miRNAs

THE KSHV miRNAs
LOCUS
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus produces mature
miRNAs from 12 stem-loops, all of which are encoded in the
latency locus (Figure 2A). The latency region is complex and
allows for the coordinated expression of the KSHV miRNAs
with the viral proteins latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA),
FADD-like interleukin-1-β-converting enzyme (FLICE)/caspase-
8-inhibitory protein (v-FLIP), v-cyclin, and Kaposins A–C
(Figure 2A). The viral latent proteins mediate the episomal main-
tenance of the KSHV genome (LANA), stimulate NFκB signaling
(v-FLIP), and modulate cell cycle progression (v-cyclin), among
other functions. The mature KSHV miRNAs are called miR-K12-
1 to miR-K12-12, based on their proximity to the kaposin (K12)
gene, or simply miR-K1 to miR-K12. The transcripts from the
latency region that serve as pri-miRNAs for the KSHV miRNAs
are shown in Figure 2B (Cai and Cullen, 2006). All of these
transcripts presumably also function as mRNAs for one or more
of the Kaposin proteins, whose coding sequences are located in
(cid:2)
the common 3
portion of these transcripts. The promoters with
start sites at 127880/86 and 123751/60 are active during latency
and the resulting pri-miRNAs contain miR-K1-K9 and miR-K11
(cid:2)
within a ∼4.8-kb intron and miR-K10/miR-K12 in their 3
ter-
minal exon. At least in the PEL cell line BC-1, a singly spliced
mRNA with a ∼9-kb intron containing miR-K1-K9 and miR-
K11 also exists (Figure 2B, bottom). The latency promoters also
drive the expression of mRNAs encoding LANA, v-cyclin, and v-
FLIP (not shown in Figure 2B), which terminate downstream
of the v-FLIP coding region and do not contain the miRNA
hairpins (Cai and Cullen, 2006). In addition, there is a predom-
inantly lytic promoter which gives rise to an unspliced ∼1.3 kb
transcript that was shown to minimally express Kaposin B and
also contains the miR-K10 and miR-K12 stem-loops, resulting in
increased levels of miR-K10 and miR-K12 expression during lytic
replication.

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

Virtually all of the KSHV pre-miRNAs overlap multifunctional
regions. The entire miR-K10 stem-loop is embedded within the
open reading frame of the Kaposin A and C proteins at a location
that is also in the 3
UTR of Kaposin B and the miR-K12 stem-loop
is located in the 3
UTRs of all Kaposin transcripts. Because the
processing of these two exonic miRNAs and Kaposin translation
are mutually exclusive events, the miR-K10 and miR-K12 stem-
loops can be viewed as negative cis-regulatory RNA elements that
mediate the nuclear destabilization of Kaposin mRNAs and con-
sequently reduce protein expression from these transcripts (Lin
and Sullivan, 2011). The miR-K9 stem-loop is located within a
∼1.7-kb sequence that can function as an origin of lytic genome
replication (ORI-lytB; AuCoin et al., 2002; Lin et al., 2003). Much
of this sequence represents an inverted repeat of a second ori-
gin of lytic replication (Ori-lytA), between ORF K4.2 and K5. In
contrast to ORI-lytA, which is essential for replication, ORI-lytB
is not required for genome replication and the function of this
sequence in the context of the virus remains unknown (Xu et al.,
2006). The miR-K1-K7 and miR-K11 stem loops are antisense to
the recently identiﬁed 10 kb antisense to latency transcripts (ALT)
RNA (Figure 2A; Chandriani et al., 2010). ALT is a non-coding
RNA of unknown function expressed during lytic replication.

FIGURE 1 | miRNA biogenesis and target recognition. (A) Schematic of
the canonical miRNA biogenesis pathway. pri-miRNAs are typically capped
and polyadenylated and contain one or more miRNA stem-loops at exonic
or intronic locations. The pre-miRNA stem-loop is excised by the
microprocessor complex, containing the endonuclease Drosha and its
cofactor DiGeorge syndrome critical region gene 8 (DGCR8), which helps
position Drosha. Following nuclear export, the pre-miRNA is processed by
Dicer to a miRNA:passenger strand duplex. Dicer processing is closely
coupled to loading of the mature miRNA into the RISC. RISC complexes
contain one of four Ago proteins (Ago1–4), which bind the miRNA, and
associated proteins, including TNRC6. (A)n indicates the position of the
polyA tail and arrows indicate cleavage sites. (B) Shown are the minimal
7mer-m8 (top) and 7mer-1A (bottom) seed-mediated interactions between a
miRNA (nts are numbered from the 5(cid:2) end of the miRNA) and its mRNA
target.

antigenic and their precursors can easily ﬁt into multifunctional
transcripts (Cullen, 2006). In addition, the regulatory potential of
miRNAs differs fundamentally from that of proteins, i.e., they are
commonly multifunctional and may allow viruses to regulate com-
binations of mRNAs and pathways that would be hard to access
otherwise. Here, I review what is currently known about KSHV
miRNA expression, targets and functions. miRNAs encoded by
other viruses are reviewed elsewhere (Cullen, 2011; Grundhoff
and Sullivan, 2011).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 2

Gottwein

KSHV miRNAs

FIGURE 2 | The KSHV miRNAs are expressed from the major latency
locus. (A) Schematic of the latency locus and the adjacent K14 and ORF74
genes. The LANA, v-cyclin, v-FLIP, and Kaposin A and B open reading frames
(ORFs) are indicated by black arrows. The Kaposin C ORF includes the ORF of
Kaposin A and an N-terminal extension (white box). Pre-miRNA sequences
are indicated by numbered red arrows. Overlapping DNA elements are
indicated by gray boxes. Also shown is the antisense to latency locus

transcript (ALT). (B) Schematic of the KSHV pri-miRNAs, showing exons (thick
lines), introns, transcription start sites. In both panels, nucleotide coordinates
refer to positions in the KSHV genome (GenBank accession number:
U75698.1). Double arrows indicate transcription start site of lytic RNAs, single
arrows start sites of latent RNAs. The bottom transcript was detected in BC-1
cells, but not in BCBL-1 cells. (A,B) are drawn approximately to scale and
aligned to each other.

While the ALT promoter has not been mapped, it may well overlap
the miR-K8 stem-loop, which begins only 300 nts away from the
ALT start site. Finally, the expression of sequences antisense to
the miR-K8 stem-loop has been reported, although an antisense
transcript in this region has not been identiﬁed (Lin et al., 2010;
Umbach and Cullen, 2010).

SEQUENCES OF THE KSHV miRNAs
The KSHV miRNAs were ﬁrst identiﬁed by cDNA cloning and
traditional sequencing (Cai et al., 2005; Pfeffer et al., 2005; Samols
et al., 2005) and by an approach that combined the computa-
tional prediction of candidate pre-miRNA stem-loops with high-
throughput validation of miRNA expression (Grundhoff et al.,
2006). These ﬁndings were further extended by small RNA deep-
sequencing on the Illumina and ABI SOLiD platforms (Lin et al.,
2010; Umbach and Cullen, 2010; Gottwein et al., 2011). Table 1
lists the sequences of the mature KSHV miRNAs that are likely
to be expressed at physiologically relevant levels under most con-
ditions. This list is based on the number of reads obtained in
deep-sequencing experiments, miRNA activity assays and detec-
tion of the miRNAs using qRT-PCR, primer extension analysis, or
northern blotting. The actual number of KSHV miRNAs exceeds
that of the 12 stem-loop precursors, due to the expression of
relatively abundant 5p and 3p miRNAs from several of the pre-
miRNAs and other sources of miRNA sequence variation discussed
below. While 5p and 3p sequences from all stem-loop precur-
sors have been detected at high sequencing depth (Lin et al.,
2010; Umbach and Cullen, 2010), it remains to be seen if all of
these sequences are expressed at functionally signiﬁcant levels in
every context. Expression of 5p and 3p miRNAs was consistently
observed for some KSHV miRNAs (i.e., miR-K4, miR-K6, miR-
K7, miR-K8, and miR-K9). In contrast, other sequences that were
recovered by deep-sequencing (e.g., miR-K1-3p and miR-K3-3p)
probably reﬂect true star strands without functional relevance in
most settings. The KSHV miRNA repertoire is further expanded

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

by differential processing at the 5
end of miR-K10, which results
in two distinct seed sequences for this miRNA (Umbach and
Cullen, 2010), and through adenosine (A) to inosine (I) editing
by RNA-speciﬁc adenosine deaminase (ADAR) of each of the
miR-K10 seeds. Unedited and A to I edited miR-K10 are des-
ignated miR-K10a and miR-K10b, respectively (Table 1; Pfeffer
et al., 2005). The longer 5
processing variants of miR-K10 are des-
ignated miR-K10+ 1_5 (Table 1; Gottwein et al., 2011). During
latency, expression of miR-K10b is low, but RNA editing at this
location is induced during lytic replication and it is possible that
a substantial fraction of miR-K10 expressed during lytic reactiva-
tion has undergone A to I editing (Gandy et al., 2007). Because
I base-pairs like guanosine (G), miR-K10b is expected to target
a different pool of mRNAs than miR-K10a. An interesting case
is miR-K3, with several PEL cell lines encoding a novel miR-K3
adenosine (miR-K3+ 1_5; Got-
(cid:2)
sequence with an additional 5
twein et al., 2011). As in the case of miR-K10, acquisition of the
additional miRNA seed sequence is expected to extend the target
pool of miR-K3.

CELLULAR ANALOGS OF THE KSHV miRNAs
Importantly, several of the KSHV miRNAs share seed homol-
ogy with cellular miRNAs suggesting that they function as viral
analogs of these miRNAs (Figure 3A). Such functional analogy has
been demonstrated for miR-K11, which mimics miR-155 (Got-
twein et al., 2007; Skalsky et al., 2007), and for the two miR-K10a
miRNAs, which together mimic one of two miR-142-3p derived
miRNAs (Gottwein et al., 2011). Interestingly, miR-K3+ 1_5
shares 7mer seed homology with the miR-23 miRNA family, but
functional analogy between these miRNAs has not been demon-
strated yet. A ﬁnal analogy with likely functional signiﬁcance is
the 6mer seed homology between miR-K6-5p and the miR-214
family of miRNAs. Interestingly, miR-K6-5p also shares extended
homology with the miR-15/miR-16 family of miRNAs (Skalsky
et al., 2007), but the seed is offset by 1 nt (Figure 3A). For 6mer

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 3

Gottwein

KSHV miRNAs

Table 1 | Sequences of the KSHV miRNAs.

miRNA

Arm Sequence

miR-K1-5p
miR-K2-5p
miR-K3-5p
miR-K3_+ 1_5a
miR-K4-3p
miR-K4-5p
miR-K5-3p
miR-K6-3p
miR-K6-5p
miR-K7-3p
miR-K7-5p
miR-K8-3p
miR-K8-5p
miR-K9-3p
miR-K9-5p
miR-K10a (-3p)c
miR-K10b- (-3p)b,c
miR-K10a_+ 1_5 (-3p)c
miR-K10b_+ 1_5 (-3p)b,c
miR-K11-3p
miR-K12-3pc
miR-K12-5pc

5p
5p
5p
5p
3p
5p
3p
3p
5p
3p
5p
3p
5p
3p
5p
3p
3p
3p
3p
3p
3p
5p

AUUACAGGAAACUGGGUGUAAG(CUG)
AACUGUAGUCCGGGUCGAU(CUGA)
UCACAUUCUGAGGACGGCAGCGA(CG)
AUCACAUUCUGAGGACGGCAGCGA
UAGAAUACUGAGGCCUAGCUG(A)
AGCUAAACCGCAGUACUCUAGG
UAGGAUGCCUGGAACUUGCCGG(U)
UGAUGGUUUUCGGGCUGUUGAG(C)
CCAGCAGCACCUAAUCCAUCGG
UGAUCCCAUGUUGCUGGCGC(UCA)
AGCGCCACCGGACGGGGAUUUAUG
CUAGGCGCGACUGAGAGAGC(AC)
ACUCCCUCACUAACGCCCCGCU
CUGGGUAUACGCAGCUGCGU(AA)
ACCCAGCUGCGUAAACCCCG(CU)
UAGUGUUGUCCCCCCGAGUGG(C)
UIGUGUUGUCCCCCCGAGUGG(C)
UUAGUGUUGUCCCCCCGAGUGG(C)
UUIGUGUUGUCCCCCCGAGUGG(C)
UUAAUGCUUAGCCUGUGUCCG(AU)
UGGGGGAGGGUGCCCUGGUUG(A)
AACCAGGCCACCAUUCCUCUCCG

Sequences of the KSHV miRNAs with signiﬁcant expression under most exper-
imental conditions are listed. Nucleotides in brackets are not always present
in deep-sequencing reads. Bold letters highlight the A to I editing event within
miR-K10. amiR-K3+ 1_5 is only present in a subset of KSHV strains. bmiR-K10b
may reach functionally relevant levels of expression only during lytic replication.
cmiR-K10 and miR-K12 expression is increased during lytic replication. In the case
of miR-K10, it is unclear if the expression of unedited and/or edited miRNAs is
increased.

seed and offset homology, resulting functional analogies would be
expected to be less complete than for 7mer seed analogs. Other
potential analogs have been listed (Gottwein et al., 2011), but
in most cases the cellular miRNAs in question have not under-
gone stringent validation. Findings in mice suggest that many of
the small RNAs currently annotated as miRNAs may not repre-
sent true miRNAs (Chiang et al., 2010). It is therefore possible
that many of the >1000 human miRNAs listed in miRBase have
been misclassiﬁed as miRNAs. The signiﬁcance of analogies with
such uncharacterized miRNAs is therefore unclear and could be
co-incidental (Grundhoff and Sullivan, 2011).

BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF KSHV miRNA EXPRESSION LEVELS
The regulatory impact of miRNA expression depends on the rel-
ative abundance of the miRNA and its targets. Consequently, the
level of miRNA expression is of critical relevance for miRNA func-
tion. Methods used for miRNA detection have intrinsic biases and
a careful analysis of the absolute and relative expression levels of
individual KSHV miRNAs against oligonucleotide standards has
not been reported. However, from deep-sequencing data, real-time
PCR experiments and activity assays, it appears that individ-
ual KSHV miRNAs are expressed at dramatically different copy

A

B

FIGURE 3 | (A) KSHV miRNAs with known or potential cellular analogs.
miRNAs are aligned to show seed (red) and non-seed (blue) homologies.
(B) Schematic illustrating the origin of moRNAs.

numbers. While some KSHV miRNAs are always readily detectable
(especially miR-K1, miR-K3, miR-K4-3p, miR-K6-3p, miR-K11),
others are unlikely to be abundant (e.g., miR-K9; Cai et al., 2005;
Pfeffer et al., 2005; Gottwein et al., 2006, 2011; O’Hara et al.,
2009; Hansen et al., 2010; Lin et al., 2010; Umbach and Cullen,
2010). Because all KSHV miRNAs are expressed from common
pri-miRNAs, their differential expression must result from differ-
ences in processing efﬁciency, RISC loading, and/or stability. In
addition, the expression level of the KSHV miRNAs also varies
among PEL cell lines and de novo infection models (Hansen et al.,
2010; Gottwein et al., 2011). While some PEL cell lines express rel-
atively low levels of the KSHV miRNAs (∼20–30% of all miRNA
reads in deep-sequencing experiments, e.g., BC-1 and BCBL-1),
other PEL cell lines express very high levels of the KSHV miRNAs
(>80% of all miRNA reads, BC-3 cells). The KSHV miRNAs are
constitutively expressed during latency and their expression is
maintained upon entry into lytic replication (Cai et al., 2005; Pfef-
fer et al., 2005). miR-K10 and miR-K12 are induced several-fold
during lytic replication due to their expression from both latent
and lytic transcripts (see above). In addition, RNA editing of the
miR-K10 stem-loop is likely induced during lytic replication, but it
is unclear if this results in increased expression of miR-K10b over
miR-K10a (Gandy et al., 2007). Finally, the expression levels of the
KSHV miRNAs during natural KSHV infection remain unknown.

EVOLUTIONARY CONSERVATION AND VARIATION BETWEEN KSHV
STRAINS
Like most herpesvirus miRNAs (Cai et al., 2006; Walz et al., 2010),
the KSHV miRNA seed sequences are not conserved between

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 4

Gottwein

KSHV miRNAs

KSHV and evolutionary distant herpesviruses. One notable excep-
tion is the 6mer seed homology between KSHV miR-K10a and
miR-rR1-15-3p of the closely related rhesus rhadinovirus (RRV,
Figure 3A; Umbach and Cullen, 2010), which may be the result of
convergent evolution rather than true evolutionary conservation.
Despite this lack of evolutionary conservation of the miRNA seeds
between evolutionary distant viruses, the mature sequences of the
KSHV miRNAs appear to be highly conserved between KSHV iso-
lates (Marshall et al., 2007, 2010). Maybe surprisingly, Marshall et
al. also reported a high degree of conservation of sequences outside
the mature miRNAs. For example the terminal loop sequences of
the pre-miRNA stem-loops were generally conserved, despite the
fact that these sequences are expected to be functionally irrele-
vant as long as the stem-loop structure is maintained. Because
of the multifunctional nature of the latency region, it is possible
that yet unappreciated selective pressures act on these sequences.
Despite this caveat, the observed degree of miRNA conservation
strongly argues that the KSHV miRNAs are important for KSHV.
Several polymorphisms that change the KSHV miRNA repertoire
have been described. An A to G polymorphism in the miR-K5
passenger strand (position 121,315) was found in >20% of all
KSHV sequences analyzed (Marshall et al., 2007, 2010). This sin-
gle nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was reported elsewhere to
alter the structure of the miR-K5 stem, which results in reduced
processing of pri-miR-K5 by Drosha and lower levels of miR-K5
expression (Cai et al., 2005; Gottwein et al., 2006, 2011). The miR-
K9 stem-loop appears to be the most variable between isolates
and has been lost from at least one PEL cell line (BC-3; Marshall
et al., 2007; Umbach and Cullen, 2010), suggesting that this miRNA
is dispensable for the maintenance of latency, for lytic reactiva-
tion and possibly for lymphomagenesis by KSHV. Other reported
variants of pre-miR-K9 are likely to also dramatically alter either
miR-K9 sequence or expression (Marshall et al., 2007, 2010). Other
frequent polymorphisms are located outside mature or passenger
strand sequences and consequences on miRNA expression have
not been reported (Marshall et al., 2007, 2010).

OTHER SMALL RNAs EXPRESSED FROM THE KSHV LATENCY REGION
Two reports described the detection of miRNA offset RNAs
(moRNAs or moRs) and small RNAs antisense to the KSHV
miRNAs (Lin et al., 2010; Umbach and Cullen, 2010). moRNAs
were ﬁrst described in the sea squirt Ciona intestinalis, which
serves as a model organism for simple chordates (Shi et al., 2009).
moRNAs are processed from sequences adjacent to the pre-miRNA
stem-loop (Figure 3B) and are both frequent and abundant in C.
intestinalis. moRs have also been detected in human small RNA
deep-sequencing libraries, but at levels consistently below that of
miRNAs and passenger strand sequences (Langenberger et al.,
2009), suggesting that these RNAs are potentially only byprod-
ucts of miRNA biogenesis. KSHV moRNAs were detected for 9
of 12 KSHV miRNA stem-loops (Lin et al., 2010; Umbach and
Cullen, 2010), but like human moRs, these sequences were of very
low abundance. While RRV moRs have shown activity in cleavage
assays for miRNA activity when expressed at high enough levels
(Umbach et al., 2010), the low expression of KSHV moRs dur-
ing KSHV infection suggests that these sequences might not be
expressed at high enough levels to be functionally relevant.

Similarly, small RNAs antisense to miRNA hairpins for miR-K2,
miR-K4, and miR-K8 were recovered at frequencies lower than for
passenger strand miRNAs (Lin et al., 2010; Umbach and Cullen,
2010). These sequences arise due to bi-directional transcription
of a miRNA locus. The expression of KSHV antisense miRNAs
appears to be restricted to lytic replication and the recovery of -5p
and -3p sequences suggests that they are products of the miRNA
biogenesis machinery. A small RNA antisense to miR-K4 (miR-
K4-AS-3p) was readily detectable and active in miRNA indicator
assays when this region was placed into an expression vector (Lin
et al., 2010). It is unclear, however, if this is also the case at phys-
iological levels of expression in PEL. miR-K4-AS and miR-K2-AS
could be derived from the ALT RNA. No transcript encompassing
miR-K8-AS sequences has been identiﬁed to date.

TARGETS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE KSHV miRNAs
The constitutive expression and conservation of
the KSHV
miRNAs suggests they are functionally important during nat-
ural KSHV infection and may also contribute to the oncogenic
properties of KSHV. Thus, identifying the targets and functions of
the KSHV miRNAs is clearly important for our understanding of
KSHV biology and pathogenesis. In principle, the KSHV miRNAs
may have evolved to target cellular or viral mRNAs and to regulate
cellular properties or viral gene expression. As discussed above,
KSHV has evolved a number of novel miRNA seed sequences and
also appears to access pre-existing, evolutionary conserved reg-
ulatory networks by encoding miRNAs with seed homology to
evolutionary conserved cellular miRNAs. While cellular miRNAs
are thought to repress many mRNAs, perhaps even hundreds,
through seed interactions, there is no good reason to assume that
novel viral miRNAs would also target multiple imperfect sites and
predominantly engage in seed-mediated interactions. However, no
cleavage targets of the KSHV miRNAs have been identiﬁed to date
and it appears all KSHV miRNAs have many seed targets much like
typical cellular miRNAs. It is noteworthy that the KSHV miRNAs
must have undergone selection to be functionally compatible with
all cell types relevant to KSHV infection, including endothelial cells
and B cells, each with a different transcriptome. Consequently, it is
possible that one or more targets with a strong selective advantage
in one cell type or the latent or lytic stages of KSHV infection may
come at a cost in other cell types or at other stages of the life cycle.

(cid:2)

KSHV miRNA TARGETOME
Understanding the KSHV miRNA targetome is a critical step
toward identifying the functions of the KSHV miRNAs. One of
the most successful methods for the identiﬁcation of function-
ally relevant targets of evolutionary conserved cellular miRNAs is
the computational identiﬁcation of evolutionary conserved seed
matches in 3
UTR sequences (Bartel, 2009). The assumption
underlying this approach is that miRNA and target sequences
co-evolve and that functionally important interactions will be
conserved. With the exception of the viral analogs of cellular
miRNAs, the KSHV miRNAs are unique to KSHV, and therefore
not expected to preferentially target 3
UTR sequences that are
evolutionary conserved between species. Consequently, computa-
tional target prediction is generally not suitable for the identiﬁ-
cation of targets of the KSHV miRNAs with novel seeds, which

(cid:2)

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 5

Gottwein

KSHV miRNAs

has mostly relied on experimental target identiﬁcation. Several
studies combined gene expression proﬁling upon ectopic deliv-
ery of individual or several KSHV miRNAs (Gottwein et al., 2007;
Samols et al., 2007; Skalsky et al., 2007; Ziegelbauer et al., 2009;
Hansen et al., 2010; Suffert et al., 2011) or their antagonism in
the context of KSHV infection (Ziegelbauer et al., 2009) with the
detection of seed matches to the expressed miRNA(s) among dif-
ferentially expressed mRNAs in order to identify candidate targets.
While such analyses can also give insight into the functional conse-
quences of miRNA expression, the identiﬁcation of direct targets
from differentially expressed mRNAs is confounded by indirect
consequences of miRNA expression. In addition, while miRNA-
induced changes of mRNA expression are often predictive of the
effect on protein expression (Baek et al., 2008; Selbach et al., 2008),
the effect of individual interactions is typically small and many
targets may be missed using this approach. To overcome these
limitations, Dölken et al. (2010) used Ago2-immunoprecipitation
coupled with microarray analysis of associated RNAs (RIP-Chip)
to identify mRNAs that are enriched in RISC complexes in cells
expressing KSHV miRNAs compared to control cells. This work
resulted in a list of 114 high conﬁdence candidate targets of the
KSHV miRNAs. While RIP-Chip can measure the degree of mRNA
association with RISC, it cannot conﬁdently assign the targeting
miRNA or map its binding site. This caveat of RIP-CHIP is over-
come by the transcriptome-wide identiﬁcation of miRNA binding
sites using photoactivatable-ribonucleoside-enhanced crosslink-
ing and immunoprecipitation (PAR-CLIP) and high-throughput
sequencing of RISC protected fragments (Hafner et al., 2010; Got-
twein et al., 2011). In contrast to other technologies, PAR-CLIP
directly identiﬁes RISC-binding sites, which are examined for
miRNA seed matches. Applying PAR-CLIP to PEL cell lines has
yielded thousands of experimentally identiﬁed Ago2 binding sites
with seed matches to KSHV miRNAs, in more than 2000 candidate
target mRNAs. Validation of a subset of these candidate targets by
reporter assays suggested that ≥75% of the identiﬁed sites can be
expected to cause measurable regulation by the assigned miRNA.
Thus, extensive lists of candidate targets of the KSHV miRNAs and
their likely binding sites exist, but further validation of individual
interactions will be required. Because most of these experiments
were performed in B cells and none of the datasets is expected to
have captured all interactions of the KSHV miRNAs, future work
will have to reﬁne our understanding of the KSHV miRNA targe-
tome in other cell types and to address which of the identiﬁed
interactions impact gene expression and are functionally relevant.
Despite these caveats, pathway analyses of high conﬁdence candi-
dates can already give insight into potential functions of the KSHV
miRNAs (Dölken et al., 2010; Gottwein et al., 2011). While such
analyses are still hampered by the incomplete functional annota-
tion of the human transcriptome and may be biased by the cell
type candidates were derived from, current data strongly suggest
that KSHV miRNAs are highly multifunctional. Candidate targets
of the KSHV miRNAs were found to be signiﬁcantly enriched for
those with roles as transcription factors and those that participate
in signaling and vesicular trafﬁcking, among others. The notion
that the KSHV miRNAs have diverse functions is also supported by
functional validation of diverse targets (below). PAR-CLIP and/or
candidate approaches, have also resulted in a number of known or

suspected viral targets of the KSHV miRNAs, including the mRNA
encoding replication and transcription activator (RTA; Bellare and
Ganem, 2009; Gottwein et al., 2011). Finally, a surprisingly high
overlap between PAR-CLIP targets of the KSHV and EBV miRNAs,
suggests that the KSHV and EBV miRNAs share many functions as
a result of convergent evolution (Gottwein et al., 2011). While this
cannot be said for sure until such common targets and functions
are studied in detail, this hypothesis is already supported by the
ﬁnding that KSHV, human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and EBV
all target MICB, an important mediator of NK cell recognition,
through different sites (Nachmani et al., 2009). The overlapping
target range of EBV and KSHV miRNAs may have functional sig-
niﬁcance in PEL, because >80% of PELs carry both EBV and
KSHV (Cesarman et al., 1995) and co-express >30 EBV BART
miRNAs with the KSHV miRNAs (Cai et al., 2006; Gottwein et al.,
2011). It is therefore likely that the KSHV and EBV miRNAs syn-
ergize in PEL to repress important targets. Indeed, PAR-CLIP data
predicts that several of the already validated KSHV miRNA targets
may also be targeted by EBV miRNAs, including for example cas-
pase 3 (Suffert et al., 2011). In summary, while a signiﬁcant amount
of work remains, we are beginning to understand the complexity
of the KSHV miRNA targetome. An even higher degree of com-
plexity is certain to emerge once additional cell types are analyzed
at comparable depth.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

The functional validation of miRNA targets typically includes
several steps: (1) The 3
UTR sequence of the candidate target is
(cid:2)
placed 3
to a luciferase reporter and the speciﬁc regulation of
indicator activity by the targeting miRNA is established by 3
UTR
reporter assays. The loss of reporter regulation upon mutation of
the miRNA binding site is currently the only way to demonstrate
the potential of a direct regulatory interaction in human cells.
However, due to the artiﬁciality of this assay, target regulation in
a 3
UTR reporter assay cannot prove that the interaction does
indeed take place in the context of infection or is functionally rel-
evant. (2) Repression of the endogenous protein by the miRNA
is established. This is demonstrated by reduced target expression
following the ectopic expression of physiological levels of the tar-
geting miRNA in cells lacking this miRNA and by increased target
expression following the inhibition of the miRNA in the context
of infection. Because miRNA-induced changes are often subtle,
quantitative western blotting is emerging as one of the best tools
to accurately establish the level of regulation at the protein level
(Abend et al., 2010). (3) The contribution of target regulation
to observed functional consequences is established. Because it
is often hard to unequivocally demonstrate that observed func-
tional consequences are indeed due to the targeting of a particular
mRNA, several lines of indirect evidence are usually accumulated
to support this idea. Upon ectopic miRNA expression, rescue of
a miRNA-induced phenotype can be performed by re-expression
of the target. In addition, RNA interference (RNAi) of the target
should phenocopy miRNA expression. Conversely, upon miRNA
inhibition, siRNA of the target mRNA is expected to reverse the
phenotype and overexpression of the target is expected to phe-
nocopy miRNA knockdown. The few KSHV miRNA targets that
have undergone fairly stringent functional validation are listed
in Table 2. In the following paragraphs, key concepts and open
questions that have emerged are highlighted.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 6

Gottwein

KSHV miRNAs

Table 2 | KSHV miRNA targets.

Gene Symbol

miRNA(s)

Reference

Functional consequences

Gottwein et al. (2007), Skalsky et al. (2007),
Qin et al. (2010a)
Ziegelbauer et al. (2009)

Upregulation of SCL7A11/xCT expression by the KSHV
miRNAs, increased viability under oxidative stress
Prime cells for KSHV reactivation, modulate caspase activity

Suffert et al. (2011)

This interaction may contribute to the inhibition of apoptosis
by KSHV

BACH1

BCLAF1

CASP3

CDKN1A/p21
IKBKE/IKKε

MAF

MICB
NFIB

miR-K11 (PC)

K5
K9-3p
K10a (PC), K10b
miR-K1 (PC)
miR-K3 (PC)
miR-K4-3p (PC)
miR-K1 (PC)
miR-K11

miR-K1
miR-K6-5p
miR-K11
miR-K7
miR-K3

Gottwein and Cullen (2010)
Gottwein et al. (2007), Liang et al. (2011)

Hansen et al. (2010)

Nachmani et al. (2009)
Lu et al. (2010a)

NFKBIA/IκBα

miR-K1

Lei et al. (2010)

RBL2

miR-K4-5p (PC)

Lu et al. (2010b)

SMAD5
miR-K11 (PC)
TNFRSF12A/TWEAKR miR-K10a (PC)

Liu et al. (2012)
Abend et al. (2010)

KSHV RTA (ORF50)

miR-K9-5p

Bellare and Ganem (2009)

Attenuation of p21-dependent cell cycle arrest
Attenuation of interferon induction by pattern recognition
receptors, stabilize KSHV latency
Downregulation of LEC marker expression, de-differentiation

Reduced NK cell recognition and activation
Stabilization of KSHV latency by regulation of RTA promoter
activity
Stabilization of KSHV latency by regulation of RTA promoter
activity
De-repression of DNA methyl transferases Dnmt1, 3a
and 3b?
Attenuation of TGF-beta signaling
Reduce cellular responses to TWEAK signaling, including
the induction of inﬂammatory cytokines and the induction of
apoptosis
Reduce RTA expression and consequently inhibit KSHV
reactivation

Only KSHV miRNA targets that have undergone stringent validation and at least some functional analyses are listed.The gene symbol, the targeting miRNA(s), original
reports, and proposed functional consequences are listed. In the miRNA(s) column (PC) indicates that the proposed interaction was also recovered by PAR-CLIP
(Gottwein et al., 2011).

(cid:2)

KSHV ANALOGS OF CELLULAR miRNAs
Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus gains access to a num-
ber of pre-existing regulatory networks by encoding viral analogs
of cellular miRNAs. As mentioned above, miR-K11 shares 7mer
seed homology with miR-155 and their overlapping target range
has been extensively validated: ectopically expressed miR-K11 and
miR-155 regulate similar sets of mRNAs and result in equiva-
lent regulation of 3
UTR reporters in all cases tested to date
(Gottwein et al., 2007; Skalsky et al., 2007). Similar target regu-
lation by miR-K11 and miR-155 was also observed at the level
of protein expression for the transcription factors BACH1 and
FOS in side-by-side experiments. In addition, it was demonstrated
that miR-K11 regulates protein expression of known miR-155
targets IκB kinase epsilon (IKKε) and SMAD5 (Gottwein et al.,
2007; Lu et al., 2008; Yin et al., 2008, 2010; Liang et al., 2011;
Liu et al., 2012). More recently, the analogy between miR-K11
and miR-155 was further conﬁrmed by the recovery of ∼40%
of all known miR-155 targets as candidate targets of miR-K11
in PEL cells using PAR-CLIP (Gottwein et al., 2011). While a
role of miR-K11 in KSHV-induced cancer has not been demon-
strated, such a role appears likely, because (1) the constitutive

expression of its analog miR-155 in B cells or hematopoietic stem
cells causes B cell- or myelo-proliferative disease (Costinean et al.,
2006; O’Connell et al., 2008), (2) EBV-induced cellular miR-155 is
essential for the survival and growth of EBV-transformed lym-
phoblastoid cells (Linnstaedt et al., 2010), (3) a viral miR-155
analog encoded by the oncogenic chicken α-herpesvirus Marek’s
disease virus (MDV) was found to be essential for lymphoma-
genesis by MDV in chickens (Zhao et al., 2011), and (4) the
constitutive expression of miR-K11 in human hematopoietic cells
that were reconstituted into a humanized mouse model pheno-
copied expression of miR-155 and lead to an expansion of splenic
B cells (Boss et al., 2011). Which of the many miR-155 targets are
responsible for these observations is not understood in detail, but
it is tempting to speculate that at least some of the relevant tar-
gets may be conserved in humans, mice, and chicken. In addition
to a potential role in lymphomagenesis, miR-K11 contributes to
the KSHV-induced transcriptional reprogramming of lymphatic
endothelial cells (Hansen et al., 2010), promotes cell survival under
oxidative stress (Qin et al., 2010a), and inhibits TGF-beta signal-
ing (Liu et al., 2012). These functions of miR-K11 are discussed
below.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 7

Gottwein

KSHV miRNAs

(cid:2)

Recently, a more complex analogy has been demonstrated
between KSHV miR-K10a and the cellular miRNA miR-142-3p
(Gottwein et al., 2011). miR-K10a and miR-142-3p both have two
(cid:2)
5
processing variants, which are expressed at close to a 1:1 ratio
(Umbach and Cullen, 2010; Gottwein et al., 2011). The longer
miR-K10a_+ 1_5 shares 7mer seed homology with the shorter
miR-142-3p-1_5p (Figure 3A). Because the 5
nt of miR-K10a
is a uridine, 7mer-1A sites for miR-K10a are also 7mer sites for
miR-K10a+ 1_5 and both miRNAs expressed by miR-K10a are
predicted to effectively mimic miR-142-3p-1_5. In fact, only 15%
of the PAR-CLIP sites predicted as targets of the two miR-K10a
variants were not also predicted to be targets of miR-142-3p-1_5.
miR-142-3p is expressed in all cells of the hematopoietic lineage
and largely absent in non-hematopoietic cells, but very few targets
and functions of miR-142-3p have been identiﬁed to date. In PEL
cell lines, miR-142-3p is likely signiﬁcantly more abundant than
miR-K10, suggesting that these miRNAs may be redundant in B
cells. Because miR-142-3p is absent from many other cell types,
including endothelial cells, it is possible that KSHV uses miR-
K10 to introduce miR-142-3p-like functions into other cell types.
Interestingly, PAR-CLIP sites assigned to miR-K10/miR-142-3p
were also reported in latent viral mRNAs (Gottwein et al., 2011),
(cid:2)
including the 3
UTRs of v-cyclin/LANA, the KSHV homolog of
human IL-6 (v-IL-6), and latent nuclear antigen 2/viral interferon
regulatory factor 3, a protein that interferes with cellular signal-
ing and is essential for the survival of PEL cells in culture (Wies
et al., 2008). While these interactions remain to be validated at
a functional level, their identiﬁcation raises the possibility that
KSHV uses miR-142-3p and/or miR-K10 to ﬁne tune latent protein
expression. In conclusion, while KSHV clearly encodes functional
mimics of cellular miRNAs, it is also important to point out that
this analogy extends only to the seed region. Like in the case of viral
homologs of cellular proteins, it appears likely that viral analogs of
cellular miRNAs also differ in key aspects from their cellular coun-
terparts. Although such differences remain to be identiﬁed, these
may include differences in non-seed target interactions, miRNA
stability, and miRNA regulation.

DO THE KSHV miRNAs REGULATE REACTIVATION?
The establishment of latency, a highly restricted gene expression
pattern that mediates the maintenance of the viral episome and
minimizes immune recognition, is universal among herpesviruses
and critical for their life-long persistence. Expression of herpesvi-
ral immediate early (IE) genes serves as a “switch” that triggers
reactivation from latency and initiates the lytic gene expression
cascade that ultimately results in expression of all viral genes and
the production of progeny virus. RTA is both necessary and sufﬁ-
cient for the initiation of lytic KSHV replication. RTA expression
is tightly regulated to respond to a variety of physiological triggers.
While the default gene expression program of KSHV in culture is
latency, spontaneous reactivation occurs at a low rate (typically
∼1–2% of the cells). Latently expressed α-herpesviral miRNAs
were found to regulate IE genes (Umbach et al., 2008; Jurak et al.,
2011) and it is an attractive hypothesis that viral miRNAs in general
function in this manner to stabilize latency (Murphy et al., 2008).
Potentially, regulation of RTA could take place at the level of tran-
scription, through epigenetic modiﬁcation and the availability of

repressors and activators of transcription, at the level of mRNA
stability and translation and at the level of protein stability and
activity. Thus, in order to affect RTA levels, the KSHV miRNAs
may directly target RTA mRNAs or regulate cellular factors that
control RTA expression and activity. Two independent studies
reported that deletion of the intronic miRNAs, miR-K1-9 and
miR-K11, from KSHV bac36 causes a two to fourfold increase in
RTA transcript levels, a similarly modest increase in downstream
viral lytic gene expression and an approximately twofold increase
in virus yield from 293T cells, suggesting that the intronic miRNAs
modulate the latent to lytic switch in favor of latency (Lei et al.,
2010; Lu et al., 2010b). This phenotype was accompanied by a
modest, 1.5- to 2-fold, increase in RTA promoter reporter activ-
ity in these cells (Lei et al., 2010), suggesting that regulation is at
the level of promoter activity. While Lei et al. (2010) reported
that this effect could be reversed by re-expression of miR-K1,
Lu et al. (2010b) observed no restoration of RTA inhibition by
re-expression of miR-K1 and presented data suggesting that the
expression of miR-K5, and perhaps miR-K4, was able to restore
lower RTA transcript levels. Given that a similar cell type was used
by both groups, it is possible that differences in the level of the
re-expressed miRNAs may account for the discrepancies between
these studies. In a complementary approach, Bellare and Ganem
(2009) transfected antisense inhibitors against individual miRNAs
into human foreskin ﬁbroblasts (HFFs) infected with rKSHV.219,
a recombinant KSHV containing an RFP reporter under control of
the lytic PAN promoter (Vieira and O’Hearn, 2004). Interestingly,
no effect on the spontaneous reactivation of KSHV was observed
upon individual inhibition of either miR-K1, miR-K4-5p, miR-
K4-3p, or miR-K5, suggesting that, at least in HFF, inhibition of
these miRNAs alone is not sufﬁcient to cause an increase in spon-
taneous reactivation. In HFF, only the inhibition of miR-K9-5p
resulted in a ∼2.5-fold increase in RFP expression, likely due to
a direct interaction of this miRNA with a site in the 3
UTR of
RTA (Bellare and Ganem, 2009), but expression of miR-K9 was
reported to be unable to restore RTA inhibition to the miRNA-
deleted virus in 293 cells (Lu et al., 2010b). Another study reported
that overexpression of miR-K3 in the PEL cell line BC-3 results in
decreased RTA mRNA expression (Lu et al., 2010a), but the con-
tribution of endogenously expressed miR-K3 to the maintenance
of latency in PEL remains unclear. The re-expression of miR-K3
was unable to restore RTA inhibition to the miRNA-deleted virus
in 293 cells (Lu et al., 2010b) and its inhibition did not result in
reactivation of the virus in HFF (Bellare and Ganem, 2009). In
addition to the study by Bellare and Ganem (2009), several labo-
(cid:2)
ratories have tested RTA-3
UTR indicators for inhibition by the
KSHV miRNAs, with different results (Lei et al., 2010; Lu et al.,
2010b; Lin et al., 2011). Additional miRNAs that were reported to
inhibit RTA indicator expression include miR-K5 and miR-K7-5p
(Lu et al., 2010b; Lin et al., 2011). Lei et al. (2010), however, did not
observe RTA indicator repression by any of the KSHV miRNAs.
It appears that differences between studies are most likely due
to the use of different approaches to miRNA expression, using
mimics or from expression vectors, which may either overexpress
or inadequately express 5p and 3p miRNAs. Another source of
(cid:2)
experimental discrepancies could be the folding of the 3
UTR-
indicator transcript which depends on the exact sequence of the

(cid:2)

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 8

Gottwein

KSHV miRNAs

(cid:2)

transcript. It is conceivable that unnatural 3
UTR folding could
result in both false positive and false negative results. While the
above studies generally agree that the KSHV miRNAs modestly
stabilize latency, Ziegelbauer et al. (2009) showed that the com-
bined inhibition of miR-K5, miR-K9-3p, and miR-K10a/b in PEL
and SLK cells had the opposite effect and reduced the percentage
of cells undergoing spontaneous reactivation by about 40%, likely
through de-repression of the cellular protein bcl2-associated factor
(BCLAF1). Thus, several of the miRNAs may also help tip the bal-
ance in favor of lytic reactivation. In conclusion, while much work
remains to be done to establish which individual or collaborating
KSHV miRNAs affect KSHV reactivation in different cell types,
existing data point to a subtle function of the intronic miRNAs
in favor of maintaining latency. The observed effects were modest
and may present additional controls to KSHV gene expression. It is
plausible that the KSHV miRNAs are under evolutionary pressure
to be compatible with the latent and lytic replication modes, and
even possible that they have evolved to avoid strong interactions
with RTA and other lytic mRNAs.

TRANSCRIPTIONAL AND EPIGENETIC REPROGRAMMING
While direct recognition by miRNAs often results in only subtle
changes of target expression, indirect functional consequences can
be more dramatic if regulated mRNAs encode transcription factors
and other regulators of gene expression. Transcriptional regulation
was the most highly enriched function among candidate targets
of the KSHV miRNAs (Gottwein et al., 2011), and several tran-
scription factors have already been validated as targets of KSHV
miRNAs. KSHV-infected spindle cells are the predominant cell
type in advanced KS lesion. Spindle cells are poorly differentiated
with expression of lymphatic and blood vessel endothelial cell
(LEC and BEC) as well as mesenchymal markers. This transcrip-
tional reprogramming is recapitulated upon infection of LECs
by KSHV in vitro (Boshoff et al., 1995; Hong et al., 2004; Wang
et al., 2004; Cheng et al., 2011; Gasperini et al., 2012). Several
KSHV miRNAs contribute to the transcriptional reprogramming
of LEC by KSHV through targeting of the transcription factor c-
Maf (MAF; Hansen et al., 2010). Large Maf transcription factors,
including c-Maf, can act as activators or repressors and regu-
late the terminal differentiation of a number of tissues. c-Maf
is among the proteins that are speciﬁcally induced in LEC by the
transcriptional master regulator of lymphatic endothelial differ-
entiation PROX1 (Petrova et al., 2002; Hong et al., 2004). c-Maf
was downregulated in LEC stably expressing the intronic KSHV
miRNAs and found to be directly repressed by KSHV miR-K6
and miR-K11. Downregulation of c-Maf following the expression
of the intronic miRNAs or by RNAi induced the expression of
BEC marker genes in LEC, suggesting that c-Maf is important
to maintain LEC differentiation. Thus, regulation of MAF by the
KSHV miRNAs at least partially accounts for the transcriptional
reprogramming observed upon KSHV infection of LEC. Other
examples of transcription factors targeted by KSHV miRNAs
include the transcriptional repressors RBL2 (retinoblastoma-like
2), BACH1 (BTB and CNC homology 1, basic leucine zipper tran-
scription factor 1), and BCLAF1 (discussed above and below).
RBL2 is downregulated by miR-K4-5p, potentially resulting in
increased expression of DNA methyl transferases DNMT1, 3a, and

3b (Lu et al., 2010b). Consistent with a function of the KSHV
miRNAs in the epigenetic modiﬁcation of the KSHV and cellular
genomes, deletion of the intronic miRNAs resulted in an overall
reduction of CpG methylation of the viral and cellular genomes.
BACH1 is among the most strongly regulated targets of the KSHV
miRNAs validated to date (Gottwein et al., 2007; Skalsky et al.,
2007). The best characterized target of BACH1-mediated repres-
sion is hemeoxygenase 1 (HO-1, HMOX1), the limiting enzyme
in heme catabolism, which is strongly upregulated in KS (McAl-
lister et al., 2004). More recently, Qin et al. (2010a) showed that
BACH1 also represses SLC7A11 (solute carrier family 7, xCT), a
transporter which imports cystine required for the synthesis of
glutathione (GSH), a critical antioxidant that protects cells from
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Consequently, the resulting upreg-
ulation of SLC7A11 protects infected cells from oxidative stress.
BACH1-ChIP-seq in 293 cells (Warnatz et al., 2011), which express
endogenous BACH1, conﬁrmed HO-1 and SLC7A11 as BACH1
target genes and identiﬁed additional targets of BACH1, including
additional factors involved in redox and transport processes, and
those involved in cell cycle and apoptosis. Thus, several transcrip-
tion factors have already been shown to be important targets of the
KSHV miRNAs and many more are likely candidates, suggesting
that transcriptional reprogramming is an important function of
the KSHV miRNAs.

(cid:2)

UTR and the 3

EVASION FROM CELL CYCLE ARREST AND CELL DEATH
The deregulation of the cell cycle, survival signaling, and cell death
pathways contributes to the oncogenic properties of KSHV and
other oncogenic viruses. Not surprisingly, several of the already
validated targets of the KSHV miRNAs are predicted to facilitate
viral escape from cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. KSHV miR-K1
targets p21, a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CDKI) induced
by several growth inhibitory signals, and thereby attenuates p21-
mediated cell cycle arrest (Gottwein and Cullen, 2010). More
recently, several other miRNAs were reported to also bind the p21
(cid:2)
3
UTR of a second CDKI, p27, but the functional
impact of these interactions in the context of KSHV infection
remains to be established (Gottwein et al., 2011). As discussed
above, the downregulation of BACH1 by miR-K11 promotes cel-
lular survival under oxidative stress, through de-repression of
xCT (Qin et al., 2010a). KSHV miR-K10 was shown to allow the
escape from TNFSF12/TWEAK-induced apoptosis by repression
of TNRSFR12A/TWEAKR, its receptor (Abend et al., 2010), and
miRNAs miR-K1, miR-K3, and miR-K4-3p target effector cas-
pase 3 (CASP3; Suffert et al., 2011). The co-expression of the
intronic KSHV miRNAs inhibited apoptosis following treatment
with staurosporine, while the joint inhibition of miR-K1, miR-
K3, and miR-K4-3p in KSHV-infected E6/E7-immortalized LEC
enhanced etoposide-induced apoptosis by about twofold (Suffert
et al., 2011). Attenuation of staurosporine-induced apoptosis was
also observed in DG-75 cells in the absence of caspase 3 activa-
tion, which is defective in these cells, suggesting that caspase 3
is unlikely to be the functionally relevant target in DG-75 cells.
An important remaining question is whether an approximately
twofold reduction of procaspase 3 expression can indeed protect
cells from cell death or even delay its progression, given that cas-
pase 3 is an effector rather than an inducer of apoptosis and may

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 9

Gottwein

KSHV miRNAs

not be limiting to the progression of apoptosis. TGF-β is a multi-
functional cytokine that induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in B
cells. Importantly, PEL cell lines are generally resistant to the effects
of TGF-β, at least in part due to inhibition of TGF-β receptor 2
subunit expression by LANA (Di Bartolo et al., 2008). The sta-
ble expression of the intronic KSHV miRNAs in 293T resulted in
strongly reduced activity of a SMAD-responsive element reporter
(Samols et al., 2007), suggesting that the KSHV miRNAs may also
contribute to the inhibition of TGF-β signaling by KSHV or at
least serve as an additional safeguard. The mechanism underly-
ing this observation was not addressed, but, more recently it was
shown that miR-K11, like its analog miR-155 (Yin et al., 2008,
2010; Rai et al., 2010), antagonizes SMAD5 and this interaction
likely contributes to the observed resistance to TGF-beta induced
growth inhibition and apoptosis in PEL (Liu et al., 2012). Other
candidate targets with known roles in the regulation of cell cycle
and cell death have been validated (Dölken et al., 2010; Gottwein
et al., 2011), but are of unknown relevance in the context of KSHV
infection.

OTHER FUNCTIONS OF THE KSHV miRNAs
Immune evasion is critical for the life-long persistence of her-
pesviral infection and herpesviruses employ multiple mechanisms
to ensure the escape of infected cells from both the innate and
the adaptive arms of the immune system. Latency and the wide-
spread use of viral miRNA expression during latency themselves
can be viewed as mechanisms of passive immune evasion. One
important target with a role in evasion from natural killer (NK)
cells is the miR-K7 target MICB (Nachmani et al., 2009), whose
surface expression triggers recognition by the NK cell activating
receptor NKG2D and subsequent killing by NK cells. MICB is
also repressed by the miRNAs of other herpesviruses, including
EBV miR-Bart2-5p and HCMV miR-UL112, through different
sites (Stern-Ginossar et al., 2007; Nachmani et al., 2009), which
further underscores the likely importance of this target in her-
pesviral infection. A ﬁnal important emerging concept is the
regulation of cellular signaling by the KSHV miRNAs and many
of the validated targets discussed above participate in one or
more signaling cascades (Table 1). Given the critical role cytokines
play in the pathogenesis of KS, deregulation of cytokine expres-
sion by KSHV miRNAs is perhaps expected. Abend et al. (2010)

demonstrated that the ectopic expression of miR-K10a in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) inhibited the TWEAK-
induced expression of the proinﬂammatory cytokines IL-8 and
MCP-1 approximately two to threefold. Another report has impli-
cated several KSHV miRNAs in the induction of IL-6 and IL-10
secretion by murine and human myeloid-derived cells, poten-
tially through downregulation of the C/EBPβ LIP isoform (Qin
et al., 2010b). However, this effect is unlikely to be entirely due
to a direct interaction of the proposed KSHV miRNAs with the
C/EBPβ mRNA, because C/EBPβ isoforms other than LIP, which
are expressed from the same mRNA through differential trans-
lational initiation (Calkhoven et al., 2000), were not affected. In
addition, the murine and human C/EBPβ mRNAs lack canonical
miRNA binding sites for miR-K3 and miR-K7. C/EBPβ, however,
is a well validated target of cellular miR-155 (O’Connell et al.,
2008; Costinean et al., 2009) and is also regulated by its ana-
log miR-K11 (Boss et al., 2011). Lei et al. (2010) demonstrated
that KSHV miR-K1 inhibits IκBα expression and consequently
activates NFκB signaling, which may help stabilize KSHV latency.
Finally, PAR-CLIP data from PEL cells identiﬁed numerous candi-
dates for direct targets of the KSHV miRNAs with roles in signaling
(Gottwein et al., 2011).

CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
An important open question in the miRNA ﬁeld is whether
miRNAs have a small number of critical targets or whether many,
possibly hundreds of interactions of each individual miRNA have
functional importance. The KSHV miRNAs have undoubtedly
evolved a very complex set of regulatory relationships through
viral analogs of cellular miRNAs and also novel miRNA sequences.
Future functional experiments will have to clarify how many
and which of these interactions are important for the KSVH life
cycle and pathogenesis. Particularly relevant will be to elucidate
functions of the KSHV miRNAs that contribute to the develop-
ment of KSHV-induced disease, which could become targets for
therapeutic intervention.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Work in the Gottwein laboratory is supported by the NCI (R00-
CA137860). Eva Gottwein would like to thank Eleonora Forte and
Jonathan Leis for comments on the manuscript.

REFERENCES
Abend, J. R., Uldrick, T., and Ziegel-
bauer, J. M. (2010). Regulation of
factor-like weak
tumor necrosis
inducer
receptor
expression
protein
by Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus microRNA prevents
TWEAK-induced apoptosis
and
inﬂammatory cytokine expression.
J. Virol. 84, 12139–12151.

of
(TWEAKR)

apoptosis

AuCoin, D. P., Colletti, K. S., Xu,
Y., Cei, S. A., and Pari, G. S.
(2002). Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (human herpesvirus 8)
contains two functional
lytic ori-
gins of DNA replication. J. Virol. 76,
7890–7896.

Baek, D., Villen, J., Shin, C., Camargo,
F. D., Gygi, S. P., and Bartel, D.
P. (2008). The impact of microR-
NAs on protein output. Nature 455,
64–71.

Bartel, D. P. (2009). MicroRNAs: tar-
get recognition and regulatory func-
tions. Cell 136, 215–233.

Bellare, P., and Ganem, D. (2009). Reg-
ulation of KSHV lytic switch pro-
tein expression by a virus-encoded
microRNA: an evolutionary adap-
tation that ﬁne-tunes lytic reactiva-
tion. Cell Host Microbe 6, 570–575.

Boshoff, C., Schulz, T. F., Kennedy,
M. M., Graham, A. K., Fisher, C.,
Thomas, A., Mcgee, J. O., Weiss, R.
A., and O’Leary, J. J. (1995). Kaposi’s

sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
infects endothelial and spindle cells.
Nat. Med. 1, 1274–1278.

Boss, I. W., Nadeau, P. E., Abbott,
J. R., Yang, Y., Mergia, A., and
(2011). A Kaposi’s
Renne, R.
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus-
encoded ortholog of microRNA
miR-155 induces human splenic
B-cell expansion in NOD/LtSz-scid
IL2Rgammanull mice. J. Virol. 85,
9877–9886.

Cai, X., and Cullen, B. R. (2006).
Transcriptional origin of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
microRNAs. J. Virol. 80, 2234–2242.
Cai, X., Lu, S., Zhang, Z., Gonzalez, C.
M., Damania, B., and Cullen, B. R.

(2005). Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus expresses an array of
viral microRNAs in latently infected
cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102,
5570–5575.

Cai, X., Schafer, A., Lu, S., Bilello, J.
P., Desrosiers, R. C., Edwards, R.,
Raab-Traub, N., and Cullen, B. R.
(2006). Epstein-Barr virus microR-
NAs are evolutionarily conserved
and differentially expressed. PLoS
Pathog. 2, e23. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.ppat.0020023

Calkhoven, C. F., Muller, C., and Leutz,
A. (2000). Translational control of
C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta iso-
form expression. Genes Dev. 14,
1920–1932.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 10

Gottwein

KSHV miRNAs

Cesarman, E., Chang, Y., Moore, P. S.,
Said, J. W., and Knowles, D. M.
(1995). Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus-like DNA sequences
in AIDS-related body-cavity-based
lymphomas. N. Engl. J. Med. 332,
1186–1191.

Chandriani, S., Xu, Y., and Ganem,
D. (2010). The lytic transcriptome
of Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus reveals extensive tran-
scription of noncoding regions,
including
to
important
84,
7934–7942.

antisense
J. Virol.

regions
genes.

Cheng, F., Pekkonen, P., Laurinavi-
cius, S., Sugiyama, N., Hender-
son, S., Gunther, T., Rantanen,
V., Kaivanto, E., Aavikko, M.,
Sarek, G., Hautaniemi, S., Biber-
feld, P., Aaltonen, L., Grundhoff,
A., Boshoff, C., Alitalo, K., Lehti,
K.,
(2011).
KSHV-initiated notch activation
leads to membrane-type-1 matrix
metalloproteinase-dependent
lym-
phatic endothelial-to-mesenchymal
transition. Cell Host Microbe 10,
577–590.

and Ojala, P. M.

Chiang, H. R., Schoenfeld, L. W., Ruby,
J. G., Auyeung, V. C., Spies, N., Baek,
D., Johnston, W. K., Russ, C., Luo, S.,
Babiarz, J. E., Blelloch, R., Schroth,
G. P., Nusbaum, C., and Bartel, D.
P. (2010). Mammalian microRNAs:
experimental evaluation of novel
and previously annotated genes.
Genes Dev. 24, 992–1009.

Costinean, S., Sandhu, S. K., Pedersen,
I. M., Tili, E., Trotta, R., Perrotti, D.,
Ciarlariello, D., Neviani, P., Harb, J.,
Kauffman, L. R., Shidham, A., and
Croce, C. M. (2009). Src homol-
ogy 2 domain-containing inositol-5-
phosphatase and CCAAT enhancer-
binding protein beta are targeted
by miR-155 in B cells of Emicro-
MiR-155 transgenic mice. Blood 114,
1374–1382.

Costinean, S., Zanesi, N., Pekarsky, Y.,
Tili, E., Volinia, S., Heerema, N.,
and Croce, C. M. (2006). Pre-B
cell proliferation and lymphoblas-
tic leukemia/high-grade lymphoma
in E(mu)-miR155 transgenic mice.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 103,
7024–7029.
Cullen, B. R.

(2006). Viruses and
microRNAs. Nat. Genet. 38(Suppl.),
S25–S30.

Cullen, B. R.

(2011). Viruses and
microRNAs: RISCy
interactions
with serious consequences. Genes
Dev. 25, 1881–1894.

Di Bartolo, D. L., Cannon, M., Liu, Y.
F., Renne, R., Chadburn, A., Boshoff,
C., and Cesarman, E. (2008). KSHV
LANA inhibits TGF-beta signaling

through epigenetic silencing of the
TGF-beta type II receptor. Blood
111, 4731–4740.

Dölken, L., Malterer, G., Erhard, F.,
Kothe, S., Friedel, C. C., Suffert,
G., Marcinowski, L., Motsch, N.,
Barth, S., Beitzinger, M., Lieber,
D., Bailer, S. M., Hoffmann, R.,
Ruzsics, Z., Kremmer, E., Pfeffer,
S., Zimmer, R., Koszinowski, U.
H., Grasser, F., Meister, G., and
Haas, J. (2010). Systematic analy-
sis of viral and cellular microRNA
targets
latently infected
with human gamma-herpesviruses
by RISC immunoprecipitation assay.
Cell Host Microbe 7, 324–334.

in cells

Gandy, S. Z., Linnstaedt, S. D., Muralid-
har, S., Cashman, K. A., Rosenthal,
L. J., and Casey, J. L. (2007). RNA
editing of the human herpesvirus
8 kaposin transcript eliminates its
transforming activity and is induced
during lytic replication. J. Virol. 81,
13544–13551.

Gasperini, P., Espigol-Frigole, G.,
Mccormick, P.
J., Salvucci, O.,
Maric, D., Uldrick, T. S., Poliz-
zotto, M. N., Yarchoan, R., and
Tosato, G. (2012). Kaposi sarcoma
herpesvirus promotes endothelial-
to-mesenchymal transition through
Notch-dependent signaling. Cancer
Res. 72, 1157–1169.

Gottwein, E., Cai, X., and Cullen, B.
R. (2006). A novel assay for viral
microRNA function identiﬁes a sin-
gle nucleotide polymorphism that
affects Drosha processing. J. Virol.
80, 5321–5326.

Gottwein, E., Corcoran, D. L., Mukher-
jee, N., Skalsky, R. L., Hafner, M.,
Nusbaum, J. D., Shamulailatpam,
P., Love, C. L., Dave, S. S., Tuschl,
T., Ohler, U., and Cullen, B. R.
(2011). Viral microrna targetome
of KSHV-infected primary effu-
sion lymphoma cell lines. Cell Host
Microbe 10, 515–526.

Gottwein, E., and Cullen, B. R. (2010).
A human herpesvirus microRNA
inhibits p21 expression and attenu-
ates p21-mediated cell cycle arrest. J.
Virol. 84, 5229–5237.

Gottwein, E., Mukherjee, N., Sachse, C.,
Frenzel, C., Majoros, W. H., Chi,
J. T., Braich, R., Manoharan, M.,
Soutschek, J., Ohler, U., and Cullen,
B. R. (2007). A viral microRNA func-
tions as an orthologue of cellular
miR-155. Nature 450, 1096–1099.

Grey, F., Tirabassi, R., Meyers, H.,
Wu, G., Mcweeney, S., Hook, L.,
and Nelson, J. A. (2010). A viral
microRNA down-regulates multi-
ple cell cycle genes through mRNA
(cid:2)
UTRs. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000967.
5
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000967

Grundhoff, A., and Sullivan, C. S.
(2011). Virus-encoded microRNAs.
Virology 411, 325–343.

Grundhoff, A., Sullivan, C. S., and
Ganem, D. (2006). A combined
computational
and microarray-
based approach identiﬁes novel
microRNAs encoded by human
gamma-herpesviruses. RNA 12,
733–750.

Hafner, M., Landthaler, M., Burger, L.,
Khorshid, M., Hausser, J., Berninger,
P., Rothballer, A., Ascano, M. Jr.,
Jungkamp, A. C., Munschauer, M.,
Ulrich, A., Wardle, G. S., Dewell,
S., Zavolan, M., and Tuschl, T.
(2010). Transcriptome-wide identi-
ﬁcation of RNA-binding protein and
microRNA target sites by PAR-CLIP.
Cell 141, 129–141.

Hansen, A., Henderson, S., Lagos, D.,
Nikitenko, L., Coulter, E., Roberts, S.,
Gratrix, F., Plaisance, K., Renne, R.,
Bower, M., Kellam, P., and Boshoff,
C. (2010). KSHV-encoded miRNAs
target MAF to induce endothelial
cell reprogramming. Genes Dev. 24,
195–205.

Hong, Y. K., Foreman, K., Shin, J. W.,
Hirakawa, S., Curry, C. L., Sage, D.
R., Libermann, T., Dezube, B. J.,
Fingeroth, J. D., and Detmar, M.
(2004). Lymphatic reprogramming
of blood vascular
endothelium
sarcoma-associated
by
herpesvirus. Nat.
36,
683–685.

Kaposi

Genet.

Huntzinger, E., and Izaurralde, E.
(2011). Gene silencing by microR-
NAs: contributions of translational
repression and mRNA decay. Nat.
Rev. Genet. 12, 99–110.

Hutvagner, G., and Zamore, P. D.
(2002). A microRNA in a multiple-
turnover RNAi enzyme complex.
Science 297, 2056–2060.

Jurak, I., Grifﬁths, A., and Coen, D.
M. (2011). Mammalian alphaher-
pesvirus miRNAs. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1809, 641–653.

Kim, V. N., Han, J., and Siomi, M. C.
(2009). Biogenesis of small RNAs in
animals. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 10,
126–139.

Lagos-Quintana, M., Rauhut, R.,
Lendeckel, W., and Tuschl, T. (2001).
Identiﬁcation of novel genes coding
for small expressed RNAs. Science
294, 853–858.

J., Hoffmann,

Langenberger, D., Bermudez-Santana,
S.,
and Stadler, P.
(2009). Evidence for human
in
data.

C., Hertel,
Khaitovich, P.,
F.
microRNA-offset
small
Bioinformatics 25, 2298–2301.

RNAs
RNA sequencing

Lau, N. C., Lim, L. P., Weinstein,
E. G., and Bartel, D. P. (2001).

An abundant class of tiny RNAs
with probable regulatory roles in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 294,
858–862.

Lee, R. C., and Ambros, V. (2001). An
extensive class of small RNAs in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 294,
862–864.

Lee, R. C., Feinbaum, R. L., and Ambros,
V. (1993). The C. elegans hete-
rochronic gene lin-4 encodes small
RNAs with antisense complementar-
ity to lin-14. Cell 75, 843–854.

Lei, X., Bai, Z., Ye, F., Xie, J., Kim, C.
G., Huang, Y., and Gao, S. J. (2010).
Regulation of NF-kappaB inhibitor
IkappaBalpha and viral replication
by a KSHV microRNA. Nat. Cell
Biol. 12, 193–199.

Liang, D., Gao, Y., Lin, X., He, Z., Zhao,
Q., Deng, Q., and Lan, K. (2011).
A human herpesvirus miRNA atten-
uates interferon signaling and con-
tributes to maintenance of viral
latency by targeting IKKepsilon. Cell
Res. 21, 793–806.

(2003). Kaposi’s

Lin, C. L., Li, H., Wang, Y., Zhu, F.
X., Kudchodkar, S., and Yuan,
Y.
sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus lytic origin
(ori-Lyt)-dependent DNA replica-
tion:
identiﬁcation of the ori-Lyt
and association of K8 bZip pro-
tein with the origin. J. Virol. 77,
5578–5588.

Lin, H. R., and Ganem, D. (2011). Viral
microRNA target allows insight into
the role of translation in govern-
ing microRNA target accessibility.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108,
5148–5153.

Lin, X., Liang, D., He, Z., Deng,
Q., Robertson, E. S., and Lan,
K. (2011). miR-K12-7-5p encoded
by Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus stabilizes the latent state
by targeting viral ORF50/RTA. PLoS
ONE 6, e16224. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0016224

Lin, Y. T., Kincaid, R. P., Arasappan,
D., Dowd, S. E., Hunicke-Smith,
S. P., and Sullivan, C. S. (2010).
Small RNA proﬁling reveals anti-
sense transcription throughout the
KSHV genome and novel
small
RNAs. RNA 16, 1540–1558.

Lin, Y. T., and Sullivan, C. S. (2011).
Expanding the role of Drosha to
the regulation of viral gene expres-
sion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108,
11229–11234.

Linnstaedt, S. D., Gottwein, E., Skalsky,
R. L., Luftig, M. A., and Cullen,
B. R. (2010). Virally induced cel-
lular microRNA miR-155 plays a
key role in B-cell immortalization
by Epstein-Barr virus. J. Virol. 84,
11670–11678.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 11

Gottwein

KSHV miRNAs

Liu, Y., Sun, R., Lin, X., Liang, D.,
Deng, Q., and Lan, K.
(2012).
KSHV-encoded miR-K12-11 atten-
uates transforming growth factor
beta signaling through suppression
of SMAD5. J. Virol. 86, 1372–1381.
Lu, C. C., Li, Z., Chu, C. Y., Feng, J., Sun,
R., and Rana, T. M. (2010a). MicroR-
NAs encoded by Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus regulate viral
life cycle. EMBO Rep. 11, 784–790.

Lu, F., Stedman, W., Yousef, M.,
Renne, R., and Lieberman, P. M.
(2010b). Epigenetic regulation of
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated her-
pesvirus latency by virus-encoded
microRNAs that target Rta and the
cellular Rbl2-DNMT pathway.
J.
Virol. 84, 2697–2706.

Lu, F., Weidmer, A., Liu, C. G.,
Volinia, S., Croce, C. M., and Lieber-
man, P. M. (2008). Epstein-Barr
virus-induced miR-155 attenuates
NF-kappaB signaling and stabilizes
latent virus persistence. J. Virol. 82,
10436–10443.

Marshall, V., Martro, E., Labo, N., Ray,
A., Wang, D., Mbisa, G., Bagni,
R. K., Volfovsky, N., Casabona, J.,
and Whitby, D. (2010). Kaposi sar-
coma (KS)-associated herpesvirus
microRNA sequence analysis and KS
risk in a European AIDS-KS case
control study. J. Infect. Dis. 202,
1126–1135.

Marshall, V., Parks, T., Bagni, R.,
Wang, C. D., Samols, M. A., Hu,
J., Wyvil, K. M., Aleman, K., Lit-
tle, R. F., Yarchoan, R., Renne, R.,
and Whitby, D. (2007). Conserva-
tion of virally encoded microRNAs
in Kaposi sarcoma – associated her-
pesvirus in primary effusion lym-
phoma cell
lines and in patients
with Kaposi sarcoma or multicentric
Castleman disease. J. Infect. Dis. 195,
645–659.

McAllister, S. C., Hansen, S. G., Ruhl,
R. A., Raggo, C. M., Deﬁlippis,
V. R., Greenspan, D., Fruh, K.,
and Moses, A. V. (2004). Kaposi
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
(KSHV) induces heme oxygenase-1
expression and activity in KSHV-
infected endothelial cells. Blood 103,
3465–3473.

Murphy, E., Vanicek, J., Robins, H.,
Shenk, T., and Levine, A. J. (2008).
Suppression of
immediate-early
viral gene expression by herpesvirus-
coded microRNAs: implications for
latency. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
105, 5453–5458.

Nachmani, D., Stern-Ginossar, N., Sarid,
R., and Mandelboim, O. (2009).
Diverse herpesvirus microRNAs tar-
get the stress-induced immune lig-
and MICB to escape recognition by

natural killer cells. Cell Host Microbe
5, 376–385.

O’Connell, R. M., Rao, D. S., Chaud-
huri, A. A., Boldin, M. P., Taganov,
K. D., Nicoll, J., Paquette, R. L.,
and Baltimore, D.
(2008). Sus-
tained expression of microRNA-155
in hematopoietic stem cells causes
a myeloproliferative disorder. J. Exp.
Med. 205, 585–594.

O’Hara, A.

J., Dezube, B.

J., Chugh, P., Wang,
L., Netto, E. M., Luz, E., Har-
rington, W.
J.,
Damania, B.,
and Dittmer, D.
P. (2009). Pre-micro RNA signa-
tures delineate stages of endothe-
lial cell transformation in Kaposi
sarcoma. PLoS Pathog. 5, e1000389.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000389

Pasquinelli, A. E., Reinhart, B. J., Slack,
F., Martindale, M. Q., Kuroda, M.
I., Maller, B., Hayward, D. C.,
Ball, E. E., Degnan, B., Muller, P.,
Spring, J., Srinivasan, A., Fishman,
M., Finnerty, J., Corbo, J., Levine,
M., Leahy, P., Davidson, E., and
Ruvkun, G. (2000). Conservation of
the sequence and temporal expres-
sion of let-7 heterochronic regula-
tory RNA. Nature 408, 86–89.

Petrova, T. V., Makinen, T., Makela, T. P.,
Saarela, J., Virtanen, I., Ferrell, R. E.,
Finegold, D. N., Kerjaschki, D., Yla-
Herttuala, S., and Alitalo, K. (2002).
Lymphatic endothelial reprogram-
ming of vascular endothelial cells
by the Prox-1 homeobox tran-
scription factor. EMBO J. 21,
4593–4599.

Pfeffer, S., Sewer, A., Lagos-Quintana,
M., Sheridan, R., Sander, C., Grasser,
F. A., Van Dyk, L. F., Ho, C. K., Shu-
man, S., Chien, M., Russo, J. J., Ju,
J., Randall, G., Lindenbach, B. D.,
Rice, C. M., Simon, V., Ho, D. D.,
Zavolan, M., and Tuschl, T. (2005).
Identiﬁcation of microRNAs of the
herpesvirus family. Nat. Methods 2,
269–276.

Pfeffer, S., Zavolan, M., Grasser, F. A.,
Chien, M., Russo, J. J., Ju, J., John,
B., Enright, A. J., Marks, D., Sander,
C., and Tuschl, T. (2004). Identiﬁca-
tion of virus-encoded microRNAs.
Science 304, 734–736.

Qin, Z., Freitas, E., Sullivan, R.,
Mohan, S., Bacelieri, R., Branch,
D., Romano, M., Kearney, P.,
J., Plaisance, K., Renne,
Oates,
R., Kaleeba,
J., and Parsons, C.
(2010a). Upregulation of xCT by
KSHV-encoded microRNAs facili-
tates KSHV dissemination and per-
sistence in an environment of oxida-
tive stress. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000742.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000742

Qin, Z., Kearney, P., Plaisance, K.,
(2010b).

and Parsons, C. H.

advance:

Pivotal
Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
(KSHV)-encoded
microRNA
speciﬁcally induce IL-6 and IL-10
secretion by macrophages
and
monocytes.
J. Leukoc. Biol. 87,
25–34.

Rai, D., Kim, S. W., Mckeller, M.
R., Dahia, P. L., and Aguiar, R.
C. (2010). Targeting of SMAD5
links microRNA-155 to the TGF-
beta pathway and lymphomagene-
sis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
3111–3116.

Reinhart, B. J., Slack, F. J., Basson,
M., Pasquinelli, A. E., Bettinger,
J. C., Rougvie, A. E., Horvitz,
H. R., and Ruvkun, G. (2000).
The 21-nucleotide let-7 RNA reg-
ulates developmental
timing in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 403,
901–906.

Samols, M. A., Hu, J., Skalsky, R. L.,
and Renne, R.
(2005). Cloning
and identiﬁcation of a microRNA
cluster within the latency-associated
region
sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus. J. Virol. 79,
9301–9305.

Kaposi’s

of

Samols, M. A., Skalsky, R. L., Mal-
donado, A. M., Riva, A., Lopez,
M. C., Baker, H. V., and Renne,
R. (2007). Identiﬁcation of cellu-
lar genes targeted by KSHV-encoded
microRNAs. PLoS Pathog. 3, e65.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.0030065

Selbach, M., Schwanhausser, B., Thier-
felder, N., Fang, Z., Khanin, R.,
and Rajewsky, N. (2008). Wide-
spread changes in protein synthesis
induced by microRNAs. Nature 455,
58–63.

Shi, W., Hendrix, D., Levine, M., and
Haley, B. (2009). A distinct class
of small RNAs arises from pre-
miRNA-proximal regions in a sim-
ple chordate. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol.
16, 183–189.

Shin, C., Nam, J. W., Farh, K. K., Chi-
ang, H. R., Shkumatava, A., and
Bartel, D. P. (2010). Expanding the
microRNA targeting code:
func-
tional sites with centered pairing.
Mol. Cell 38, 789–802.

Reduced

Skalsky, R. L., and Cullen, B. R.
expression
(2011).
brain-enriched microRNAs
of
in
glioblastomas
tar-
geted regulation of a cell death
gene.
e24248.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0024248

PLoS ONE

permits

6,

Skalsky, R. L., Samols, M. A., Plai-
sance, K. B., Boss, I. W., Riva, A.,
Lopez, M. C., Baker, H. V., and
Renne, R. (2007). Kaposi’s sarcoma-
associated herpesvirus encodes an
ortholog of miR-155. J. Virol. 81,
12836–12845.

Stern-Ginossar, N.,

Elefant, N.,
Zimmermann, A., Wolf, D. G.,
Saleh, N., Biton, M., Horwitz, E.,
Prokocimer, Z., Prichard, M., Hahn,
G., Goldman-Wohl, D., Greenﬁeld,
C., Yagel, S., Hengel, H., Altuvia, Y.,
Margalit, H., and Mandelboim, O.
(2007). Host immune system gene
targeting by a viral miRNA. Science
317, 376–381.

Suffert, G., Malterer, G., Hausser, J.,
Viiliainen,
J., Fender, A., Con-
trant, M., Ivacevic, T., Benes, V.,
Gros, F., Voinnet, O., Zavolan, M.,
J. G., and
Ojala, P. M., Haas,
Pfeffer, S.
sar-
coma herpesvirus microRNAs tar-
get caspase 3 and regulate apop-
tosis. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002405.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002405

(2011). Kaposi’s

Umbach, J. L., and Cullen, B. R. (2010).
of Kaposi’s
In-depth
analysis
herpesvirus
sarcoma-associated
provides
microRNA expression
insights
the mammalian
microRNA-processing machinery. J.
Virol. 84, 695–703.

into

Umbach, J. L., Kramer, M. F., Jurak, I.,
Karnowski, H. W., Coen, D. M., and
Cullen, B. R. (2008). MicroRNAs
expressed by herpes simplex virus 1
during latent infection regulate viral
mRNAs. Nature 454, 780–783.

Umbach, J. L., Strelow, L. I., Wong,
S. W., and Cullen, B. R. (2010).
rhesus
Analysis of
rhadinovirus
expressed in virus-
microRNAs
from infected
induced tumors
rhesus macaques. Virology
405,
592–599.

Vieira, J., and O’Hearn, P. M. (2004).
the red ﬂuorescent pro-
Use of
a marker of Kaposi’s
tein as
sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus
lytic gene expression. Virology 325,
225–240.

Walz, N., Christalla, T., Tessmer, U.,
and Grundhoff, A. (2010). A global
analysis of evolutionary conserva-
tion among known and predicted
gammaherpesvirus microRNAs. J.
Virol. 84, 716–728.

Wang, H. W., Trotter, M. W., Lagos,
D., Bourboulia, D., Henderson,
S., Makinen, T., Elliman,
S.,
Flanagan, A. M., Alitalo, K., and
Boshoff, C.
sar-
coma herpesvirus-induced cellular
to
reprogramming
the
lymphatic
gene
expression in Kaposi sarcoma. Nat.
Genet. 36, 687–693.

(2004). Kaposi

contributes

endothelial

Warnatz, H. J., Schmidt, D., Manke, T.,
Piccini, I., Sultan, M., Borodina, T.,
Balzereit, D., Wruck, W., Soldatov,
A., Vingron, M., Lehrach, H., and
Yaspo, M. L. (2011). The BTB and
CNC homology 1 (BACH1) target

Frontiers in Microbiology | Virology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 12

Gottwein

KSHV miRNAs

genes are involved in the oxidative
stress response and in control of
the cell cycle. J. Biol. Chem. 286,
23521–23532.

Wies, E., Mori, Y., Hahn, A., Krem-
mer, E., Sturzl, M., Fleckenstein,
B., and Neipel, F.
(2008). The
interferon-regulatory factor-
viral
3 is
survival
required for
of KSHV-infected primary effu-
sion lymphoma cells. Blood 111,
320–327.

the

Xu, Y., Rodriguez-Huete, A.,

the lytic origins of

and
(2006). Evaluation
Pari, G. S.
of
replica-
tion of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated
virus/human herpesvirus 8 in the
context of the viral genome. J. Virol.
80, 9905–9909.

Yin, Q., Mcbride, J., Fewell, C., Lacey,
M., Wang, X., Lin, Z., Cameron,
J., and Flemington, E. K. (2008).
MicroRNA-155 is an Epstein-Barr
virus-induced gene that modulates
Epstein-Barr virus-regulated gene
expression pathways. J. Virol. 82,
5295–5306.

Yin, Q., Wang, X., Fewell, C., Cameron,
J., Zhu, H., Baddoo, M., Lin, Z.,
and Flemington, E. K.
(2010).
MicroRNA miR-155 inhibits bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) sig-
naling and BMP-mediated Epstein-
Barr virus reactivation. J. Virol. 84,
6318–6327.

Zhao, Y., Xu, H., Yao, Y., Smith, L. P.,
Kgosana, L., Green, J., Petherbridge,
L., Baigent, S. J., and Nair, V. (2011).

Critical role of the virus-encoded
microRNA-155 ortholog in the
induction of Marek’s disease lym-
phomas. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1001305.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1001305

Ziegelbauer,

J. M., Sullivan, C. S.,
and Ganem, D. (2009). Tandem
array-based expression screens iden-
tify host mRNA targets of virus-
encoded microRNAs. Nat. Genet. 41,
130–134.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 30 January 2012; paper pending
published: 17 February 2012; accepted:
13 April 2012; published online: 03 May
2012.
Citation: Gottwein E (2012) Kaposi’s
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus microR-
3:165. doi:
NAs. Front. Microbio.
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00165
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Virology, a specialty of Frontiers in
Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Gottwein. This is an
open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribu-
tion Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 165 | 13

