ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 08 June 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00193

Nitric oxide releasing nanoparticles for treatment of
Candida albicans burn infections

Chitralekha Macherla1, David A. Sanchez 2,3, Mohammed S. Ahmadi 1,4, Ernestine M. Vellozzi 1,
Adam J. Friedman5, Joshua D. Nosanchuk 2,3 and Luis R. Martinez 1,2,3*

1 Department of Biomedical Sciences, Long Island University, Brookville, NY, USA
2 Divisions of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA
3 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA
4 Adelphi University, Garden City, NY, USA
5 Divisions of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA

Edited by:
Helio K. Takahashi, Universidade
Federal de Sao Paulo, Brazil
Reviewed by:
Jose M. Diaz-Minguez, Microbiologia
y Genetica University of Salamanca
CIALE, Spain
Simon Andrew Johnston, University
of Birmingham, UK
*Correspondence:
Luis R. Martinez, Long Island
University, Post 720 Northern
Boulevard, Pell Hall/Life Science
Building, Room 347, Brookville, NY
11548-1300, USA.
e-mail: luis.martinez-torres@liu.edu

Candida albicans is a leading fungal cause of burn infections in hospital settings, and sep-
sis is one of the principle causes of death after a severe burn. The prevalence of invasive
candidiasis in burn cases varies widely, but it accounts for 3–23% of severe infection
with a mortality rate ranging from 14 to 70%. Therefore, it is imperative that we develop
innovative therapeutics to which this fungus is unlikely to evolve resistance, thus curtail-
ing the associated morbidity and mortality and ultimately improving our capacity to treat
these infections. An inexpensive and stable nitric oxide (NO)-releasing nanoparticle (NO-np)
platform has been recently developed. NO is known to have direct antifungal activity, mod-
ulate host immune responses and signiﬁcantly regulate wound healing. In this study, we
hypothesized that NO-np would be an effective therapy in the treatment of C. albicans burn
infections. Using a murine burn model, NO-np demonstrated antifungal activity against C.
albicans in vivo, most likely by arresting its growth and morphogenesis as demonstrated
in vitro. NO-np demonstrated effective antimicrobial activity against yeast and ﬁlamentous
forms of the fungus. Moreover, we showed that NO-np signiﬁcantly accelerated the rate
of wound healing in cutaneous burn infections when compared to controls. The histolog-
ical evaluation of the affected tissue revealed that NO-np treatment modiﬁed leukocyte
inﬁltration, minimized the fungal burden, and reduced collagen degradation, thus providing
potential mechanisms for the therapeutics’ biological activity.Together, these data suggest
that NO-np have the potential to serve as a novel topical antifungal which can be used for
the treatment of cutaneous burn infections and wounds.

Keywords: nitric oxide, nanoparticles, burn healing, collagen, Candida albicans

INTRODUCTION
Sepsis is one of the leading causes of death after a severe burn
injury. The rate of microbial infection is estimated to range from
30 to 63% among all burn victims admitted to burn centers,
with the incidence also associated with the severity of injury
and the duration of hospital stay (Holzheimer and Dralle, 2002).
Microorganisms responsible for sepsis are usually bacteria, includ-
ing Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus; however,
Candida spp., of which C. albicans is the most common, are eti-
ologic in ∼8% of all cases (Santucci et al., 2003). Burn wound
colonization and local infection with Candida spp., can progress
to systemic disease. The prevalence of invasive candidiasis in
burn cases accounts for as much as ∼23% of severe infections
(Holzheimer and Dralle, 2002) with mortality rates ranging from
14 to 70% (Holzheimer and Dralle, 2002; Eggimann et al., 2003a).
We recently developed and characterized an inexpensive and
stable nitric oxide (NO)-releasing nanoparticle (NO-np) plat-
form using nanotechnology based on a silane hydrogel (Eggimann
et al., 2003b). This technology has the potential to serve as a
novel, easily applied, topical delivery system for antimicrobials,

such as NO, which can be used for the treatment of complex cuta-
neous infections and wounds. In both physiologic and pathologic
conditions, NO maintains skin homeostasis by regulating circula-
tion, ultraviolet-mediated melanogenesis, and sunburn erythema,
which all participate in the maintenance of the skin as a protective
barrier against microorganisms (Frank et al., 2002). Notably, NO
also modulates immune responses and is a signiﬁcant regulator
of wound healing (Soneja et al., 2005; Mowbray et al., 2008). In
fact, the simplicity and the stability of NO-np for use in sustained
delivery of NO make the nanoparticles a very attractive treatment
modality for many conditions. This is supported by our previous
work which demonstrated potent NO-np efﬁcacy in vitro (Fried-
man et al., 2011) and in vivo against multi-drug resistant bacteria
which currently challenge many of the successful antibiotic ther-
apies (Han et al., 2009; Martinez et al., 2009; Mihu et al., 2010;
Schairer et al., 2012). Ghaffari et al. (2006) has shown that NO
is effective against C. albicans even though the fungus possesses
a highly inducible NO defense mechanism (Ullmann et al., 2004;
Tillmann et al., 2011). Based on our previous work and the fact
that NO easily transits most if not all biological barriers, we have

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 193 | 1

Macherla et al.

NO-np treats C. albicans burn infections

hypothesized that NO-np would be fungicidal for C. albicans in
an in vivo setting. Hence, NO-np could be an effective means for
treating burned infections caused by this fungus. To validate this
hypothesis, we have investigated the biological impact of NO-np
on C. albicans using a murine burn infection model.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
CANDIDA ALBICANS
Candida albicans SC5314 was obtained from M. Ghannoum
(Cleveland, OH, USA). Unless otherwise stated, the isolate was
grown in yeast extract, peptone, and dextrose (YPD) broth (Difco
Laboratories) containing 10 g/L yeast extract, 10 g/L peptone, and
20 g/L glucose and incubated for 24 h at 30˚C in a shaker set at
150 rpm (IKA KS 4000, Cole-Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL, USA; to
early stationary phase).

SYNTHESIS OF NO-np
A hydrogel/glass composite was synthesized using a mixture of
tetramethyl orthosilicate, polyethylene glycol, chitosan, glucose,
and sodium nitrite in a 0.5 mm sodium phosphate buffer (pH
7). The nitrite was reduced to NO within the matrix with ther-
mally generated electrons from glucose. After the redox reaction,
the ingredients were combined and dried using a lyophilizer, and
which resulted in a ﬁne powder comprised of nanoparticles con-
taining NO. The NO-np remains stable in this form for more than
1 year at room temperature. Once exposed to an aqueous envi-
ronment, the hydrogel properties of the composite allow for an
opening of the water channels inside the particles, facilitating the
release of the trapped NO overextended time periods. Nanopar-
ticles (np) were also prepared without the addition of NO, and
served as a control.

SUSCEPTIBILITY OF C. ALBICANS SC5314 TO NO-np
To determine the impact of the NO-np on C. albicans, 1 mL of
YPD broth was inoculated with a 24 h colony of the fungus grown
on YPD agar. One hundred µL of C. albicans broth suspension was
inoculated in each well of a 200-well plate, containing 100 µL of
YPD broth with either NO-np or np (5 mg/mL; Nitric oxide kinet-
ics release from nanoparticles: Peak state: 18.75 nM; Steady state:
12.5 nM). The inoculated plate was then incubated for 24 h at 37˚C.
Controls included wells containing yeast suspension alone, and
yeast cells in YPD broth containing np. Growth was assessed every
30 min using a microplate reader (Bioscreen C, Growth Curves
USA, Piscataway, NJ, USA) set at an OD of 600 nm.

IN VIVO BURN INJURY AND INFECTION MODEL AND NO-np
TREATMENT
To investigate the antifungal efﬁcacy of NO-np in C. albi-
cans induced burn infections, female Balb/c mice (6–8 weeks;
National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD, USA) were anesthetized
(ketamine-xylazine cocktail), their back hair removed, and their
exposed skin cleansed with an application of iodine. Five-mm
diameter burn injuries were created applying a 60 s-heated brass
bar for 45 s. Immediately after injury, C. albicans was inoculated
onto the burned tissue using a 107 cell suspension of the yeast pre-
pared in PBS. Animals were individually housed to prevent crossed
infection. On day 1 after infection, 5 mg of NO-np or np powder

was then applied. Applications were similarly performed on days 3
and 5 after injury. Untreated, injured mice were used as additional
controls. To monitor healing, photographs were taken daily. Also, a
caliper was used to blindly measure the burn diameter of the injury
on a daily basis, and was performed by two independent investi-
gators. Three and 7 days after infection, mice were euthanized and
tissue biopsies were taken.

CFU DETERMINATIONS
At days 3 and 7 after C. albicans infection, wound tissues were
excised and homogenized in sterile PBS. Samples were plated on
YPD agar and fungal colony counts were determined. The results
were normalized by tissue weights.

HISTOLOGICAL EXAMINATIONS
At days 3 and 7 after wounding, wound tissues were excised from
euthanized mice, ﬁxed in 10% formalin for 24 h, processed, and
embedded in parafﬁn. Four micron vertical sections were ﬁxed
to glass slides and subjected to Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E),
Periodic acid schiff (PAS), Gomori’s trichrome, Myeloperoxidase
(MPO; day 3), and Iba-1 staining to examine tissue morphol-
ogy, fungal morphology, collagen deposition, neutrophil inﬁltra-
tion, and macrophage-like cells, respectively. Slides were exam-
ined by light microscopy with an Olympus AX70 (Melville, NY,
USA) microscope, and images were obtained [QImaging Retiga
1300 digital camera (Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada)] with
QCapture Suite V2.46 software (QImaging).

TIME-LAPSE MICROSCOPY
Candida albicans rapidly undergoes cell division by budding and
forms pseudohyphae and hyphae when grown in media supple-
mented with fetal calf serum (FCS). Hence, the effect of NO-np
on C. albicans cell division and morphological transformation was
assessed using live cell imaging. Brieﬂy, 106 yeasts were plated on a
polylysine coated coverslip bottom of MatTek plates. Images were
collected for 2 h at 40× using a Zeiss Axiovert 200 M inverted
microscope with an Axiocam MR camera controlled by the Axio
Vision 4.4 software (Carl Zeiss Micro Imaging, NY). This micro-
scope was housed in a Plexiglas box and the temperature was
stabilized at 37˚C, using a forced air heater system. The plate
lid was kept in place to prevent evaporation, and 5% CO2 was
delivered to a chamber locally over the culture dish. Images were
compiled into movies which were then used to analyze the C.
albicans morphogenesis.

SUSCEPTIBILITY OF FILAMENTOUS C. ALBICANS SC5314 TO NO-np
To assess the antifungal activity of the NO-np on invasive C. albi-
cans ﬁlamentous form, 106 yeasts were grown in 100 µL of media
supplemented with FCS on a 96-well microtiter plates. Plates were
incubated for 4 h at 37˚C and 5% CO2. After hyphal formation,
100 µL of media supplemented with FCS with either NO-np or np
(5 mg/mL) were added to each well. Then, plates were incubated
for 24 h at 37˚C and 5% CO2. Controls included wells containing
untreated ﬁlamentous fungus. Metabolic activity was measured
by 2, 3-bis (2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-5-[(phenylamino)
carbonyl]-2H-tetrazolium-hydroxide (XTT) reduction assay.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 193 | 2

Macherla et al.

NO-np treats C. albicans burn infections

XTT REDUCTION ASSAY
For ﬁlamentous C. albicans SC5314, 50 µL of XTT salt solution
(1 mg/mL in PBS) and 4 µL of menadione solution (1 mM in
acetone; Sigma) were added to each well. Microtiter plates were
incubated at 37˚C for 5 h. Mitochondrial dehydrogenases in live
cells reduce XTT tetrazolium salt to XTT formazan, resulting in
a colorimetric change, which was measured in a microtiter reader
at 492 nm. Microtiter wells containing heat-killed fungi or only
medium but no ﬁlamentous C. albicans cells were used as negative
controls. The percentage of metabolic activity was determined by
measuring the optical density of fungi exposed to np or NO-np
relative to unexposed bioﬁlms.

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
All data were subjected to statistical analysis using GraphPad
Prism 5.0 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA). P values were
calculated by analysis of variance and were adjusted by use of
the Bonferroni correction. P values of <0.05 were considered
signiﬁcant.

RESULTS
NO-np INHIBITS C. ALBICANS GROWTH
Candida albicans SC5314 growth with and without exposure to
NO-np was determined in real-time for 24 h (Figure 1). NO-
np signiﬁcantly reduced fungal growth after 2 h co-incubation
when compared with untreated controls (P < 0.001). Notably,
C. albicans grown with np had signiﬁcant reductions in fungal
growth at 4 h, an effect that is likely due to steric interference
with cell to cell contact or communication (e.g., quorum sens-
ing). It is also possible that the chitosan incorporated into the
np may offer some degree of antifungal activity; although the
concentrations used to generate the np were negligible. When
nano-scaled, chitosan has a higher surface to volume ratio, trans-
lating into a higher surface charge density, and increased afﬁnity
for bacteria and fungi with greater antimicrobial activity (Qi
et al., 2004). Therefore at the nano-scale, the concentration used
may confer some inhibitory activity. Nevertheless, NO-np sig-
niﬁcantly impeded growth relative to the np controls at >4 h
(P < 0.001).

NO-np ENHANCES BURN HEALING IN VIVO
The effect of NO-np on burn healing in Balb/c mice after C. albi-
cans infection was investigated (Figure 2). The curative process
progressed most rapidly in the NO-np-treated mice (Figure 2A),
with complete healing in all treated mice within 20 days follow-
ing burn injury and infection (P < 0.001; Figure 2B). In contrast,
the healing process of untreated or np-treated mice was signif-
icantly delayed (Figure 2A), and complete wound closure was
not achieved within the 20 days following injury when mice were
euthanized (Figure 2B). Notably, animals in the control groups
experienced fungal transmission from the burn site to the paws,
possibly by scratching of the infected injury (Figure 2C), which is
consistent with higher fungal burdens and prolonged infection.

NO KILLED C. ALBICANS IN BURN LESIONS
The efﬁcacy of NO-np in killing C. albicans in the infected tissue
was further explored by examining fungal burdens (Figure 3). At

FIGURE 1 | The effect of NO-np on C. albicans growth kinetics was
determined using Bioscreen C analysis. C. albicans was grown in the
absence (untreated) or presence of nanoparticles with NO (NO-np) or
without NO (np). Each point represents the average of three
measurements. *P < 0.001 in comparing the np- or NO-np-treated group
with untreated group. #P < 0.001 in comparing the np-treated group with
the NO-np-treated group. This experiment was performed twice, with
similar results each time.

three and 7 days post infection, wounds were excised and plated
on YPD agar. C. albicans-infected NO-np-treated burns showed
signiﬁcantly lower fungal burdens when compared to untreated or
np-treated wounds (P < 0.01; Figure 3A).

Histological examinations (H&E staining) of day 7 untreated
and np-treated C. albicans-infected burns revealed numerous
pseudohyphal and hyphal forms penetrating into different tissue
layers along with extensive cell necrosis (Figure 3B; insets). Tissue
sections from the lesions of NO-np-treated C. albicans-infected
mice revealed less suppurative inﬂammation along with increased
ﬁbrin deposition and no evidence of fungal hyphal structures in
dermis (Figure 3B).

NO-np REDUCES GROWTH AND MORPHOGENESIS
Time-lapse microscopy was used to examine whether NO-np
interferes with C. albicans cell division and morphological trans-
formation (Figure 4A). Untreated control yeasts displayed rapid
(12 min) budding formation and morphogenesis. The control np
delayed budding and transformation for up to 48 min post expo-
sure. In contrast, NO-np arrested fungal budding and morphogen-
esis over the entire 60 min time course examined. At the 120 min
time point, the untreated group evinced morphological changes
consistent with that of candidal pseudohyphal structures while the
np and NO-np-treated groups demonstrated delayed budding or
no budding, respectively, without any indication of active ﬁlamen-
tation (Figure 4B). In addition, NO-np-treated yeasts displayed a
rounded shape characteristic of cellular edema which has been
previously observed in studies with multi-drug S. aureus (Mar-
tinez et al., 2009). Thus, the results strongly suggest that NO-np
can effectively inhibit or delay the onset of pseudohyphal forma-
tion. Together, these results suggest that the in vivo ﬁndings may
in part be due to a reduction in the rate of yeast cell division and
morphogenesis.

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 193 | 3

Macherla et al.

NO-np treats C. albicans burn infections

FIGURE 2 | Healing effectiveness of NO-np in C. albicans induced burn
infections. (A) Burn injuries of Balb/c mice untreated, treated with np, and
treated with NO-np, day 0, 1, 5, 10, and 15. Bar= 5 mm. Five animals per
group were used. These experiments were performed twice with similar
results. (B) Burn area closure of Balb/c mice skin lesions relative to the initial
5 mm wound. Time points are the averages of the results for measurements

of six different wounds, and error bars denote SDs. *P < 0.001 in comparing
the np- or NO-np-treated group with untreated group. #P < 0.001 in
comparing the np-treated group with the NO-np-treated group. These
experiments were performed twice with similar results. (C) NO-np prevents
cutaneous spread of candidiasis in mice. Three animals per group per time
point were used.

Since the ﬁlamentous stage of C. albicans invades tissue and is
relevant in pathogenesis, we investigated the antifungal activity of
NO-np against the mycelial form of the fungus. XTT reduction
assay was utilized to quantify fungal metabolic activity. At 24 h,
NO-np signiﬁcantly reduced the metabolic activity of ﬁlamentous
C. albicans when compared to untreated (∼65%; P < 0.001) or
np (∼52%; P < 0.001; Figure 4C). Our ﬁndings suggest that NO-
np are effective against the tissue invasive ﬁlamentous form of C.
albicans.

NO-np ACCELERATES DEPOSITION AND/OR REDUCES DESTRUCTION OF
COLLAGEN IN BURN HEALING DURING CANDIDAL INFECTION
The mechanisms through which the NO-np accelerates wound
healing were further explored by examining the collagen content
in burn wounds treated with NO-np (Figure 5). Trichrome stain-
ing dyes collagen blue. For each image, quantitative measurement
of collagen intensity in 20 representative squares of the same size
was performed using Image J software. Collagen content was high-
est in the infected wounds treated with NO-np (Figure 5A). The
dispersed blue stain in these sections indicated a thicker and more

mature tissue collagen formation, thus suggesting that NO-np
exposure protected the dermal architecture through fungal clear-
ance, and ultimately maintaining collagen stores while promoting
formation of new collagen. Figure 5B is a morphometric analysis
of the data shown in Figure 5A.

NO-np MODIFIES LEUKOCYTE INFILTRATION IN BURN INJURY
INFECTED WITH C. ALBICANS
We investigated the effect of NO-np on leukocyte migration to
the C. albicans-infected tissue (Figure 6). First, neutrophil inﬁl-
tration was evaluated by measuring the production of MPO in
the injured area. MPO is an enzyme most abundantly present in
neutrophils, and the localized brown staining reaction observed
indicated more neutrophil inﬁltration in NO-np-treated samples
compared to untreated or np-treated burn tissue (Figure 6A).

Secondly, we identiﬁed macrophage-like inﬁltration by mea-
suring the expression of Iba-1, which is speciﬁcally expressed
and upregulated during the activation of these cells. Iba-1 is
the product of the Aif1 gene (allograft inﬂammatory factor 1)
which is located within a segment of the major histocompatibility

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 193 | 4

Macherla et al.

NO-np treats C. albicans burn infections

FIGURE 3 | Antifungal efﬁcacy of NO-np in C. albicans induced burn
infections. (A) Burn fungal burden (colony forming units, CFU) in mice
infected topically with 107 yeast cells and treated with NO-np is
signiﬁcantly lower than untreated or np-treated mice (n = 5). Bars are the
averages of the results and brackets denote standard deviations.
Asterisks denote P value signiﬁcance (*P < 0.05; **P < 0.001; ns, no
signiﬁcance) calculated by analysis of variance and adjusted by use of the

Bonferroni correction. (B) Histological analysis of Balb/c mice untreated
C. albicans-infected, np-treated C. albicans-infected, and C.
albicans-infected treated with NO, day 7. Mice were infected with 107 C.
albicans. Representative H&E-stained sections of the skin lesions are
shown with the Insets showing Periodic acid schiff staining of C.
albicans. Black arrows indicate fungal pseudohyphae and hyphae. Scale
bars: 20 µm.

complex class III region. Tissue sections from untreated murine
burns showed only scattered macrophage-like cells whereas np and
NO-np-treated mice showed massive cellular inﬁltrations into the
injured area (Figure 6B).

Together, our data suggests NO-np can stimulate cell recruit-
ment during burn healing and fungal cell clearance by up-
regulating phagocytic cell inﬁltration into the injured area.

DISCUSSION
Candida albicans has emerged as a major agent of hospital-
acquired infections and this fungus has a high incidence of pro-
gression from focal infection to invasive and/or systemic diseases in
speciﬁc patient subpopulations such as burn victims (Holzheimer
and Dralle, 2002). Our data shows that NO-np interferes with C.
albicans growth in vitro, which is likely attributable to the sus-
tained release of NO that can penetrate and permeabilize the
cellular membrane of yeast cells. The rate and amount of NO
released from this nanotechnology allows the free radical to alter

peripheral and integral structures on the yeast membrane, partic-
ularly membrane-bound proteins and lipids. As a lipophilic and
uncharged molecule, NO can easily transverse the lipid bilayer
to reach key metabolic enzymes, messenger RNA, proteins, and
DNA, disabling vital biological processes (Jones et al., 2010).
Furthermore, formation of peroxynitrite from interactions with
superoxides further disrupts the yeast membrane through lipid
peroxidation, accelerating degradation of cellular integrity. Previ-
ous studies suggest that NO greatly accelerates the rate at which
hydrogen peroxide kills microbes by damaging their DNA (Wood-
mansee and Imlay, 2003). NO also blocks respiration, an event that
can stimulate oxidative DNA damage (Woodmansee and Imlay,
2003). Likewise, alterations in cell charge may lead to increased
phagocytosis and killing of fungal cells by phagocytes (Nosanchuk
and Casadevall, 1997). Recently, we suggested that NO-np is a
promising candidate for use in cutaneous infections due to its
excellent tissue penetration and potent, broad spectrum antimi-
crobial activity (Witte et al., 1998; Ghaffari et al., 2006; Martinez

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 193 | 5

Macherla et al.

NO-np treats C. albicans burn infections

FIGURE 4 | Impact of NO-np on fungal growth and morphogenesis. (A)
Time-lapse (0–60 min) microscopy was used to explore the effect of NO-np on
C. albicans cell division and morphological transformation. White single arrow
heads indicate budding yeast and/or pseudohyphae whereas white double
arrow heads indicate nanoparticle aggregates. Images were collected at 40×.
Scale bar: 10 µm. (B) Time-lapse microscopy images of untreated, np, and
NO-np groups at 120 min. Images collected at 40×. Scale bar: 10 µm. (C) XTT

reduction assay was used to measure the metabolic activity of NO-np-treated
ﬁlamentous C. albicans in vitro. The 100% activity was set as the
measurements in wells with ﬁlamentous fungi without the addition of either
NO-np or np. Bars represent the average of the results and error bars denote
standard deviations. Asterisks denote P value signiﬁcance (**P < 0.001)
calculated by analysis of variance and adjusted by use of the Bonferroni
correction. These experiments were performed twice with similar results.

et al., 2009). In this regard, NO is able to diffuse through skin and
soft tissues thereby reducing the microbial burden.

Our studies demonstrate that NO-np have signiﬁcant anti-
fungal efﬁcacy in the setting of C. albicans-infected burn injury.
Burn injuries and infection can lead to serious complications
including tissue damage, sepsis and death. NO-np was found
to prevent fungal invasion to the subcutis/muscle and reduced
dermal candidal burden. NO also stimulated the inﬁltration of
innate immune cells such as neutrophils and macrophages (Ghaf-
fari et al., 2007), which enhanced its impact as an antifungal agent.
NO-np can potentially induce a protective immune response
capable of containing infection, therefore preventing systemic dis-
semination. Additionally, time-lapse microscopy images suggest
that NO-np may arrest growth and morphogenesis of C. albi-
cans during infection. The mechanisms underlying these effects
of the NO-np on morphogenesis are not yet elucidated, and are

likely multi-factorial, potentially impacting adhesion (Privett et al.,
2010), colonization (Elahi et al., 2001), tissue penetration (Ghaf-
fari et al., 2006), and dissemination (Glittenberg et al., 2011). The
effects of the particles can be as simple as interfering with cell-cell
interactions (Netea et al., 2002; Glittenberg et al., 2011) or quorum
sensing to disrupting cell signaling cascades (Toenjes et al., 2009)
or directly damaging DNA (Woodmansee and Imlay, 2003; Jones
et al., 2010). Perhaps, NO-np may directly inﬂuence cyclic AMP–
protein kinase A complex which is the major pathway by which
hyphal growth is regulated in C. albicans (Bahn et al., 2007). This
is a promising area for future studies.

NO-np treatment of C. albicans burn injuries offers additional
beneﬁts, as we found that treatment results in the stimulation of
healing by induction of collagen deposition and/or protects against
collagen degradation. NO promotes wound healing by inducing
collagen secretion by ﬁbroblasts (Han et al., 2012). Acceleration of

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 193 | 6

Macherla et al.

NO-np treats C. albicans burn infections

FIGURE 5 | Effect of NO-np on C. albicans collagen degradation in
burn injuries. (A) Histological analysis of Balb/c mice untreated C.
albicans-infected, np-treated C. albicans-infected, and C.
albicans-infected treated with NO-np, day 7. Mice were infected with
107 fungal cells. The blue stain indicates collagen. Scale bar: 20 µm.
(B) Quantitative measurement of collagen intensity in 20

representative squares of the same size for untreated C.
albicans-infected, np-treated C. albicans-infected, and C.
albicans-infected treated with NO-np. Bars are the averages of the
results, and error bars denote standard deviations. Asterisks denote P
value signiﬁcance (*P < 0.05) calculated by analysis of variance and
adjusted by use of the Bonferroni correction.

FIGURE 6 | Inﬂuence of NO-np on neutrophil and macrophage-like
cell inﬁltration into burn wounds. (A) Histological analysis of
untreated, np-treated and NO-np-treated wounded Balb/c mice, day 3.
The brown staining indicates neutrophil inﬁltration. Representative
MPO-immunostained sections of the skin lesions are shown. Scale

bars: 20 µm. (B) Histological analysis of untreated, np-treated and
NO-np-treated wounded Balb/c mice, day 7. The brown staining
indicates macrophage-like cell inﬁltration. Representative
Iba-1-immunostained sections of the skin lesions are shown. Scale
bars: 25 µm.

wound healing by nitric oxide donors (Lund and Scholeﬁeld, 1997)
and NO-np has also been demonstrated recently (Martinez et al.,
2009; Han et al., 2012). Indeed, accelerated healing of gastric ulcers
has been demonstrated in rats treated with a nitric oxide releasing
derivative of diclofenac, and a similar effect was observed by treat-
ing the rats with glyceryl trinitrate (Elliott et al., 1995). Further,
Thornton et al. (1998) demonstrated that collagen deposition can

be enhanced in wounded rats transfected in vivo with the gene for
inducible nitric oxide synthase, and the increased nitric produc-
tion within the wound milieu preceded the observed increase in
collagen synthesis. Additionally, we recently suggested that top-
ically applied NO-np might also prevent collagen degradation
by microbial collagenases through a reduction in microbial load
(Martinez et al., 2009). Pathogens can impair the repair processes

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 193 | 7

Macherla et al.

NO-np treats C. albicans burn infections

by producing toxic byproducts and competing with cells for oxy-
gen and nutrients (Robson et al., 1990). C. albicans adheres to
laminin and ﬁbronectin, types I and IV collagen proteins (Alonso
et al., 2001) and releases metalloproteases that degrade collagen
(Imbert et al., 2002) which facilitate the migration of the yeast
in tissues after crossing the endothelial layer, allowing for fungal
invasion of target organs (Rodier et al., 1999). Impeding the meta-
bolic function of microbes diminishes their capacity to damage
host tissues.

Concomitant to reducing host damage by injuring invading
microbes, NO modiﬁes the host effector response. In addition to
their antimicrobial functions, neutrophils are recruited from the
blood to sites of inﬂammation, where they contribute to wound
healing (Theilgaard-Monch et al., 2004). Once in the wound envi-
ronment, neutrophils phagocytose foreign material and bacteria,
destroying them by releasing proteolytic enzymes and oxygen-
derived free radical species. Nevertheless, in the absence of ongoing
infection, neutrophil activity gradually changes within a few days
of injury to prevent tissue damage. In later stages of healing, the
neutrophils must be eliminated from the wound site. Redun-
dant cells are disposed of by extrusion to the wound surface as
either slough or by apoptosis, allowing elimination of the entire
neutrophil population without further tissue damage or poten-
tiation of the inﬂammatory response. The cell remnants and
apoptotic bodies are then phagocytosed by macrophages. Con-
sistent with this ﬁnding we found relatively high numbers of
neutrophils in wounds of NO-np-treated mice early on in the
infection.

The role of macrophages in wound healing has evolved from
the concept that macrophages primarily clear a wound of for-
eign material, to the understanding that macrophages are involved
in multiple aspects ranging from re-epithelialization and col-
lagen deposition to angiogenesis and cell proliferation (Mirza
et al., 2009; Friedman, 2011). We use Iba-1, an actin-cross-linking
protein expressed in macrophage-like cells but not restricted
to the macrophage lineage to investigate the effect of NO on
macrophage-like inﬁltration in the wound environment. While
many studies have focused on the role of macrophage-like cells
inducing NO release from iNOS as part of the host defense, our
data suggests that NO also modulates macrophage-like cell activity,
similar to the manner in which NO and VEGF exhibit recipro-
cal regulation (Kimura and Esumi, 2003; Broughton et al., 2006).
We further observed in our study that macrophage migration is

increased in NO-np-treated mice suggesting that NO is a wide-
acting, critical molecule in the early and late stages of tissue repair
and regeneration.

Safety and toxicity of nanotechnology have been well docu-
mented and widely discussed (Service, 2003; Nel et al., 2006).
Numerous investigations have revealed that diverse nanomaterials
can penetrate intact skin in animal models and in human ex vivo
models (Gamer et al., 2006; Baroli et al., 2007). Furthermore, cuta-
neous penetration of NO-np can be enhanced depending on the
delivery vehicle used or barrier disruption found, especially this
is true in cases of open wounds, such as those that we describe in
this study. Of greater concern are toxicities caused by the systemic
penetration and ultimate circulation of speciﬁc nanomaterials
through various oriﬁces, and which have been shown to occur
(Hohr et al., 2002). We have demonstrated in vitro that NO-nps
show minimal toxicity toward cultured ﬁbroblasts (Friedman et al.,
2008). Furthermore, in in vivo safety (murine) evaluations using
intraperitoneal and intravenous administration routes minimal
cytotoxicity was found with no clinical adverse events occurring
in the treated mice (Cabrales et al., 2010, 2011).

In summary, this study shows that NO-np have both antifungal
and burn healing properties. Overall, the results presented show
that the topical application of NO-np is highly effective against
cutaneous C. albicans infection in a murine burn model. In addi-
tion, the NO-np appears to enhance burn healing by shielding
dermal structural components, such as collagen from degrada-
tion, and likely stimulates new collagen generation and deposition.
These ﬁndings support other studies, which have shown that top-
ically applied NO-np can be effective in inducing a local immune
response with minimal inﬂammation (Mowbray et al., 2009), fur-
ther adding to its beneﬁcial effects in this application. These results
suggest that this platform has the potential to serve as an easily
administered source of anti-infectives, such as NO, for the treat-
ment of cutaneous and tissue infections, including those resulting
from burn injuries.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Joshua D. Nosanchuk is supported in part by an Irma T.
Hirschl/Monique Weill-Caulier Trust Research award. Luis R.
Martinez gratefully acknowledges support from NIH-NIAID
1K22A1087817-01A1 and LIU-Post-Faculty Committee Research
awards. Adam J. Friedman gratefully acknowledges support from
the Dermatology Foundation.

REFERENCES
Alonso, R., Llopis, I., Flores, C., Murgui,
A., and Timoneda, J. (2001). Differ-
ent adhesins for type IV collagen on
Candida albicans: identiﬁcation of
a lectin-like adhesin recognizing the
7S(IV) domain. Microbiology 147(Pt
7), 1971–1981.

Bahn, Y. S., Molenda, M., Staab, J. F.,
Lyman, C. A., Gordon, L. J., and
Sundstrom, P. (2007). Genome-wide
transcriptional proﬁling of the cyclic
AMP-dependent signaling pathway
during morphogenic transitions of
Candida albicans. Eukaryotic Cell 6,
2376–2390.

Baroli, B., Ennas, M. G., Loffredo, F.,
Isola, M., Pinna, R., and López-
Quintela, M. A. (2007). Penetration
of metallic nanoparticles in human
full-thickness skin. J. Invest. Derma-
tol. 127, 1701–1712.
I.,

J. E.,
and Attinger, C. E. (2006). The
basic science of wound healing.
Plast. Reconstr. Surg. 117(Suppl. 7),
12S–34S.

Broughton, G.

Janis,

I.

Cabrales, P., Han, G., Nacharaju, P.,
Friedman, A. J., and Friedman, J.
M. (2011). Reversal of hemoglobin-
induced vasoconstriction with sus-
tained release of nitric oxide. Am.

J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 300,
H49–H56.

Cabrales, P., Han, G., Roche, C.,
Nacharaju, P., Friedman, A.
J.,
and Friedman, J. M. (2010). Sus-
tained release nitric oxide from
long-lived circulating nanoparti-
cles. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 49,
530–538.

Eggimann, P., Garbino, J., and Pittet,
D. (2003a). Management of Can-
dida species infections in critically
ill patients. Lancet. Infect. Dis. 3,
772–785.

Eggimann, P., Hugonnet, S., Sax, H.,
J. C.,

Touveneau, S., Chevrolet,

and Pittet, D. (2003b). Ventilator-
associated pneumonia: caveats for
benchmarking. Intensive Care Med.
29, 2086–2089.

Elahi, S., Pang, G., Ashman, R. B.,
and Clancy, R.
(2001). Nitric
oxide-enhanced resistance to oral
candidiasis.
104,
447–454.

Immunology

J. L.

Elliott, S. N., McKnight, W., Cirino,
G., and Wallace,
(1995).
A nitric
oxide-releasing nons-
teroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drug
accelerates gastric ulcer healing
in
109,
524–530.

rats. Gastroenterology

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 193 | 8

Macherla et al.

NO-np treats C. albicans burn infections

Frank, S., Kämpfer, H., Wetzler, C., and
Pfeilschifter, J. (2002). Nitric oxide
drives skin repair: novel functions of
an established mediator. Kidney Int.
61, 882–888.

Friedman, A. (2011). Wound healing:
from basic science to clinical prac-
tice and beyond. J. Drugs Dermatol.
10, 427–433.

Friedman, A., Blecher, K., Sanchez, D.,
Tuckman-Vernon, C., Gialanella, P.,
Friedman, J. M., Martinez, L. R.,
and Nosanchuk, J. D. (2011). Sus-
ceptibility of Gram-positive and -
negative bacteria to novel nitric
oxide-releasing nanoparticle tech-
nology. Virulence 2, 217–221.

Friedman, A. J., Han, G., Navati, M. S.,
Chacko, M., Gunther, L., Alﬁeri, A.,
and Friedman, J. M. (2008). Sus-
tained release nitric oxide releas-
ing nanoparticles: characterization
of a novel delivery platform based
on nitrite containing hydrogel/glass
composites. Nitric Oxide 19, 12–20.
Gamer, A. O., Leibold, E., and van
Ravenzwaay, B. (2006). The in vitro
absorption of microﬁne zinc oxide
and
through
porcine skin. Toxicol. In vitro 20,
301–307.

titanium dioxide

Ghaffari, A., Jalili, R., Ghaffari, M.,
Miller, C., and Ghahary, A. (2007).
Efﬁcacy of gaseous nitric oxide in
the treatment of skin and soft tissue
infections. Wound Repair Regen. 15,
368–377.

Ghaffari, A., Miller, C. C., McMullin,
B., and Ghahary, A. (2006). Potential
application of gaseous nitric oxide as
a topical antimicrobial agent. Nitric
Oxide 14, 21–29.

Glittenberg, M. T., Kounatidis, I., Chris-
tensen, D., Kostov, M., Kimber,
S., Roberts,
I., and Ligoxygakis,
P. (2011). Pathogen and host fac-
tors are needed to provoke a sys-
temic host response to gastrointesti-
nal infection of Drosophila larvae by
Candida albicans. Dis. Model Mech.
4, 515–525.

Han, G., Martinez, L. R., Mihu, M. R.,
Friedman, A. J., Friedman, J. M., and
Nosanchuk, J. D. (2009). Nitric oxide
releasing nanoparticles are ther-
apeutic for Staphylococcus aureus
abscesses in a murine model of
infection. PLoS ONE 4(11): e7804.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007804.
Han, G., Nguyen, L. N., Macherla, C.,
Chi, Y., Friedman, J. M., Nosanchuk,
J. D., and Martinez, L. R. (2012).
Nitric oxide releasing nanoparticles
accelerate wound healing by pro-
moting ﬁbroblast migration and col-
lagen deposition. Am. J. Pathol. 180,
1465–1473.

Hohr, D., Steinfartz, Y., Schins, R. P.,
Knaapen, A. M., Martra, G., Fubini,

B., and Borm, P. J. (2002). The sur-
face area rather than the surface
coating determines the acute inﬂam-
matory response after instillation of
ﬁne and ultraﬁne TiO2 in the rat.
Int. J. Hyg. Environ. Health 205,
239–244.

Holzheimer, R. G., and Dralle, H.
(2002). Management of mycoses in
surgical patients – review of the lit-
erature. Eur. J. Med. Res. 7, 200–226.
Imbert, C., Kauffmann-Lacroix, C.,
Daniault, G., Jacquemin, J. L., and
Rodier, M. H. (2002). Effect of
matrix metalloprotease inhibitors
on the 95 kDa metallopeptidase
of Candida albicans. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 49, 1007–1010.

Jones, M. L., Ganopolsky, J. G., Labbé,
A., Wahl, C., and Prakash, S. (2010).
Antimicrobial properties of nitric
oxide and its application in antimi-
crobial
formulations and medical
devices. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
88, 401–407.

Kimura, H., and Esumi, H. (2003).
Reciprocal regulation between nitric
oxide
endothelial
growth factor in angiogenesis. Acta
Biochim. Pol. 50, 49–59.

and vascular

Lund, J. N., and Scholeﬁeld, J. H. (1997).
Glyceryl
trinitrate is an effective
treatment for anal ﬁssure. Dis. Colon
Rectum 40, 468–470.

Martinez, L. R., Han, G., Chacko,
M., Mihu, M. R., Jacobson, M.,
Gialanella, P., Friedman, A.
J.,
Nosanchuk, J. D., and Friedman, J.
M. (2009). Antimicrobial and heal-
ing efﬁcacy of sustained release nitric
oxide nanoparticles against Staphy-
lococcus aureus
skin infection.
J.
Invest. Dermatol. 129, 2463–2469.

Mihu, M. R., Sandkovsky, U., Han, G.,
Friedman, J. M., Nosanchuk, J. D.,
and Martinez, L. R. (2010). The use
of nitric oxide releasing nanoparti-
cles as a treatment against Acineto-
bacter baumannii in wound infec-
tions. Virulence 1, 62–67.

Mirza, R., DiPietro, L. A., and Koh,
T. J. (2009). Selective and speciﬁc
macrophage ablation is detrimental
to wound healing in mice. Am. J.
Pathol. 175, 2454–2462.

Mowbray, M., McLintock, S., Weer-
akoon, R., Lomatschinsky, N., Jones,
S., Rossi, A. G., and Weller, R.
B. (2009). Enzyme-independent NO
stores in human skin: quantiﬁcation
and inﬂuence of UV radiation. J.
Invest. Dermatol. 129, 834–842.

Mowbray, M., Tan, X., Wheatley, P. S.,
Rossi,A. G., Morris, R. E., and Weller,
R. B. (2008). Topically applied nitric
oxide induces T-lymphocyte inﬁltra-
tion in human skin, but minimal
inﬂammation. J. Invest. Dermatol.
128, 352–360.

Nel, A., Xia, T., Mädler, L., and Li, N.
(2006). Toxic potential of materi-
als at the nanolevel. Science 311,
622–627.

Netea, M. G., Meer,

J. W., Ver-
schueren, I., and Kullberg, B.
J.
(2002). CD40/CD40 ligand interac-
tions in the host defense against dis-
seminated Candida albicans infec-
tion: the role of macrophage-derived
nitric oxide. Eur. J. Immunol. 32,
1455–1463.

Nosanchuk, J. D., and Casadevall, A.
(1997). Cellular charge of Cryp-
tococcus neoformans: contributions
from the capsular polysaccharide,
melanin, and monoclonal
anti-
body binding. Infect. Immun. 65,
1836–1841.

Privett, B.

S. T.,

J., Nutz,

and
Schoenﬁsch, M. H. (2010). Efﬁcacy
of
surface-generated nitric oxide
against Candida albicans adhesion
and bioﬁlm formation. Biofouling
26, 973–983.

Qi, L., Xu, Z., Jiang, X., Hu, C., and Zou,
X. (2004). Preparation and antibac-
terial activity of chitosan nanoparti-
cles. Carbohydr. Res. 339, 2693–2700.
Robson, M. C., Stenberg, B. D., and
Heggers, J. P. (1990). Wound heal-
ing alterations caused by infection.
Clin. Plast. Surg. 17, 485–492.

Rodier, M. H.,

el Moudni, B.,
Kauffmann-Lacroix,
C., Dani-
ault, G., and Jacquemin, J. L. (1999).
A Candida albicans metallopepti-
dase degrades constitutive proteins
of
FEMS
Microbiol. Lett. 177, 205–210.

extracellular matrix.

Santucci, S. G., Gobara, S., Santos, C. R.,
Fontana, C., and Levin, A. S. (2003).
Infections in a burn intensive care
unit: experience of seven years. J.
Hosp. Infect. 53, 6–13.

Schairer, D., Martinez, L. R., Blecher,
J., Nacharaju, P.,
K., Chouake,
Gialanella, P., Friedman,
J. M.,
Nosanchuk, J. D., and Friedman, A.
J. (2012). Nitric oxide nanoparti-
cles: pre-clinical utility as a thera-
peutic for intramuscular abscesses.
Virulence 3, 62–67.

Service, R. F. (2003). American chem-
ical society meeting. Nanomaterials
show signs of toxicity. Science 300,
243.

Soneja, A., Drews, M., and Malinski, T.
(2005). Role of nitric oxide, nitrox-
idative and oxidative stress in wound
healing. Pharmacol. Rep. 57(Suppl.),
108–119.

Theilgaard-Monch, K., Knudsen, S.,
Follin, P., and Borregaard, N. (2004).
The transcriptional activation pro-
gram of human neutrophils in skin
lesions supports their important role
in wound healing. J. Immunol. 172,
7684–7693.

Thornton, F. J., Schäffer, M. R., Witte,
M. B., Moldawer, L. L., MacKay, S. L.,
Abouhamze, A., Tannahill, C. L., and
Barbul, A. (1998). Enhanced colla-
gen accumulation following direct
transfection of the inducible nitric
oxide synthase gene in cutaneous
wounds. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 246, 654–659.

J.

Tillmann, A., Gow, N. A., and Brown,
A.
(2011). Nitric oxide and
nitrosative stress tolerance in yeast.
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 39, 219–223.

Toenjes, K. A., Stark, B. C., Brooks,
K. M., and Johnson, D. I. (2009).
Inhibitors of cellular signalling are
cytotoxic or block the budded-to-
hyphal
transition in the patho-
genic yeast Candida albicans. J. Med.
Microbiol. 58(Pt 6), 779–790.

Ullmann, B. D., Myers, H., Chiranand,
W., Lazzell, A. L., Zhao, Q., Vega, L.
A., Lopez-Ribot, J. L., Gardner, P. R.,
and Gustin, M. C. (2004). Inducible
defense mechanism against nitric
oxide in Candida albicans. Eukary-
otic Cell 3, 715–723.

Witte, M. B., Thornton, F. J., Kiyama, T.,
Efron, D. T., Schulz, G. S., Moldawer,
(1998).
L. L., and Barbul, A.
Metalloproteinase
and
wound healing: a novel enhancer
of wound strength. Surgery 124,
464–470.

inhibitors

Woodmansee, A. N., and Imlay,

J.
A. (2003). A mechanism by which
the rate
nitric oxide accelerates
of oxidative DNA damage
in
Escherichia coli. Mol. Microbiol. 49,
11–22.

of

Interest

Conﬂict
Statement:
Adam J. Friedman and Joshua D.
Nosanchuk
advisors
and hold stock options in Makeﬁeld
Therapeutics.

scientiﬁc

are

Received: 08 February 2012; accepted:
11 May 2012; published online: 08 June
2012.
Citation: Macherla C, Sanchez DA,
Ahmadi MS, Vellozzi EM, Friedman
AJ, Nosanchuk JD and Martinez LR
(2012) Nitric oxide releasing nanopar-
ticles for treatment of Candida albicans
burn infections. Front. Microbio. 3:193.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00193
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Fungi and Their Interactions, a specialty
of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Macherla, Sanchez,
Ahmadi, Vellozzi, Friedman, Nosanchuk
and Martinez. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

www.frontiersin.org

June 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 193 | 9

