REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 31 May 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00194

Selection of yeasts as starter cultures for table olives: a
step-by-step procedure

Antonio Bevilacqua*, Maria Rosaria Corbo and Milena Sinigaglia

Department of Food Science, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy

Edited by:
Aldo Corsetti, University of Teramo,
Italy
Reviewed by:
Francisco Noé Arroyo López, Instituto
de la Grasa (CSIC), Spain
Rosanna Tofalo, University of Teramo,
Italy
*Correspondence:
Antonio Bevilacqua, Department of
Food Science, University of Foggia,
Via Napoli 25, 71122 Foggia, Italy.
e-mail: a.bevilacqua@unifg.it;
abevi@libero.it

The selection of yeasts intended as starters for table olives is a complex process, including
a characterization step at laboratory level and a validation at lab level and factory-scale. The
characterization at lab level deals with the assessment of some technological traits (growth
under different temperatures and at alkaline pHs, effect of salt, and for probiotic strains
the resistance to preservatives), enzymatic activities, and some new functional properties
(probiotic traits, production of vitamin B-complex, biological debittering). The paper reports
on these traits, focusing both on their theoretical implications and lab protocols; moreover,
there are some details on predictive microbiology for yeasts of table olives and on the use
of multivariate approaches to select suitable starters.

Keywords: yeasts, table olives, starter selection, validation

YEASTS AS STARTER CULTURES IN TABLE OLIVES
Olive fermentation relies on a complex microﬂora, including
lactic acid bacteria (LAB), Gram Negative bacteria, and yeasts
(Garrido-Fernández et al., 1997; Arroyo-López et al., 2008b);
however, the fermentation of treated olives (e.g., olives where
oleuropein had been removed through a treatment with NaOH)
has been attributed for a long period to LAB, while yeasts have
been referred as spoiling microorganisms, due to their pectolytic
and xylanolytic activities or to the production of off-ﬂavors and
off-odors, clouding of brines, gas-pocket formation, and package
bulging (Garrido-Fernández et al., 1997; Bevilacqua et al., 2009;
Tofalo et al., 2012). Recently, the role of yeasts has been reviewed
and many authors have reported that they could exert a fundamen-
tal role for olive fermentation, both for green-treated olives and
black-naturally fermented ones, with a focus on both their tech-
nological implications and functional properties (Arroyo-López
et al., 2008b; Bevilacqua et al., 2009; Bautista-Gallego et al., 2011;
Silva et al., 2011; Rodríguez-Gómez et al., 2012). Although it is
not possible to point out a general yeast evolution throughout
olive fermentation, due to different olive varieties and ﬂow-sheets
of production, literature analysis allows the deﬁnition of the
most common species; yeasts belong to the genera Aureobasidium,
Candida, Cryptococcus, Issatchenkia, Pichia, Rhodotorula, Saccha-
romyces, Zygotorulaspora; Table 1 represents a short overview of
the literature and reports the most important species, for dif-
ferent kinds of olives (green and alkali-treated, black and nat-
urally fermented ones), from different cultivars and Countries
(Italy, Greece, Spain, and some other Countries of Mediterranean
area).

Starter cultures are preparations of live microorganisms or their
resting forms, whose metabolic activity has desired effects in the
fermentation substrate (DFG-Senate Commission of Food Safety,
2010).

fermented foods could have strong beneﬁts. The basic question is
“which strain? what are the characteristics required for a potential
starter? how select a starter?”

Starter selection is a complex process; although there is not
a general ﬂow-sheet for starters of table olives, we can use the
procedure proposed by Carnevali et al. (2007) for other microor-
ganisms and other foods and modify it. Generally, the selection
involves three steps:

1. isolation and “in vitro” selection;
2. validation on a lab-scale;
3. validation at factory-scale.

Figure 1 reports a possible general ﬂow-sheet for the selection
of suitable starter cultures. Focusing on yeasts of table olives, the
criteria to be used at laboratory level (step 1) includes technologi-
cal traits, enzymatic activities, and some new criteria (Table 2); the
technological traits deal with the ability to grow and persist under
the conditions usually encountered in olive fermentation, i.e.,
moderate-to-high salt amounts, temperature proﬁle (an import
tool to assure starter ability to conduct fermentation from Septem-
ber to November), growth, and survival at alkaline pHs (for green
alkali-treated olives-Spanish style). Apart from these primary tech-
nological traits, the use of probiotic strains requires their ability to
survive throughout storage and resist to the common preservatives
used for olive stabilization.

Another important ﬁeld for yeast selection is their ability to
improve olive quality through production of volatile and ﬂavor
compounds (esterase and lipolytic activity). Finally a new trend
for fermented foods is the use of functional starter cultures, i.e.,
starter cultures showing an added value (probiotic properties, or
the production of vitamin B-complex, as well as the ability to
degrade oleuropein-biological debittering of olives).

Keeping in mind the idea that yeasts can contribute to improve
olive quality, its obvious that yeast use as starters in this kind of

In the following sections of this chapter, these characteristics
will be discussed, reporting on the practical protocols to be used,

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 194 | 1

Bevilacqua et al.

Starter yeasts for olives

Table 1 | Yeast species in table olives.

Candida
C. boidinii
C. diddensiae
C. famata (formerly Debaryomyces hansenii)
C. guilliermondii (formerly Hanseniaspora guilliermondii)
C. oleophila
C. tropicalis
Pichia
Pichia anomala (Wickerhamomyces anomalus)
P. fermentans
P. galeiformis
P. membranifaciens
OTHER SPECIES
Aureobasidium pullulans
Citeromyces matritensis
Cryptococcus laurentiii
Debaryomyces etchellsii
Geotrichum candidum
Issatchenkia occidentalis
Kluyveromyces lactis
Rhodotorula spp.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Zygotorulaspora mrakii

as well as on their theoretical implications; ﬁnally, some details
on starter validation in laboratory and at industrial level will be
reported.

TECHNOLOGICAL TRAITS: GROWTH ASSAYS
The positive technological traits for yeasts intended as starters for
table olives include both growth assays and resistance proﬁle to
some common preservatives (this trait only for probiotic strains).
Concerning growth assays, they focus on the most important
variables acting on yeast evolution in brines, i.e., salt concentra-
tion, temperature, and pH; thus Bevilacqua et al. (2009) proposed
a quali-quantitative approach, based on yeast growth in lab media,
supplemented with different amounts of salt, adjusted to different
pHs, or stored under different temperatures. The growth was eval-
uated through absorbance measurement at 600 nm and compared
to yeast growth in a control (i.e., not-modiﬁed lab medium at pH
6.0–6.5 and incubated at 25˚C); Bevilacqua et al. (2009) proposed
a low level of inoculum (3 log cfu/ml) and modiﬁed the equation
of Growth Index (GI) reported by Blaszyk and Holley (1998), as
follows:
GI =

∗ 100

(cid:3)

(cid:2)

Abssample
Abscontrol

t

(a) GI < 25%, strong inhibition,
(b) 25 < GI < 75%, partial inhibition,
(c) GI > 75%, growth similar to that recovered in the control.

PREDICTIVE MICROBIOLOGY
The evaluation of growth/resistance of yeasts under different
technological conditions is one of the most important ﬁeld to
use Predictive Microbiology (PM) in table olives; as reported by
Arroyo-López et al. (2010), the ﬁnal result of PM is obtaining
an useful and safe tool for the implementation and evaluation of
corrective actions throughout olive processing and packaging.

Focusing on the use of PM for yeast selection, basically it can be
applied at two different levels, i.e., modeling growth/survival under
different conditions (primary model) and building a second-level
model.

Data for primary models are usually collected by means of plate
count and OD measurement and then ﬁtted through some com-
mon sigmoid equations (Gompertz, Logistic, Baranyi) to obtain
the physiological parameters of yeast population (lag phase dura-
tion, maximum speciﬁc growth rate and maximum population
level reached; Arroyo-López et al., 2010).

Another trait of great concern is modeling death kinetic and
yeast survival under different conditions; for this purpose a shoul-
der/tail equations could be of interest (Arroyo-López et al., 2010),
as well as the Weibull-type model proposed by Van Boekel (2002).
Recently, some primary models were proposed to ﬁt simulta-
neously both the growth and decay phases of microorganisms,
such as the quasi-chemical primary model, the Peleg model, or
the Churchill and two-term Gompertz equations (Arroyo-López
et al., 2010).

Fitting parameters of primary models represent the input val-
ues to build second-level model, able to predict yeast growth
as a function of technological and environmental conditions.
Secondary models can be some simple regression functions or
more complex probabilistic models, depending on the initial
approach and experimental design used to combine the different
environmental variables (Arroyo-López et al., 2010).

Why use PM in table olives and for the selection of a suitable
yeast starter cultures? Arroyo-López et al. (2010) reports some
interesting ideas:

1. Reduce the length of the fermentation period, ﬁnding the
combination of factors that favor growth and imposition of
a “starter” culture.

2. Study the interactions between microorganisms during table

olive fermentation or storage.

3. Optimize the concentration of preservatives during packaging

that guarantee the inhibition of microorganisms.

4. Estimate the shelf life of packed table olives.
5. Optimize the production of desirable metabolites.

where Abssample is the absorbance in the samples with salt, at differ-
ent pHs, or incubated under various temperatures, while Abscontrol
is the absorbance of the control; this index is time-dependent, i.e.,
it represents yeast growth for a particular time-point.

Based upon GI, Bevilacqua et al. (2009) used the following

approach to highlight inhibitory effects:

RESISTANCE TO PRESERVATIVES
A trait of great concern for yeast selection is the resistance to
kaolin and copper based products, ZnCl2, sorbate, benzoate and
metabisulﬁte, natamycin, and citric acid (Arroyo-López et al.,
2008b; Echevarria et al., 2010; Bautista-Gallego et al., 2011, 2012;
Muccilli et al., 2011); this trait could be not a primary tool to

Frontiers in Microbiology | Food Microbiology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 194 | 2

Bevilacqua et al.

Starter yeasts for olives

FIGURE 1 | Flow-sheet for the selection of a starter culture.

be assessed, as preservatives are used to stabilize olives throughout
packaging and storage and yeasts should not be able to grow under
these conditions. An important exception to this generalized state-
ment is the use of probiotic yeasts which are required to survive
and persist throughout storage.

Apart from the role of these compounds, extensively reviewed
by the literature, the evaluation of yeast resistance is based upon
the use of PM and mathematical tools in lab media, later conﬁrmed
in brines. Brieﬂy, three innovative and interesting approaches were
proposed for yeasts of table olives (Quasi-chemical model, frac-
tional area, and growth/no growth interface); growth/no growth

interface is more focused on product stabilization and on the
inhibition of spoiling yeasts, thus it will be not discussed in the
following sections.

QUASI-CHEMICAL PRIMARY MODEL
Echevarria et al. (2010) studied the effects of ascorbic acid and
sodium metabisulﬁte, combined with NaCl, through a Quasi-
chemical primary model; the main idea of this approach is to
integrate the individual phases of microbial life cycle into a series
of chemical equation at constant rate (Taub et al., 2003; Echevarria
et al., 2010). Basically, life cycle is divided into four steps, each of

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 194 | 3

Bevilacqua et al.

Starter yeasts for olives

Table 2 | Technological and functional properties of yeasts for table
olives.

TECHNOLOGICAL TRAITS
Desired
Growth with salt added
Temperature proﬁle
Growth/survival at alkaline pHs
Resistance to kaolin and copper based products (only for probiotic strains)
Resistance to ZnCl2
Resistance to sorbate, benzoate and metabisulﬁte
Resistance to natamycin and citric acid
Undesired
Assimilation of lactic acid
Production of CO2
NEW CRITERIA AND FUNCTIONAL PROPERTIES
Assimilation/degradation of oleuropein
Production of vitamin B-complex
Antimycogenic and antibacterial activity
Survival and/or persistence into the gastro-intestinal tract
ENZYMATIC ACTIVITIES
Desired
Esterase
(-glucosidase
Lipolytic activity
Catalase (?)
Undesired
Production of biogenic amines
Protease
Pectolytic and xylanolytic activity

them associated to a differential equation (ODE, ordinary differ-
ential equation); the set of equation can be summarized as follows
(Ross et al., 2005).

Activation
M → M

∗

ODE :

= −k1M

dM
dt

∗

In this set of equations, M is the concentration of cells in the
lag phase (inoculum); M
, growth phase cells; A, antagonistic
metabolite; D, dead cells; k1–k4, rate constants; G, net growth rate.
The numerical solving of these equations results in the esti-
mation of the growth rate (μ), lag phase (λ) and maximum
population size (called ratio of growth and denoted as Rg).

After parameters evaluation, Echevarria et al. (2010) put them
in a polynomial equation of cubic order to highlight the individ-
ual and interactive effects of the different antimicrobials (theory
of Design of Experiments, DoE).

FRACTIONAL AREA
Another approach to highlight the antimicrobial effect of a preser-
vative toward yeasts of table olives is the evaluation of the Mini-
mal Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) along with Non-Inhibitory
Concentration (NIC; Arroyo-López et al., 2008a).

This approach is based on a spectro-photometric assay and
compares the area under OD/time curve corresponding to a pos-
itive control (inoculated sample without preservative; areacont)
with the areas of the test samples (areatest) through the following
equation:

fa = areatest − areauni
areacont − areaunicot

where “fa” is the fractional area; areauni is the area under OD/time
curve corresponding to uninoculated samples, but containing the
antimicrobial compound, and areaunicot is the area under OD/time
curve of negative control (samples without microorganisms and
preservative).

It is possible to estimate the “fa” for each concentration of the
antimicrobial compound; then, the values of “fa” versus log10 con-
centration can be ﬁtted through the equation of Lambert et al.
(2001):
fa = exp

(cid:2)

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

(cid:5)

−

P2

x
P1

where x is the concentration of the antimicrobial; P 1 the con-
centration of preservative when fa is 1/e and P 2 the slope
parameter.

M

Multiplication
∗ + A
∗ → 2M
∗
= k1M + M
dM
dt

ODE:

∗ (G − εA)

M

Sensitized death/decay
∗ → D
∗ + A
= M
dA
dt

∗ (k2 − εA)

ODE:

M

Natural death/decayed
∗ → D
dD
dt

∗ (k4 + εA)

= M

ODE:

Re-arranging the equations and using the ﬁtting parameters P 1

(cid:3)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)

and P 2, MIC and NIC can be evaluated as follows:
MIC = P1 exp
NIC = P1 exp

(cid:3)

1
P2
1 − e
P2

For two antimicrobials (A and B) used in a combination,
Arroyo-López et al. (2008a) proposed the use of
the frac-
tional inhibitory concentrations (FIC). Brieﬂy, FIC values can be
estimated as follows:

FICA = MICAcombination
FICA = MICBcombination

MICAalone

MICBalone
FICindex = FICA + FICB

Frontiers in Microbiology | Food Microbiology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 194 | 4

Bevilacqua et al.

Starter yeasts for olives

Calculation of a combined FIXindex yields a single number
able to highlight additive, synergistic, or antagonistic effects.
Theoretically, FICindex near 1 indicates an additive effect, while
FICindex < 1 and FICindex > 1 stand for synergic and antagonistic
effects, respectively.

ENZYMATIC ACTIVITIES
The study of enzymatic activities represents a critical point for
yeast selection, as a starter could enhance, increase, or decrease the
quality of raw material through the production of some metabo-
lites and secondary compounds; the enzymatic activities for yeasts
intended for table olives include both desired and undesired
characteristics.

The desired characters include the following ones:

1. Esterase and lipolysis: Esterase and lipase enzymes (gener-
ally recognized as lipolytic activity) are desirable characters,
because they can improve the ﬂavor of olives through the for-
mation of volatile compounds, generated by the catabolism
of free fatty acids (Hernándèz et al., 2007; Rodríguez-Gómez
et al., 2012); the compounds related to the improvement of
ﬂavor include ethanol, glycerol, higher alcohols, esters, and
other volatile compounds (Garrido-Fernández et al., 1997).
Lipolytic activity can be assessed through a qualitative test,
by streaking yeasts on Tributyrin Agar Base, acidiﬁed to pH
4.0; a positive lipolytic activity can be evidenced by a clear
halo (Hernándèz et al., 2007). This activity can be evaluated
also through the quantitative assay suggested by Rodríguez-
Gómez et al. (2012), using a chromogenic substrate, con-
taining p-nitrophenyl stearate and 4-nitrophenyl palmitate
(for lipase enzymes) and p-nitrophenyl butyrate for esterase
determination.

2. β-Glucosidase: This character is probably related to the ability to
degrade oleuropein, a new functional trend for yeast selection,
thus it will be discussed in the following section.

3. Catalase: The catalase activity of yeasts can be evaluated by
adding 3% (v/v) of hydrogen peroxide onto the cultured
colonies, according to the Whittenbury method (Whittenbury,
1964). The role of this enzymatic activity is uncertain; some
authors reported in the past that it could be related to the abil-
ity to prevent radical formation and lipid oxidation (Bevilacqua
et al., 2009).

Apart from the positive enzymatic activities, yeasts should be
evaluated in relation to their production of toxic compounds and
for their effects on olive texture and quality. The assessment of
amine (BA) production (spermine, spermidine, agmatine) was
proposed in the past as a new criterion for the selection of yeasts
as starter cultures for wine (Caruso et al., 2002; Landete et al.,
2007); many yeast species responsible of BA synthesis can be recov-
ered in olives, thus this trait should be evaluated carefully also for
microﬂora of table olives. In laboratory this assay can be per-
formed on a chromogenic medium and then conﬁrmed through
HPLC.

Other traits for yeast selection include some possible enzymatic
activities with a negative impact on olive quality, i.e., pectolytic and
xylanolytic activities and protease enzymes; hydrolysis of pectins

and xylans, as well as proteolytic activity, are related to olive soft-
ening and to the production of pellicles (Rhodotorula spp., P.
anomala, S. rosei, C. krusei; Arroyo-López et al., 2008b).

Many authors suggested some qualitative assays, i.e., yeast
streaking on lab media containing pectins and xylans as only car-
bon source or casein to assess proteolytic activity (Hernándèz et al.,
2007; Bevilacqua et al., 2009; Bautista-Gallego et al., 2011).

FUNCTIONAL PROPERTIES
The use of functional traits for the selection of yeasts for table
olives is one of the most recent trend; for these microorganisms the
term “functional” could highlight probiotic properties (Silva et al.,
2011) or other properties health- or process-focused (Restuccia
et al., 2011; Silva et al., 2011).

Concerning the probiotic properties, the classical traits includes
the survival and/or resistance to gastric pH (1.5–2.5) and to
bile salts, as well as the ability to adhere to intestinal mucosa
and the antimicrobial activity toward foodborne and intesti-
nal pathogens (van der Aa Kühle et al., 2005; Silva et al.,
2011). Some authors proposed in the past
the sur-
vival to gastro-intestinal conditions could be assessed in YM
broth (Yeast Medium, a universal medium for yeasts, medium
n. 186, www.dsmz.de/catalogues/details/culture/DSM70854.html,
accessed April 7, 2012) or in YNB (Yeast Nutrient Broth), acidiﬁed
at pH 2.5 or supplemented with 0.3% of Oxgall, a commercial mix
miming the composition of bile salts of intestine.

that

Another trait of great concern is the ability to adhere to
intestinal mucosa, that could be evaluated directly by assess-
ing yeast adhesion to IPEC-J2 cells (van der Aa Kühle et al.,
2005) or indirectly, through the measurement of aggregation,
auto-aggregation, and hydrophobicity (i.e., adhesion to hydrocar-
bons; Vinderola and Reinheimer, 2003). The last classic probiotic
feature is the antimicrobial activity toward foodborne and intesti-
nal pathogens (Escherichia coli, Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella
sp., Staphylococcus aureus), generally assessed through a modiﬁed
agar-diffusion test (Silva et al., 2011).

Table 3 | Data used to run multivariate analyses.

C. famata

C. guilliermondii

C. pelliculosa

A*

1
2
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
2
2

B

1
2
1
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
1

C

1
2
2
1
1
1
1
0
1
2
0

D

E**

0
1
1
1
0
2
2
2
2
1
0

1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1

F

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

A, growth at pH 9.5; B, growth with 7.5% of NaCl added; C, growth at 15˚C; D,
growth at 37˚C; E, pectolytic activity; F, hydrolysis of trybutyrin.
*A–D, growth index (GI) < 25%, 0; 25% < GI < 75%, 1; GI > 75%, 2.
**E–F, −, 0; +, 1; ++, 2.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 194 | 5

Bevilacqua et al.

Starter yeasts for olives

Apart from the classic probiotic features, the functional prop-
erties of yeasts includes some traits health- or process-oriented;
amongst the health-oriented traits, the most important ones are
the production of B vitamins and cytokine assays, whereas two
process-oriented properties are the assimilation of oleuropein
and β-glucosidase activity. Vitamin production can be evaluated
through the method of Pearson et al. (1986) in a vitamin free
medium and using a spectro-photometric measurement. Cytokine
assay is another way to evaluate an antagonistic effect of yeasts or
probiotic bacteria toward pathogen; a probiotic could either have
an antagonistic adhesion to intestinal mucosa, thus reducing the
adhesion of pathogens, or exert a beneﬁt, reducing the intesti-
nal pro-inﬂammatory response, mediated through the excretion
of both pro- and anti-inﬂammatory cytokines (van der Aa Kühle
et al., 2005).

A recent trait suggested by Restuccia et al. (2011) is the β-
glucosidase activity and the ability to degrade oleuropein; this
property could be evaluated through a colorimetric method on
an solid medium, containing arbutin, and then conﬁrmed by
qualitative assays (Restuccia et al., 2011; Silva et al., 2011). The

impact of this property is really strong as it is related to the
possibility to replace, or combine, chemical debittering with a
biological approach.

This possibility has been suggested some years ago for some
strains of Lactobacillus plantarum (Ciafardini et al., 1994); recently,
Restuccia et al. (2011) characterized a β-glucosidase produced by
a strain of Wickerhamomyces anomalus, showing the maximum
activity at alkaline pHs and at 35˚C. The contemporary presence
of esterase and β-glucosidase activities in this strain suggested a
potential application in olive debittering.

SELECTION OF PROMISING STRAINS
The selection of promising strains poses an important problem,
i.e., how manage a large amount of data? Multivariate analysis
offers an interesting approach to solve this setback as suggested by
Rodríguez-Gómez et al. (2012) and Bevilacqua et al. (2009).

The starting situation is a large amount of data, with sev-
eral biochemical activities and/or the results of different assays
(variables) from a considerable number of strains (cases). Which
approach use? Rodríguez-Gómez et al. (2012) and Bevilacqua et al.

FIGURE 2 | Multivariate analyses for the data reported in Table 3. (A) Cluster analysis; (B) principal component analysis; (C) correspondence analysis.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Food Microbiology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 194 | 6

Bevilacqua et al.

Starter yeasts for olives

(2009) suggested three kinds of ways: Cluster analysis (Cl), Prin-
cipal Component Analysis (PCA), and Correspondence Analysis
(CA); the choice of an approach relies upon the aim of the research.
Mainly, Cl uses different algorithms to put all the samples (e.g., the
strains) in different groups or clusters. Rodríguez-Gómez et al.
(2012) reported that clustering should be used when researcher
does not possess a “priori” hypothesis and is still in an exploratory
phase of the research; this approach is convenient as it shows in a
simple way the strains with similar characteristics. Its main draw-
back is that researcher can say if two strains are similar or not, but
he does not know the reasons (i.e., the variables) acting on their
similarities/dissimilarities. An approach to by-pass this limit is the
use of PCA and CA. PCA implies a mathematical procedure that
transforms the overall set of original variables into a smaller num-
ber of mathematical constructs, called factors; thereby, a new set of
axes, called factor axes, is obtained in a lower dimensional space,
where the cases (e.g., the strains) can be projected and classiﬁed
into categories. The beneﬁt of this kind of approach is the possi-
bility to group strains in categories and see what are the variables
acting on similarities/dissimilarities.

A similar result can be obtained through CA; CA is a descrip-
tive/exploratory technique, designed to analyze simple two-way
and multi-way tables, containing some measures of correspon-
dence between the rows and columns; it can be considered a
weighted principal component analysis method, based on the chi-
square distance between categories of each variable, where the
relationship between the variables is represented by a contingency
table and low-dimensional graphs (Sanz et al., 2004). Graphically,
in the CA strains and variables are represented as points in a
factorial space; the more a strain (e.g., a point) is near to a variable,
the more that strain shows the variable at high level.

Before running a multivariate approach, it is important to pay
attention that all the variables are expressed with the same or sim-
ilar scales (e.g., all quantitative or all qualitative); when the dataset
comprises some quantitative variables and qualitative ones, it is
important to use the same scale and standardize data.

A convenient approach was proposed by Bevilacqua et al.
(2009), who grouped yeasts from Bella di Cerignola table olives
using some quantitative (growth under different pHs, tempera-
tures and salt concentrations, as GI value) and qualitative assays
(catalase hydrolysis of pectins and xylans); thus, they used a 3-digit
scale (0, 1, and 2).

As a ﬁnal step we propose a simple case-study. Yeasts (C. famata,
C. guilliermondii, and C. pelliculosa) were isolated from Bella di
Cerignola table olives and belong to the Culture Collection of the
Laboratory of Applied Microbiology (University of Foggia); the
strains were studied for their ability to grow at pH 9.5, under dif-
ferent temperatures (from 15 to 37˚C), in a medium supplemented
with salt and for their pectolytic and lipolytic activities. Data were
converted into codes (0, 1, and 2; Table 3).

Using the qualitative codes, Cl, PCA, and CA were run; the
outputs of these approaches are reported in Figure 2. Cl grouped
the strains into three statistical classes: A (strains 6, 7, 8, and 9-
C. guilliermondii); B (strains 5 and 11, identiﬁed as C. famata
and C. pelliculosa); C (strains, 1, 2, 3, 4-C. famata- and 10-C.
pelliculosa).

This approach is useful to highlight similar strains and could
be of great concern for the formulation of a multiple strain starter,
as I can choose similar or dissimilar strains, depending on the
desired characteristics of the starter. As reported elsewhere, Cl does
not highlight which variable acts on the differences, thus different
multivariate approaches should be used.

Table 4 | Tools for yeast validation in table olives.

Main tools

Traits

Course of fermentation

Effects on sensory attributes

Production of biomass

Yeast storage

Future ways for the research.

www.frontiersin.org

Protocol for starter production
Adaptation step (if necessary)
Protocol for yeast inoculum (initial cell level, single-solution or multi-step inoculum, volume of brine, aeration-if
necessary, and conditions throughout the fermentation)
Kinetic of fermentation
Interaction with lactic acid bacteria
Interaction with other yeasts (multiple strain starter)
Starter imposition on natural microﬂora (use of molecular methods: culture independent and culture dependent tools)
Brine clouding
Formation of pellicles
Production of volatiles
Sensory scores for odor, color, texture, taste, and overall quality
Medium required for growth
Fermentation/oxidative metabolism shift
Biomass recovery
Resistance to dehydration
Viability over time of dehydrated yeasts
Viability under refrigerated conditions
Protocol for yeast growth

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 194 | 7

Bevilacqua et al.

Starter yeasts for olives

Although the statistical backgrounds of CA and PCA are quite
different, the results are very similar (2B and 2C), as both the pic-
ture highlight the different strains and the variables acting on this
difference. The choice of CA or PCA relies upon the aims of sta-
tistical treatment of data: if I want to select some strains with a
desired character, CA could be more useful, on the other hand if the
aim is the selection of the best strain/strains, taking into account
all the technological and functional traits, PCA is more versatile.
Apart from the statistical approach used, the main output of
this step is the selection of some promising strains for the fol-
lowing validation. It is important to select at least 5–10 strains
and perform the laboratory validation with this number, as some
strains could show different traits in “in vivo” conditions.

VALIDATION
The last step for starter selection and optimization is the valida-
tion of selected strains in foods under laboratory conditions and

at industrial level; to the best of our knowledge, no paper focused
on this topic. Keeping in mind the general traits for the validation
of a starter, as well as the characteristics required and assessed for
yeasts in other foods, the validation of yeasts for table olives should
focus on some primary tools, i.e.:

1. course of fermentation,
2. effects on sensory attributes,
3. production of biomass,
4. yeast storage.

Table 4 reports the desired traits for each primary tool; these
properties could represent a future direction to guide research
in the selection of suitable yeasts intended for table olives. The
research is at the beginning; however, it is important to re-direct
assays and experiments following an holistic way and focusing on
the practical aspects involved in olive fermentation.

REFERENCES
Arroyo-López, F. N., Bautista-Gallego,
J., Durán-Quintana, M. C., and
Garrido-Fernández, A.
(2008a).
Modelling the inhibition of sorbic
and benzoic acids on a native
yeast cocktail. Food Microbiol. 25,
566–574.

Arroyo-López, F. N., Querol, A.,
Bautista-Gallego, A., and Garrido-
Fernández, A.
(2008b). Role of
yeasts
olive produc-
tion. Int. J. Food. Microbiol. 128,
189–196.

in table

A.

F.,

Arroyo-López, F. N., Bautista-Gallego,
and
J., Rodríguez-Gómez,
(2010).
Garrido-Fernández,
“Predictive microbiology and table
olives,” in Current Research, Tech-
nology and Education Topics
in
Applied Microbiology and Microbial
Biotechnology,
ed. A. Mèndez-
Vilas (Bajadoz: Formatex Resaerch
Center), 1452–1461.

Bautista-Gallego, J., Rodríguez-Gómez,
F., Barrio, E., Querol, A., Garrido-
Fernández, A., and Arroyo-López, F.
N. (2011). Exploring the yeast bio-
diversity of green table olive indus-
trial fermentations for technological
applications. Int. J. Food Microbiol.
147, 89–96.

Bautista-Gallego,

J., Romero-Gil, V.,
Garrido-Fernández, A., and Arroyo-
López, F. N. (2012). Modeling the
inhibitory effects of zinc chloride
on table olive related yeasts. Food
Control 23, 499–505.

Bevilacqua, A., Perricone, M., Can-
narsi, M., Corbo, M. R., and Sini-
gaglia, M. (2009). Technological and
spoiling characteristics of the yeast
microﬂora isolated from Bella di
Cerignola table olives. Int. J. Food Sci.
Technol. 44, 2198–2207.

Blaszyk, M.,

Interaction

and Holley, R. A.
(1998).
of mono-
laurin, eugenol and sodium citrate
on growth of
common meat
spoilage and pathogenic organ-
isms.
Int.
J. Food Microbiol. 39,
175–183.

Carnevali, P., Ciati, R., Leporati, A., and
Paese, A. (2007). Liquid sourdough
fermentation: industrial application
perspectives. Food Microbiol. 24,
150–154.

Caruso, P., Fiore, C., Contursi, M.,
Salzano, G., Paparella, A., and
(2002). Formation
Romano, P.
of biogenic
amines
criteria
for the selection of wine yeasts.
World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 18,
159–163.

as

Ciafardini, G., Marsilio, V., Lanza, B.,
and Pozzi, N. (1994). Hyrolysis of
oleuropein by Lactobacillus plan-
tarum strains associated with olive
fermentation. Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 60, 4142–4147.

DFG-Senate Commission of Food
Safety. (2010). Microbial Food Cul-
tures. University of Kaiserslautern,
Kauserslautern.

Echevarria, R., Bautista-Gallego,

J.,
Arroyo-López, F. N., and Garrido-
Fernández, A. (2010). Modelling
the effect of ascorbic acid, sodium
metabisulphite and sodium chloride
on the kinetic response of lactic acid
bacteria and yeasts in table olive
storage using a speciﬁcally imple-
mented Quasi-chemical primary
model. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 138,
212–222.

Garrido-Fernández, A.,

Fernández-
Díez, M.
J., and Adams, M. R.
(1997). Table Olives: Production and
Processing. London: Chapman &
Hall.

Hernándèz, A., Martin, A., Aranda, E.,
Pèrez-Nevado, F., and Còrdoba, M.
G. (2007). Identiﬁcation and char-
acterization of yeast isolated from
the elaboration of seasoned green
table olives. Food Microbiol. 24,
346–351.
Lambert, R.

J. W., Skandamis, P.
and Nychas,
N., Coote, P.
G.
(2001). A study of
the minimum inhibitory concen-
tration and mode of action of
oregano essential oil, thymol and
carvacrol.
J. Appl. Microbiol. 91,
453–462.

J. E.

J.,

Landete, J. M., Ferrer, S., and Pardo,
(2007). Biogenic amine pro-
I.
duction by lactic acid bacteria,
acetic acid bacteria and yeasts iso-
lated from wine. Food Control 18,
1569–1574.

Muccilli, S., Caggia, C., Randazzo, C.
L., and Restuccia, C. (2011). Yeast
dynamics during the fermentation
of brined green olives treated in
the ﬁeld with kaolin and Bor-
deaux mixture to control the olive
fruit ﬂy. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 148,
15–22.

Pearson, B. M., MacKenzie, D. A., and
Keenan, M. H. J. (1986). Produc-
tion of biotin by yeasts. Lett. Appl.
Microbiol. 2, 25–28.

Restuccia, C., Muccilli, S., Palmeri,
R., Randazzo, C. L., Caggia, C.,
and Spagna, G. (2011). An alka-
line (β-glucosidase isolated from
an olive brine strain of Wicker-
hamomyces anomalus. FEMS Yeast
Res. 11, 487–493.
Rodríguez-Gómez,

F., Romero-Gil,
V., Bautista-Gallego,
J., Garrido-
Fernández, A., and Arroyo-López,
F. N. (2012). Multivariate analysis
to discriminate yeast strains with

technological applications in table
olive processing. World J. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 28, 1761–1770.

Ross, E. W., Taub, I. A., Doona, C.
J., Feeherry, F. E., and Kustin, K.
(2005). The mathematical proper-
ties of Quasi-chemical model for
microorganism growth-death kinet-
ics in foods. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 99,
157–171.

Sanz, A., Bernuès, A., Villalba, D.,
Casasùs, I., and Revilla, R. (2004).
Inﬂuence of management
and
nutritionon postpartum interval in
Brown Swiss and Pirenaica cows.
Livest. Prod. Sci. 86, 179–191.

Silva, T., Reto, M., Sol, M., Peito,
A., Peres, C. M., Peres, C., and
Xavier Malcata, F. (2011). Char-
acterization of yeasts from Por-
tuguese brined olives, with a focus
on their potentially probiotic behav-
ior. LWT Food Sci. Technol. 44,
1349–1354.

Taub, I. A., Feeherry, F. E., Ross, E.
W., Kustin, K., and Doona, C. J.
(2003). A Quasi-chemical kinetic
model for the growth and death of
Staphylococcus aureus in intermedi-
ate moisture bread. J. Food Sci. 68,
2530–2537.

Tofalo, R., Schirone, M., Perpetuini,
G., Angelozzi, G., Suzzi, G., and
Corsetti, A. (2012). Microbiologi-
cal and chemical proﬁles of nat-
urally fermented table olives and
brines from different Italian culti-
vars. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek 102,
121–131.

Van Boekel, M. A. J. S. (2002). On
the Weibull model
the use of
to describe
the
inac-
tivation of microbial vegetative
cells.
J. Food Microbiol. 74,
Int.
139–159.

thermal

Frontiers in Microbiology | Food Microbiology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 194 | 8

Bevilacqua et al.

Starter yeasts for olives

screening

and Jespersen, L.
vitro
of

van der Aa Kühle, A., Skovgaard,
K.,
(2005).
In
probi-
otic properties of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae var. boulardii and food-
borne
cerevisiae
strains. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 101,
29–39.

Saccharomyces

characteristics and biological bar-
rier resistance. Food Res. Int. 36,
895–904.

Whittenbury, R. (1964). Hydrogen per-
oxide formation and catalase activity
in the lactic acid bacteria. J. Gen.
Microbiol. 35, 13–26.

Vinderola, C. G., and Reinheimer,
J. A. (2003). Lactic acid starter
and probitoic bacteria: a compar-
ative “in vitro” study of probiotic

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships

that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 11 April 2012; paper pend-
ing published: 02 May 2012; accepted:
13 May 2012; published online: 31 May
2012.
Citation: Bevilacqua A, Corbo MR and
Sinigaglia M (2012) Selection of yeasts as
starter cultures for table olives: a step-by-
step procedure. Front. Microbio. 3:194.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00194

This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Food Microbiology, a specialty of Fron-
tiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Bevilacqua, Corbo
and Sinigaglia. This is an open-access
article distributed under
terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution
Non Commercial License, which per-
mits non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in other forums, pro-
vided the original authors and source are
credited.

the

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 194 | 9

