REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 04 May 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00167

Keys to eukaryality: Planctomycetes and ancestral
evolution of cellular complexity

John A. Fuerst* and Evgeny Sagulenko

School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, Australia

Edited by:
Naomi L. Ward, University of
Wyoming, USA
Reviewed by:
Jonathan H. Badger, J. Craig Venter
Institute, USA
Peter J. Christie, University of Texas
at Houston Medical School, USA
*Correspondence:
John A. Fuerst, School of Chemistry
and Molecular Biosciences, The
University of Queensland, St Lucia
4072, QLD, Australia
e-mail: j.fuerst@uq.edu.au

Planctomycetes are known to display compartmentalization via internal membranes, thus
resembling eukaryotes. Signiﬁcantly, the planctomycete Gemmata obscuriglobus has not
only a nuclear region surrounded by a double-membrane, but is also capable of protein
uptake via endocytosis. In order to clearly analyze implications for homology of their char-
acters with eukaryotes, a correct understanding of planctomycete structure is an essential
starting point. Here we outline the major features of such structure necessary for assessing
the case for or against homology with eukaryote cell complexity. We consider an evolu-
tionary model for cell organization involving reductive evolution of Planctomycetes from
a complex proto-eukaryote-like last universal common ancestor, and evaluate alternative
models for origins of the unique planctomycete cell plan. Overall, the structural and mole-
cular evidence is not consistent with convergent evolution of eukaryote-like features in a
bacterium and favors a homologous relationship of Planctomycetes and eukaryotes.

Keywords: Planctomycetes, evolution, compartmentalization, cell complexity, LUCA, eukaryote evolution, origin
of nucleus, Gemmata obscuriglobus

INTRODUCTION
The phylum Planctomycetes is a distinctive one situated within
the domain Bacteria with characteristics of immense signiﬁcance
for understanding cell biology and the evolution of cell organiza-
tion (Fuerst and Sagulenko, 2011). Their most dramatic feature
is a shared cell compartmentalization correlated with intracellu-
lar membranes (Fuerst, 2005). In at least one genus, Gemmata,
this is displayed by an even more complex compartment con-
taining nucleoid DNA and surrounded by an envelope of two
closely apposed membranes. Other members of the PVC super-
phylum (in phyla Planctomycetes, Verrucomicrobia, and Chlamy-
dia), e.g. Verrucomicrobia, also display at least simpler forms of
this cell compartmentalization (Lee et al., 2009b). Functional com-
plexity accompanies this structural complexity, since Gemmata
obscuriglobus has an endocytosis-like ability to incorporate large
proteins from the extracellular medium (Lonhienne et al., 2010).
This feature correlates with possession unique within the Bacte-
ria of homologs of the coatomer MC class of eukaryote proteins
associated with endocytosis (Lonhienne et al., 2010; Santarella-
Mellwig et al., 2010). These characters pose puzzles regarding the
exact relevance of Planctomycetes and the PVC superphylum to
the evolution of eukaryotes (Devos and Reynaud, 2010; Koonin,
2010; McInerney et al., 2011; Reynaud and Devos, 2011). What
might Planctomycetes tell us about evolution of eukaryote cell
biology? We will endeavur here to clarify cell structural features of
Planctomycetes of special signiﬁcance to the question of potential
homologies with eukaryotes and their endomembrane systems.

TOWARD A CLEAR UNDERSTANDING OF PLANCTOMYCETE
CELL PLANS AND THEIR COMPARISON WITH THE
EUKARYOTE CELL PLAN
For a deeper appreciation of features of PVC/Planctomycetes
members leading to a concept of eukaryote homology, we need

to make clear the evidence underlying interpretations of their
distinctiveness. This applies to evidence for internal membranes
of G. obscuriglobus and the distinction of the protein-rich wall
of Planctomycetes from the cell wall of Gram-negative Bacteria
(Cavalier-Smith, 2010). Eukaryotic features such as compartmen-
talized cells and true tubulins capable of forming microtubules in
the related Verrucomicrobia of the PVC superphylum pose sim-
ilar problems (Schlieper et al., 2005; Martin-Galiano et al., 2011;
Pilhofer et al., 2011).

We can compare cell plan features of G. obscuriglobus as a rep-
resentative planctomycete to those of other bacteria with internal
membranes and to those of Escherichia coli as typical of oth-
ers without such membranes (Figure 1). These plans can be
contrasted also with simplest representative microbial eukaryotes
Saccharomyces and Giardia (Figure 1). This clearly illustrates the
distinctive nature of the Gemmata ICM and other internal mem-
branes compared with that of the plasma membrane of other
bacteria, the uniqueness of the paryphoplasm, and the way in
which Gemmata paryphoplasm and nuclear envelope pericisternal
space are topologically similar to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
lumen in eukaryotes. In Gemmata, in addition to the two major
compartments present in other planctomycete species, there is a
third compartment, the “nuclear body,” enclosing a condensed
nucleoid and some of the cell’s ribosomes. 3D reconstruction
from serial sectioning of freeze-substituted G. obscuriglobus has
shown that the nuclear body envelope is largely continuous and
is compatible with the view of the nuclear body as a separate
compartment of the cell (Lindsay et al., 2001). This nuclear
body compartment resembles the nucleus of eukaryote cells with
its double-membraned nuclear envelope, with the exception of
apparent presence of ribosomes inside the nuclear region. Among
Planctomycetes, such structures, at least in their complete form,
are not so far found outside this genus. In G. obscuriglobus the

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 167 | 1

Fuerst and Sagulenko

Planctomycetes and evolution of cell complexity

FIGURE 1 | Schematic diagram showing plans of membrane distribution.
Membrane topology is in representative Bacteria Gemmata obscuriglobus,
Synechococcus, Escherichia coli, and Magnetospirillum relative to
representative microbial members of the Eucarya Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and Giardia lamblia. Cytoplasm containing ribosomes is shown in blue,
nucleus is shown in light-blue, DNA in black, and ribosome-free spaces (ER
lumen in the eukaryotes, paryphoplasm in G. obscuriglobus) in yellow orange,

peptidoglycan in pink, mannoprotein-glucan (Klis et al., 2006; yeast) walls or
protein (planctomycete) walls in blue or purple respectively. Magnetite
particles are shown as black diamonds (Magnetospirillum only). CW, cell wall;
CM, cytoplasmic membrane; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; G, Golgi apparatus;
ICM, intracytoplasmic membrane; MS, magnetosome; OM, outer membrane;
P, paryphoplasm; PM, plasma membrane; PG, peptidoglycan; TM, thylakoid
membrane.

outer membrane of the nuclear envelope is continuous with mem-
branes originating from the ICM. This means that the nuclear
envelope and membranes continuous with it form an endomem-
brane system comparable to the ER of eukaryotes including rough
ER. The pericisternal space between membranes of the eukaryote
nuclear envelope and continuous with the ER lumen (see Saccha-
romyces, Giardia in Figure 1) is analogous to the space between
membranes of the Gemmata nuclear envelope and perhaps also
with paryphoplasm. In rough ER of eukaryotes, ribosomes are
found bound to ER membrane and the outer membrane of the
nuclear envelope (see Saccharomyces, Giardia, in Figure 1). In
G. obscuriglobus and cyanobacterium Synechococcus, ribosomes
can be found bound to internal membranes (Figure 1). In G.
obscuriglobus, like eukaryotes, some ribosomes are found bound to
the nuclear envelope’s outer membrane, but G. obscuriglobus also
has ribosomes lining the inner side of the nuclear envelope, as well
as free ribosomes both inside and outside the nuclear compart-
ment. In G. obscuriglobus, ribosomes are also seen bound to ICM
on its inner side, but ribosomes are never seen in the paryphoplasm
or bound to the cytoplasmic membrane (in complete contrast
to E. coli, where ribosomes are normally bound to cytoplasmic
membrane as well as free in the cytoplasm; Bibi and Herskovits,
2000). We predict that internal membrane-bounded ribosomes of
Gemmata are involved in co-translational secretion across bound
membrane. At a molecular level, in ribosomal proteins such as L17
in Planctomycetes, indels involving alpha-helices unique within
domain Bacteria have been reported (Kamneva et al., 2010). These

may be correlated with changes from typical bacterial transla-
tion. Note that no internal membranes are found in wild-type
E. coli, and internal membranes such as the chromatophores of
Rhodopseudomonas viridis (Konorty et al., 2008) and the magneto-
somes of magnetotactic bacteria originate from the plasma mem-
brane (Remsen et al., 1968; Komeili et al., 2006; Schuler, 2008).
Magnetosomes of the alpha-proteobacterium Magnetospirillum in
Figure 1 represent the class of structures where plasma membrane
invaginates to form internal membranes (Komeili et al., 2006).
However the thylakoid membranes of cyanobacteria functioning
in oxygen-evolving photosynthesis may well bear comparison with
those of Gemmata internal membranes. Cryo-electron tomogra-
phy has demonstrated that thylakoid membranes seem not to show
clear continuity with plasma membrane in Prochlorococcus (Ting
et al., 2007), Synechococcus (van de Meene et al., 2006), and Syne-
chocystis (Liberton et al., 2006), as well as other cyanobacteria
(Nevo et al., 2007; Konorty et al., 2008). For Synechocystis ﬂuo-
rescence microscopy of live cells is consistent with this conclusion
(Schneider et al., 2007).

is

It

the

to confuse

important not

characteristically
planctomycete- and PVC superphylum-speciﬁc paryphoplasm
with the periplasm found in non-planctomycete and non-PVC
bacteria. Planctomycete internal membranes are not mere invagi-
nations of the plasma membrane (PM; in bacteria also called the
cytoplasmic membrane (CM), in the present context not used in
the text to avoid confusion of two terms for the same structure).
There is no existing ultrastructural data known to us suggesting

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 167 | 2

Fuerst and Sagulenko

Planctomycetes and evolution of cell complexity

any direct connection between PM of planctomycete cells and the
ICM deﬁning the inner boundary of the paryphoplasm, as there
is none relating any further internal membranes in the cytoplasm
to the PM.

It

is clear that

the “paryphoplasm” compartment

in G.
obscuriglobus plays a major role in endocytotic protein uptake
in this planctomycete bacterium (Lonhienne et al., 2010), con-
ﬁrming its functional reality. Those proteins are taken up by the
cell into the paryphoplasm but such incorporated proteins have
never been detected in other cell compartments, e.g., the nuclear
region and ribosome-containing compartments, conﬁrming the
separate functional nature of paryphoplasm. It is illuminating
to consider what we know of the mechanism of protein uptake
in G. obscuriglobus in relation to the question of the relation of
PM to ICM and the topological nature of the paryphoplasm to
any periplasm that might occur in this planctomycete. During
uptake of protein from the external milieu, vesicles form from
infolding of PM, and such vesicles form separate compartments
within the paryphoplasm (Lonhienne et al., 2010). It is the con-
tents of these vesicles which are equivalent topologically to external
milieu (or to periplasm in contact with such), not the parypho-
plasm itself, which is a space in which the vesicles are located. The
paryphoplasm is thus not equivalent to periplasm topologically. A
separate membrane-trafﬁcking compartment might be a result of
specialization for efﬁcient endocytosis-based nutrition.

ON A CLEAR DAY YOU CAN SEE FOREVER? WHAT
PLANCTOMYCETES IMPLY ABOUT EVOLUTION OF COMPLEX
CELLS AND THE ORIGINS OF THE EUKARYOTE
Once we clearly understand the unique nature of the cell plan in
Planctomycetes, we can start to approach the question of their
potential eukaryote homology. The consilience of such plancto-
mycete features as presence of endocytosis abilities and eukaryote
membrane-deforming MC-protein homologs, the absence of FtsZ
and other divisome proteins other than FtsK, presence of protein
cell walls, absence of peptidoglycan, presence of sterols accom-
panied by sterol-synthesizing enzymes with eukaryote homology
(Frickey and Kannenberg, 2009), presence of some dnaK (Hsp70)
genes with eukaryote homology (Ward-Rainey et al., 1997), C1
transfer enzymes falling between Bacteria and Archaea in phylo-
genetic trees (Chistoserdova et al., 2004), and in anammox Planc-
tomycetes the presence of ATP synthase in internal membranes
(van Niftrik et al., 2010) points to some dramatically unusual
Bacteria. And these features may also be most parsimoniously
consistent with some perhaps quite heretical evolutionary mod-
els. Such models include one where a last common ancestor of
the PVC group has some properties of all three Domains includ-
ing the Eucarya and a complex eukaryote-like cell plan – i.e., a
PVC ancestor with properties of a compartmentalized progenote
last universal common ancestor (LUCA). Occurrence of a simple
compartmentalized cell plan throughout the PVC group combined
with occurrence of now established eukaryotic tubulin homologs
of ancient origin in at least Prosthecobacter among the Verru-
comicrobia (Martin-Galiano et al., 2011) is consistent with such a
concept. An alternative model may derive key eukaryote features
from a planctomycete or other PVC members (or their ancestors),
their cells acting as a kind of tool kit for eukaryality – where genes

and cell organizational plans central to eukaryote abilities may
have evolved to be later transferred laterally to a eucaryal lineage.

CELL BIOLOGY IMPLICATIONS OF GEMMATA ENDOCYTOSIS
Endocytosis is considered a key innovation in the origin of the
eukaryotic cell (Cavalier-Smith, 2009), and is linked to evolution of
the primordial endomembrane system of the last eukaryotic com-
mon ancestor (LECA; Dacks et al., 2008). The endocytosis system
in a simple eukaryote such as Giardia (albeit of secondary simplic-
ity) is illuminating in terms of what homology might encompass
in terms of simplicity. In Giardia, endocytosis is performed via
contiguous and communicating peripheral vesicles (PV) and the
ER-like tubulovesicular network (TVN), which appear to com-
bine the functions of the separate early and late endosomes and
lysosomes of the endocytic system of more complex organisms
(Lanfredi-Rangel et al., 1998; Abodeely et al., 2009). Very inter-
estingly in relation to the paryphoplasm in Gemmata and its
role as harboring endocytotic vesicles, Giardia endocytosis and
degradation of exogenous proteins occurs in the ER (TVN) or in
a compartment communicating with ER – Giardia differs from
other eukaryotes in that the endocytotic system is not excluded
from the ER, so that “lysosomal” protein degradation occurs in the
ER. So too in Gemmata both endocytotic vesicle formation from
PM and protein degradation occur in the same paryphoplasm
region (Lonhienne et al., 2010). In both Gemmata and Giardia
reductive evolution may have occurred via distinct selective forces
but resulting in similarly simple endocytosis organelles. In such a
meeting point of pro- and eukaryote cell structure and function
we may ﬁnd clues to the minimal eukaryote and maximally com-
plex prokaryote and the evolutionary connections between them
via potential common ancestors.

STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL HOMOLOGIES OF EUKARYOTE
FEATURES IN THE PLANCTOMYCETE CELL
What does
the PVC superphylum,
the most complex of
G. obscuriglobus, imply for homologies with eukaryotes? If a dis-
tinct nuclear body compartment exists separated by a double-
membrane envelope from other ribosome-containing cytoplasm,
then some translation must occur in a non-DNA containing com-
partment as occurs in eukaryotes. Transcription must be conﬁned
to the nuclear body with its condensed nucleoid, and at least some
mRNA and possibly proteins must be transported through the
nuclear envelope. Secondly, separation of the nuclear region from
the remainder of the ribosome-rich cytoplasm implies a nuclear
transport system and even nuclear pore complexes (NPCs). The
MC-protein homolog appearing to operate in endocytosis in Gem-
mata might also form the basis for an NPC, since MC proteins
and some nucleoporins share underlying structure (Devos et al.,
2004; Devos, 2012). Like endomembrane systems and membrane-
deforming proteins needed for such vesicle-rich systems (Field and
Dacks, 2009; Field et al., 2011), NPCs seem to have been a feature
of the LECA (Wilson and Dawson, 2011). This is no surprise con-
sidering the shared membrane-deforming domains of the MC-like
proteins underlying these structures, shared also with the ances-
tral “protocoatomer” (Devos et al., 2004). These domains are also
shared, exclusively within the Bacteria, with MC proteins of PVC
superphylum members (Santarella-Mellwig et al., 2010), including

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 167 | 3

Fuerst and Sagulenko

Planctomycetes and evolution of cell complexity

those correlated with endocytosis in Gemmata (Lonhienne et al.,
2010). In G. obscuriglobus the ribosomes bound to nuclear enve-
lope membrane on both sides in linear arrays are consistent with
polysomes and imply co-translational protein secretion into the
NE lumen, making this an analog of the eukaryotic ER lumen.
This further implies ER signal sequences in proteins destined for
the lumen, chaperone proteins such as calreticulin and calnexin
assisting folding of lumen proteins (Johnson et al., 2001) and even
the ERAD system for degrading incorrectly folded lumen proteins
(Meusser et al., 2005). Absence of a clear Golgi system is not criti-
cal to proto-eukaryality, as Giardia cell biology indicates – Giardia
has no clear morphologically recognizable Golgi, but encystation-
speciﬁc vesicles perform some Golgi functions and a primordial or
a least simple secretory apparatus is present (Marti et al., 2003; no
matter whether the simplicity of any Golgi-like function in Giardia
is a result of secondary loss). The ability of Gemmata to endocy-
tose proteins implies return of membrane-forming endocytotic
vesicles back to the PM and thus some form of exocytosis and
even secretion of vesicle contents. In molecular terms, a receptor-
and clathrin-mediated endocytosis mechanism implies potential
homologs of accessory eukaryotic proteins needed for endocysto-
sis. These include SNAREs, Rab GTPases, actins and myosins, and
dynamins (Fuerst and Sagulenko, 2010), though it should be noted
that yeast seems able to dispense with the Arp2 adaptin operating
in the clathrin system of mammals (Conibear, 2010). Other ele-
ments of the system may be missing or replaced non-orthologously
in Gemmata. Actins may be crucial especially in organisms which
experience signiﬁcant turgor pressure affecting endocytotic vesicle
formation (Conibear, 2010). SNARE-like motifs have been found
in bacterial proteins including IncA of species of the PVC group
member Chlamydia (where they interact with SNAREs of hosts of
these intracellular pathogens; Delevoye et al., 2008) and IncA of
another intracellular pathogen Legionella (Paumet et al., 2009b).
G. obscuriglobus and several other Planctomycetes have proteins
with SNARE-associated domains (as do Bacteria from other phyla
(Delevoye et al., 2008; Paumet et al., 2009a). Planctomycetes may
not be the only organisms displaying homologies in their cell
biology to eukaryotes. Several members of the Crenarcheota and
Thaumarcheota within the Archaea have now been shown to pos-
sess an alternative cell division machinery. This machinery shares
elements with the ESCRT-III system of eukaryotes involved in
endocytosis via the late endosome multivesicular body and in for-
mation of intraluminal vesicles as well as cytokinesis (Lindas et al.,
2008; Ettema and Bernander, 2009; Pelve et al., 2011).

Signiﬁcant to the question of homology of Planctomycetes
with eukaryotes, bioinformatic analysis of the predicted subcellu-
lar proteome of anammox planctomycete Kuenenia stuttgartiensis
indicates that signal peptides of anammox proteins are more sim-
ilar to those of eukaryotes than to those of any model bacteria
whether Gram-positive or Gram-negative (Medema et al., 2010).
The specialized ammonium-oxidizing anammoxosome organelle
in Kuenenia appears to correlate with a distinct subproteome of
hundreds of proteins, and the Tat translocation system seems con-
ﬁned to the anammoxosome membrane. This study also found
that signal peptide prediction algorithms trained on eukary-
otes gave better yield of true positives, and that use of Gram-
negative predictors trained with proteobacteria signals could be

deceptive – this type of problem may be a wider one applying also
to genome annotation for Planctomycetes, we would suggest.

The whole question of signal peptides in Planctomycetes is sig-
niﬁcant for considering homology with eukaryotes since protein
transport through membranes in all Planctomycetes must occur
across internal membranes such as ICM as well as across the PM.
Rhodopirellula baltica has an exceptionally high number of genes
with signal peptides, and an exceptionally high number of Tat
signal peptides (Glockner et al., 2003).

PLANCTOMYCETES – DOMAIN BACTERIA BUT NOT AS WE KNOW IT?
The presently understood evolutionary relationships of Plancto-
mycetes and the PVC group place them ﬁrmly within the Bacteria,
at least as based on 16S rRNA and sequences such as multiple
ribosomal proteins derived from genomes (Fuerst and Sagulenko,
2011). There are also a number of molecular features which
link Planctomycetes with Bacteria, e.g., Shine-Dalgarno sequence
in mRNA (Leary et al., 1998), promoters (Liesack and Stacke-
brandt, 1989), common conserved oligonucleotides in 16S rRNA
(Woese, 1987), presence of some or many peptidoglycan synthe-
sis enzymes (Pilhofer et al., 2008; Bernander and Ettema, 2010),
presence of genes for lipid A (Sutcliffe, 2010), bacterial secretion
systems (Glockner et al., 2003), and bacterial ﬂagellar systems
(Pallen et al., 2009). They also have some distinctive eukaryotic
molecular features, such as discoidin domains (Studholme et al.,
2004), an integrin homolog (Fuerst et al., 2002), and MC (mem-
brane coat) proteins homologous to clathrins (Santarella-Mellwig
et al., 2010). Other features include novel cytochrome domains,
solute-binding proteins, and N-terminal export signal peptides
containing eukaryote-homologous domains such as calx-β, cad-
herin and thrombospondin Type 3 (Studholme et al., 2004). The
phylogenetic position of Planctomycetes and PVC superphylum
within the Bacteria is important to understand in relation to pos-
sible retention of features from a postulated eukaryote-like LUCA
on the one hand, and potential of these organisms to form an
intermediate between either LUCA or Bacteria and the eukary-
otes on the other (Reynaud and Devos, 2011). Conversion from a
bacterium to a eukaryote poses problems connected with the dis-
tinctive nature of their ribosomes, so that retention of eukaryote
features from a LUCA is a simpler hypothesis to explain PVC com-
partments and other eukaryote features. Evidence consistent with
a deep branching of Planctomycetes comes from slowly evolv-
ing 16SrRNA position trees (Brochier and Philippe, 2002) and
proteome phylogenetics (Jun et al., 2010). Some phylogenetic
analyses deduce that Planctomycetes are relatively shallow, based
on analysis of concatenated ribosomal proteins combined with
clustering with phylum Chlamydiae (Glockner et al., 2004). At
least one genome-based analysis separates Chlamydiae as a deep
phylum (Huson et al., 2005), and the whole PVC superphylum
could conceivably also be as deep.

Some features of plantomycetes superﬁcially resemble those of
some archaea, e.g., cell walls dominated by protein. However, the
proteins comprising the cell walls of at least the planctomycete R.
baltica appear unique to Planctomycetes (with the distinctive YTV
signature; Hieu et al., 2008) rather than converging to the archaeal
S-layer glycoprotein structure. In anammox Planctomycetes ether-
linked lipids occur as in Archaeal membranes, but these occur

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 167 | 4

Fuerst and Sagulenko

Planctomycetes and evolution of cell complexity

within the unique ladderane lipids, not known elsewhere in nature
including the Archaea (Sinninghe Damste et al., 2004)

HOMOLOGS PREDICTABLE OR EXTRAPOLATABLE AT THE GENE LEVEL
BETWEEN PLANCTOMYCETES AND EUKARYOTES
Our present knowledge of genomes of Planctomycetes is not suf-
ﬁcient to assume absence of any homology at gene level between
Planctomycetes and eukaryotes. Such a conclusion would be pre-
mature considering the limited amount of analysis of plancto-
mycete genomes and the very large percentages of the deduced
proteome of Planctomycetes consisting of hypothetical proteins
relative to proteomes of other bacteria deduced using identical
algorithms (Table 1).

Such large proportions of divergent hypothetical proteins dif-
ﬁcult to relate to those of other organisms would be expected
if Planctomycetes retain many ancestral proteins. The homology
between planctomycete and eukaryote genes is in any case likely
to be only detectable at the secondary structure level, as seems the
case for many of the MC clathrin-like proteins of Planctomycetes
(Santarella-Mellwig et al., 2010). For example, gp4978 was orig-
inally annotated as a hypothetical protein GobsU_11075 of G.
obscuriglobus, before secondary structure analysis indicated pres-
ence of the combination of α-solenoid and β propeller domains
characteristic for coatomer proteins such as clathrin (Santarella-
Mellwig et al., 2010). However, an alignment of gp4978 with
clathrin heavy-chain from yeast in fact displays many identities
occurring in homologous positions of the primary amino acid
sequence (see Supplementary Figure S8 in Lonhienne et al., 2010).
Even α-solenoids or stacked pair α-helix (SPAH) structures as they

may also be sometimes termed, are difﬁcult to detect due to limits
of present structure determination methods (Field et al., 2011).
The homology may well be a very ancient one, much more so
than homologies detectable between genes of Eucarya and Archaea
for example. Perhaps it even goes back as far as the progenote
pre-Domain gene pool (Woese, 1998) or a eukaryote-like LUCA.
Even the apparent homologies between archaeal and eukaryal
genes detectable may be remnants of very ancient HGT events
or even vertical connections to a progenote pre-Domain with
resemblances to all three Domains, but presumably in this case not
enough of the original signal has been lost to eliminate detection
via simple Blast searches based on primary sequence similarity.

NEGLECTED SCENARIOS 1: COULD REDUCTION FROM A
EUKARYOTE-LIKE LAST UNIVERSAL COMMON ANCESTOR EXPLAIN
PLANCTOMYCETE COMPLEXITY?
Serious consideration should be given to the possibility that
complex features have been retained by Planctomycetes from
a eukaryote-like ancestor such as a eukaryote-like LUCA (i.e.,
that reductive evolution has occurred; Forterre and Gribaldo,
2010; Forterre, 2011). Such reductive evolution from an ances-
tor with complex cell structure may have resulted in retention
of some eukaryote-like features such as compartmentalization
and loss/modiﬁcation of others. The prediction can be made
that an ancient link between a proto-eukaryote and PVCs would
give rise to exactly the kind of remote sequence similarities and
difﬁculties in conﬁrming gene homologies which are found with
Planctomycetes.

Table 1 | Comparison of fraction of genes annotated with function prediction in planctomycete genomes relative to other recently sequenced
genomes1.

Strain

Phylum

Genome
size (bp)

Total
genes

Protein-
coding
genes

Genes with
function
prediction

Genes with
function
prediction
(% of total)

Planctomycetes
Planctomycetes
Planctomycetes
Proteobacteria

Pirellula staleyi (Clum et al., 2009)
Isosphaera pallida (Goker et al., 2011)
Planctomyces limnophilus (Labutti et al., 2010)
Rhizobium leguminosarum bv trifolii strain WSM2304 (Reeve et al.,
2010)
Pedobacter heparinus type strain (HIM 762-3T; Han et al., 2009)
Dyadobacter fermentans type strain (NS114T; Lang et al., 2009)
Gordonia bronchialis type strain (3410T; Ivanova et al., 2010a)
Stackebrandtia nassauensis type strain (LLR-40K-21T; Munk et al.,
2009)
Nakamurella multipartita type strain (Y-104T; Tice et al., 2010)
Actinobacteria
Geodermatophilus obscurus type strain (G-20T; Ivanova et al., 2010b) Actinobacteria
Thermomonospora curvata type strain (B9T; Chertkov et al., 2011)
Actinobacteria
Actinobacteria
Nocardiopsis dassonvillei (Sun et al., 2010)
Conexibacter woesei type strain (ID131577T; Pukall et al., 2010)
Actinobacteria

Bacteroidetes
Bacteroidetes
Actinobacteria
Actinobacteria

6,196,199
5,529,304
5,446,085
6,872,702

5,167,383
6,967,790
5,290,012
6,841,557

6,060,298
5,322,497
5,639,016
6,543,312
6,359,369

4,822
3,823
4,370
6,643

4,341
5,854
4,999
6,540

5,471
5,219
5,061
5,647
5,998

4,773
3,763
4,304
6,581

4,287
5,804
4,944
6,487

5,415
5,161
4,985
5,570
5,950

2,629
2,284
2,355
4,812

2,911
3,790
3,453
4,368

3,638
3,640
3,275
3,930
4,466

54.52
59.74
53.89
72.44

67.05
64.74
69,07
66.79

66.50
69.75
64.71
69.59
74.46

1The genomes are annotated using the same methods (e.g., PRODIGAL; Hyatt et al., 2010) followed by manual annotation via JGI GenePRIMP pipeline (Pati et al.,
2010), as described in the references cited in the footnote to this legend). In green color 70% or more genes function of which could be predicted; in blue – between
60 and 70%; in red – less than 60%. Note that all three planctomycete species have less than 60% genes with predicted function.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 167 | 5

Fuerst and Sagulenko

Planctomycetes and evolution of cell complexity

The concept of a compartmentalized last bacterial common
ancestor (LBCA) derived from the eukaryote-like LUCA has been
proposed partly on the basis of the shared compartmentaliza-
tion among the PVC superphylum phyla, and the occurrence of
eukaryote-like tubulins and MC proteins in that group (Forterre,
2011). If there were also a complex last archaeal common ancestor
(LACA), then we might expect evidence for compartmentalized
ancestors of Archaea. Such evidence has been found from phyloge-
nomics, the functionally complex membranes of Ignicoccus (Kuper
et al., 2010) and the ESCRT cell division and actin-homologous
proteins in some archaea (Ettema and Bernander, 2009; Yutin
et al., 2009; Makarova et al., 2010; Forterre, 2011). Combining
these concepts yields the conclusion of a eukaryote-like or proto-
eukaryote compartmentalized LUCA. Reductive evolution and
gene loss from such an organism may have proceeded more exten-
sively in most Bacteria and Archaea. However, LBCA and LACA as
well as some more lately evolved members of both domains may
have retained proto-eukaryote features. In Figure 2A, we have
illustrated such a complex “synkaryotic” (Forterre and Gribaldo,
2010) LUCA cell. This cell would have possessed an endomem-
brane system ER communicating with both PM and periplasm of
the cell and with the nuclear cisterna, and endocytosis via MC-
protein-associated vesicles infolded from the PM. Ribosomes are
illustrated both within a nuclear envelope-bounded nuclear region
and in other cytoplasm, in a similar manner to their distribution
in Gemmata. The controversial indication of at least some trans-
lation occurring within nuclei of even advanced eukaryote cells
(Iborra et al., 2001, 2004) could be a remnant of such an early dis-
tribution where transcription and translation remained coupled
to some extent.

The idea of such a compartmentalized LUCA implies that
organisms similar to PVC group compartmentalized cells might
be found among the deep-branching Archaea. The features of
the archaeon Ignicoccus hospitalis are consistent with features
of a comparmetalized Archaeal ancestor. The energized ATP
synthase-containing outermost membrane in Ignicoccus (Kuper
et al., 2010) implies that the inner membrane of that organism
may be equivalent to the ICM of PVC bacteria. A compartmen-
talized LBCA could even encompass a full peptidoglycan wall,
and could also possess some outer membrane synthesis genes.
An even more radical concept would propose that LUCA was a
progenote (Woese, 1990, p. 310) with a genome reﬂecting a stage
before “annealing” of the Domains (Woese, 1998, p. 313). This
progenote would possess some genes ancestral to and homolo-
gous with each Domain including those of Eucarya, making this
also a proto-eukaryote with the potential for compartmentaliza-
tion. This proto-eukaryote LUCA would have an endomembrane
system and endocytosis abilities as outlined below. This has the
advantage of explaining retention of both bacterial and eucaryal
features in the PVC group – they are effectively pre-Bacterial and
pre-Eucaryal characters (see Figure 2A) and the retention of com-
partmentalization. A compartmentalized LBCA or LUCA ancestor
to the LBCA could explain the occurrence of some properties
in members of the cyanobacteria such as internal membranes
unconnected in a clear way to the PM, and ribosomes bound to
internal membrane. In relation to how internal membranes in
cyanobacteria might be formed, it is of interest that the only clear

bacterial homolog of dynamin important in eukaryote endocytotic
vesicle formation via membrane bending is from cyanobacteria
(Lowe and Low, 2006). Perhaps in organisms where compartmen-
talization by internal membranes performed a useful function,
including the diverged phyla Planctomycetes and Cyanobacteria,
LBCA compartmentalization was retained, but in most Bacteria
complete reductive loss of internal membranes occurred.

NEGLECTED SCENARIOS 2: PLANCTOMYCETES AND SOME ARCHAEA
AS FOUNDARIES OR TOOL-KITS OF EUKARYALITY
Alternatively to a reductive scenario, the Planctomycetes as well as
some groups of archaea may have acted as the foundaries of early
eukaryote-homologous genes. They effectively and independently
assembled tool-kits ready to provide separately developed Eucarya
domain members (with 18S rRNA and 80S ribosomes) with the
elements needed for full eukaryality (e.g., endocytosis, cytoskele-
ton, nuclear envelope assembly nuclear transport), for example
via lateral gene transfer. So, Planctomycetes or a PVC ancestor
might donate endocytosis-like MC proteins, true tubulins, sterols
and nuclear envelope assembly, while archaea would donate actins,
the ESCRT system for advanced endocytotic late endosome func-
tion, and eukaryotic histones (Forterre, 2011). Supplementary ele-
ments (e.g., for spliceosome origins) could be supplied from virus
genomes. Advantages of this model are that compartmentalized
eukaryote ﬁrst eukaryotic common ancestor (FECA) or LECA evo-
lution could occur quite late after bacterial and archaeal domain
development, and yet a simple Eucarya ribosomal RNA-deﬁned
domain lineage could have developed very early.

Even cell compartmentalization as such could have been sup-
plied to an early eukaryote such as LECA or its ancestor (Figure 2B)
from a Gemmata-like cell. This would require a remodeling of
the paryphoplasm and ICM such that a more dispersed ER and
endomembrane system would be evolved in the proto-eukaryotic
ancestor, but this could also have happened via lateral transfer of
gene sets coding for compartment membranes.

RELEVANCE OF ENDOCYTOSIS TO THE NATURE OF LUCA AND
ENDOMEMBRANE EVOLUTION
To extend the idea of a complex LUCA in a radical way, there
seems no reason why endocytosis could not have been a relatively
primary form of heterotrophic nutrition in LUCA or a primordial
progenote. A protocoatomer capable of allowing the sort of protein
uptake we see in Gemmata could have evolved from duplication
of existing motifs to form an MC-like protein able to stabilize
endocytotic vesicles. This could have been selected for due to the
competitive advantage supplied by a powerful form of nutrition
for LUCA, which could by this means have utilized polypeptides
present abiotically in a complex primordial soup or released from
dead progenote cells. During reductive evolution perhaps follow-
ing a thermal crisis precipitating the annealing of the distinct
Domains, most Bacteria and Archaea could have lost this ability
and the associated membrane compartmentalization. This com-
partmentalization was retained along with MC homologs in the
PVC superphylum, while being modiﬁed for specialized metab-
olism in organisms like anammox planctomycete ammonium
oxidizers and the photosynthetic cyanobacteria. Alternatively, in
a eukaryotes-late scenario, planctomycete ancestors could have

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 167 | 6

Fuerst and Sagulenko

Planctomycetes and evolution of cell complexity

FIGURE 2 | Possible scenarios for evolution of Gemmata obscuriglobus.
(A) The planctomycete cell plan originates via reductive evolution from a
proto-eukaryote, either a eukaryote-like LUCA ancestor of the three domains
itself or a later precursor to the last eukaryotic common ancestor (LECA). This
proto-eukaryote lineage has evolved endocytotic protein uptake via PM
vesicle budding as its main form of nutrition (following protocoatomer
evolution) and this has allowed bound ribosomes initially on a PM to become
attached to internal ER-like membranes and a nuclear compartment. The
proto-eukaryote has a simpliﬁed mitochondrion-less (“archaezoan”) eukaryote
cell plan where ER endomembrane is continuous with PM (dotted box),
endocytotic vesicles bud from PM, and ribosomes are bound only to
endomembranes, including inner and outer nuclear envelope membranes
(unlike modern eukaryotes); translation is not compartmented, and there may
be no introns or pre-mRNA splicesosomal processing. In a second stage of
differentiation (1), the cell plan ﬁrst becomes simpliﬁed such that ER
membrane becomes separated from PM (red dotted lines), ER vescicles fuse
(black dotted lines), and endocytotic vesicle formation occurs in the now

specialized ER-like paryphoplasm compartment. This results in increased
endocytosis efﬁciency via macromolecular crowding in a conﬁned
compartment. Finally a Gemmata-like cell evolves capable of endocytosis by
PM infolding into the paryphoplasm compartment which can be specialized
for endocytotic nutrient acquisition and expansion of lysosome-like nutrient
degradation in low osmolarity, high turgor pressure habitats. The nucleus
preserves the eukaryote-like advantages of macromolecular crowding,
replication and transcription factories and efﬁcient chromosomal segregation
without DNA-plasma membrane contact. Note that topologically equivalent
compartments or cell components appear in the same color in different
stages and scenarios – ER and paryphoplasm (yellow), ribosome-containing
cytoplasm (blue), chromosomal DNA (black) and cell wall (purple). CW, cell
wall; PM, plasma membrane; ICM, intracytoplasmic membrane; P,
paryphoplasm. (B) In this second scenario a eukaryotic cell plan originates
from the cell plan of a complex Gemmata obscuriglobus-like planctomycete
bacterium (an ancestor of modern Gemmata) possessing a nuclear envelope,

(Continued)

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 167 | 7

Fuerst and Sagulenko

Planctomycetes and evolution of cell complexity

FIGURE 2 | Continued
endocytosis and endocytotic vesicles in the paryphoplasm (yellow) and a cell
wall, an organism capable of protein uptake and thus with a competitive novel
nutrition relative to other bacteria. This ancestral form passes through a stage
of differentiation (1) where aspects of planctomycete cell plan are
conserved – such as ribosomes inside and outside of the nucleus and
accompanying incomplete compartmentation of translation – but there are
signiﬁcant changes to membrane–bounded ER-like compartments such that,
starting with paryphoplasm, separate compartments are walled off (forming
some isolated vesicles that disperse – indicated by dotted lines), making
possible greater RER surface for protein synthesis and complex processing of
proteins through differentiated compartments. Vesicle transport is now used
for wall protein addition and PM is generated via exocytotic vesicle transport
from ER; ﬁnally in the mitochondrion-less LECA cell, endomembrane is

differentiated such that some form of Golgi apparatus (similar to the simple
form in Giardia) allows protein processing via trafﬁcking. Translation is now
predominantly in the cytoplasm outside the nucleus, allowing splicesosomal
pre-mRNA splicing in the separate nuclear compartment. A stage after this
would involve a loss of the cell wall correlated with development of
phagocytosis. Cell wall loss via mutation in an endocytosis-capable ancestral
eukaryote would lead to selection for phagocytic ability and a new form of
nutrition via particle (particulate organic matter, POM) acquisition – e.g., dead
bacterial cells and degradation products – and later, predation of other cells in
a microbial community. ER and paryphoplasm (yellow), ribosome-containing
cytoplasm (blue), chromosomal DNA (black), and cell wall (purple). CW, cell
wall; CM, cytoplasmic membrane; G. Golgi apparatus; ICM, intracytoplasmic
membrane; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; ERM, endoplasmic reticulum
membrane; P, paryphoplasm.

invented simple endocytosis and associated necessary proteins and
supplied FECA or LECA with this machinery by lateral transfer.

Occurrence of endocytosis and endocytotic components in this
planctomycete species is completely consistent with recent analy-
ses showing that the endomembrane system of eukaryotes evolved
before LECA. All major vesicle coats and organelles associated
with these coats appear from phylogenetic analysis to have evolved
before LECA, even though some endocytosis proteins may have
evolved later (Dacks and Field, 2007; Dacks et al., 2008, 2009).
Mitochondria do not appear to have underpinned the origin and
expansion of the endomembrane system and endocytosis- related
gene families of eukaryotes.

Planctomycete wall structure and budding reproduction are an
indication of their distinctiveness relative to other Bacteria, and
these do not seem likely to be homologous with eukaryote charac-
ters without further molecular evidence. However, such features
may prove to be relevant to possible evolutionary pathways to
or from eukaryotes, e.g., loss of peptidoglycan and new sets of
cell division proteins (Bernander and Ettema, 2010), new types of
membrane reorganization during division (Lee et al., 2009a), and
even the prediction of a wall-less phagocytic planctomycete sim-
ilar to forms postulated in some early models for eukaryogenesis
(Cavalier-Smith, 1981).

CONCLUSION
The problem of eukaryote origins and the nature of LUCA is too
signiﬁcant to superﬁcially dismiss the relevance of Planctomycetes
on the basis of anything less than the clearest understanding of
available data on their structure and function. This includes mol-
ecular level interpretation of protein structure, as in the recent
controversy regarding MC proteins (McInerney et al., 2011; Devos,
2012). We may not have sufﬁcient evidence concerning molecu-
lar homologies of planctomycete genes with those of eukaryotes
to exclude analogy and convergent evolution of similar structures
and functions, but we also have insufﬁcient evidence to exclude
homology, especially since models for eukaryote evolution includ-
ing eukaryote-like common ancestry need to be considered in
judging such homology.

Analogy is inherently difﬁcult to test and ambiguous concep-
tually. It implies (1) similarity of structure without an explanation
of common ancestry and thus selection for similar function in
absence of similar genes (convergence) or (2) constraint to develop
similar structure and function due to common gene ancestry

(parallelism). The latter case is very difﬁcult to distinguish from
homology (Gould, 2002). To reject homology in favor of analogy
one needs very clear alternative models for how similar structures
might arise from different gene lineages. In this case, one needs
to explain how endomembranes and endocytosis correlated with
clathrin-like proteins can evolve in a cell lineage with no ancestral
tree or net connections to Eucarya. In the absence of such models
analogy as an explanation for the remarkable eukaryote features
of Planctomycetes remains unconvincing. Parallelism and homol-
ogy understood in classical macrobiologically derived senses both
imply homologous genes, the central issue for argument here and
for future tests.

The questions arising regarding planctomycete relevance to
eukaryote evolution and planctomycete homology with eukary-
otes will rely for their answers on experimental data concerning
actual abilities of Planctomycetes as well as on genomics and
in silico analysis. The key to the evolutionary signiﬁcance of Planc-
tomycetes is to be found in a “top-down” approach starting with
cell biology phenomena and structures such as endocytosis and
the membrane-bounded nuclear body of Gemmata, proteomics
of organelles and membranes, as well as in silico evidence. Con-
sidering the large proportion of hypothetical proteins in planc-
tomycete proteomes, a “bottom-up” approach starting with the
genome and deduced proteome alone would be likely to end in
an impasse. Interactive feedback between top-down and bottom-
up approaches will instead be needed, combined with an absence
of too ﬁrm an adherence to existing dogma relating to eukary-
ote and Domain evolution. The discovery of endocytotic protein
uptake in G. obscuriglobus is a good example of that approach,
and there will most probably be other important examples. Such
experimental data concerning Planctomycetes and their relatives
must be taken into account in formulating and evaluating future
hypotheses concerning origins and evolution of eukaryote cell
organization. All the consequences of assuming homology of the
planctomycete Gemmata to eukaryotes in structure and function
make testable experimental predictions, especially after genetic
systems for Planctomycetes are developed (Jogler et al., 2011),
regardless of detectable sequence similarity of proposed homologs.
Assumption of only analogy with eukaryote endocytosis is on the
other hand unproductive concerning experimental predictions.

Attempted rejections of the hypothesis of homology of planc-
tomycete features with those of eukaryotes requires more than
alternative scenarios of eukaryote origins involving the less and

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 167 | 8

Fuerst and Sagulenko

Planctomycetes and evolution of cell complexity

less tenable (Poole and Penny, 2007; Forterre, 2011) fusion of
Bacteria and Archaea domains. The concept of shared ancestry
between eukaryotes and PVC group members is a key one for test-
ing the hypothesis of homology. To test only the hypothesis of
Planctomycetes as intermediates in a linear progression to eukary-
otes is to ignore forms of homology which may lead to deeper
understanding of the meaning of Planctomycetes for cell orga-
nization evolution. If we can clear the intellectual air to allow
more illuminating evolutionary models, we may be able to see so
well we can even make out the landscape of the mythical land of
LUCA itself.

GLOSSARY
Anammox: anaerobic ammonium oxidation; a process whereby
ammonium is oxidized to N2 with nitrite as electron acceptor,
performed by some autotrophic Planctomycetes such as“Candida-
tus Brocadia anammoxidans” and “Candidatus Kuenenia stuttgar-
tiensis.” Anammox Planctomycetes contain a special anammox-
osome organelle bounded by a single membrane separating this
ribosome-free organelle from the ribosome-rich pirellulosome in
which it is contained.

Domains: in context other than referral to protein structural
and folding domains, the three Domains of life, Bacteria, Archaea,
and Eucarya, as originally deﬁned on the basis of ribosomal RNA
sequence analysis, but since largely conﬁrmed via genome analysis
(Woese et al., 1990).

FECA: the ﬁrst eukaryotic common ancestor, the ﬁrst type of
cell on the stem lineage leading to the last ancestor shared by all
extant eukaryotes – this organism may have existed quite early in
evolution of the Domains, and some characteristics of FECA may
have been lost by the time LECA evolved. If Eucarya is the root
Domain, then LUCA may have been equivalent to FECA.

ICM: intracytoplasmic membrane of Planctomycetes; a single
membrane surrounding the major pirellulosome compartment
with ribosomes and nucleoid in Planctomycetes – it separates
the outer ribosome-free paryphoplasm region from the inner
ribosome-rich pirellulosome region of cytoplasm.

Ladderane: a type of lipid unique to anammox Plancto-
mycetes containing a ladder-like arrangement of up to ﬁve fused
cyclobutane rings in a linearly concatenated chain.

LACA: last archaeal common ancestor.
LBCA: last bacterial common ancestor.
LECA: last eukaryotic common ancestor – the last ancestor

shared by all branches of the domain Eucarya.

LGT: lateral gene transfer; such transfer of course accompanies
any endosymbiotic acquisition or engulfment of one type of cell by

another, but could also occur via other less extensive mechanisms,
e.g., virus infection. Care is needed in interpreting genome data
to invoke LGT where it is not the only explanation for apparently
mixed gene origins (Kurland et al., 2003).

LUCA: last universal common ancestor of all three domains of

life.

MC protein: membrane-coating protein, a type of protein
with characteristic domains such as alpha-solenoids and/or beta-
propellors, and consistent with formation of regions of membrane
curvature; such proteins encompass diverse proteins such as those
homologous with clathrins associated with receptor-mediated
endocytosis in eukaryotes, COPI, COPII, and some nuclear pore
proteins of eukaryotes. Within Bacteria only limited species con-
tain homologs of MC proteins, including many members of the
PVC superphylum (Devos et al., 2004; Devos, 2012)

Nuclear body: a membrane-bounded organelle of the plancto-
mycete G. obscuriglobus in which all the DNA of the cell is bound
by an envelope of two closely apposed membranes.

Nucleoid: the region of the bacterial cell that contains the
genomic DNA, usually seen in thin sections as a ﬁbrillar region;
in electron micrographs of cryosubstituted Escherichia coli cell
sections, the nucleoid seems to occupy much of the cell, whereas
it forms a highly condensed ﬁbrillar structure in Planctomycetes.
Paryphoplasm: a region of the cytoplasm of the planctomycete
cell between the cytoplasmic membrane and the ICM that contains
no detectable ribosome-like particles but appears to contain RNA.
Pirellulosome: a region of planctomycete cell cytoplasm bound
by the ICM that contains the ﬁbrillar nucleoid and all the DNA of
the cell.

Progenote: an early type of “organism” consisting of a commu-
nity of cells rather than a single organismal lineage, occurring
before separation of the three Domains of life, where exten-
sive lateral gene transfer in a gene pool is postulated to have
occurred, before “annealing” of genomes into Domain character-
istics (Woese, 1990, 1998).

PVC: a superphylum consisting of the Bacteria phyla Planc-
tomycetes, Verrucomicrobia, and Chlamydia (Wagner and Horn,
2006), as well as phyla such as the uncultured marine sponge
species in phylum Poribacteria, the marine phylum Lentisphaerae,
and several other phyla such as the uncultured OP3 phylum with its
original member from a hot spring Obsidian Pool at Yellowstone
National Park (Glockner et al., 2010).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the Australian Research Council for support of Plancto-
mycete research in John A. Fuerst’s laboratory.

REFERENCES
Abodeely, M., Dubois, K. N., Hehl,
A., Stefanic, S., Sajid, M., Des-
ouza, W., Attias, M., Engel, J. C.,
Hsieh, I., Fetter, R. D., and Mck-
errow, J. H. (2009). A contiguous
compartment
functions as endo-
plasmic reticulum and endosome/
lam-
lysosome
blia.
8,
1665–1676.

Eukaryotic

Giardia

Cell

in

Bernander, R., and Ettema, T.

(2010). FtsZ-less

G.
sion in archaea
Curr.
747–752.

Opin. Microbiol.

J.
cell divi-
and bacteria.
13,

Bibi, E., and Herskovits, A. A. (2000).
Association of Escherichia coli ribo-
somes with the inner membrane
requires the signal recognition par-
ticle receptor but is independent
of the signal recognition particle.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97,
4621–4626.
Brochier, C.,

and

Phylogeny:

(2002).
hyperthermophilic
bacteria. Nature 417, 244.

Philippe, H.
non-
for

ancestor

a

Cavalier-Smith, T. (1981). “The origin
and early evolution of the eukary-
otic cell,” in Molecular and Cellu-
lar Aspects of Microbial Evolution, 32
Edn, eds M. J. Carlile, J. F. Collins,

Cavalier-Smith, T.

and B. E. B. Mosley (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press), 33–84.
(2009). Preda-
tion and eukaryote cell origins:
coevolutionary
a
perspective.
Int.
J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 41,
307–322.

Cavalier-Smith, T. (2010). Origin of the
cell nucleus, mitosis and sex: roles
of
intracellular coevolution. Biol.
Direct 5, 7.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 167 | 9

Fuerst and Sagulenko

Planctomycetes and evolution of cell complexity

Chertkov, O., Sikorski, J., Nolan, M.,
Lapidus, A., Lucas, S., Del Rio, T.
G., Tice, H., Cheng, J. F., Goodwin,
L., Pitluck, S., Liolios, K., Ivanova,
N., Mavromatis, K., Mikhailova, N.,
Ovchinnikova, G., Pati, A., Chen, A.,
Palaniappan, K., Djao, O. D., Land,
M., Hauser, L., Chang, Y. J., Jeffries,
C. D., Brettin, T., Han, C., Detter, J.
C., Rohde, M., Goker, M., Woyke, T.,
Bristow, J., Eisen, J. A., Markowitz,
V., Hugenholtz, P., Klenk, H. P., and
Kyrpides, N. C. (2011). Complete
genome sequence of Thermomono-
spora curvata type strain (B9). Stand.
Genomic Sci. 4, 13–22.

Chistoserdova, L., Jenkins, C., Kalyuzh-
naya, M. G., Marx, C. J., Lapidus, A.,
Vorholt, J. A., Staley, J. T., and Lid-
strom, M. E. (2004). The enigmatic
Planctomycetes may hold a key to
the origins of methanogenesis and
methylotrophy. Mol. Biol. Evol. 21,
1234–1241.

Clum, A., Tindall, B.

J., Sikorski,
J., Ivanova, N., Mavrommatis, K.,
Lucas, S., Glavina, T., Del, R.,
Nolan, M., Chen, F., Tice, H.,
Pitluck, S., Cheng, J. F., Chertkov,
O., Brettin, T., Han, C., Detter, J.
C., Kuske, C., Bruce, D., Good-
win, L., Ovchinikova, G., Pati, A.,
Mikhailova, N., Chen, A., Palaniap-
pan, K., Land, M., Hauser, L., Chang,
Y. J., Jeffries, C. D., Chain, P., Rohde,
M., Goker, M., Bristow, J., Eisen,
J. A., Markowitz, V., Hugenholtz,
P., Kyrpides, N. C., Klenk, H. P.,
and Lapidus, A. (2009). Complete
genome sequence of Pirellula staleyi
type strain (ATCC 27377). Stand.
Genomic Sci. 1, 308–316.

Conibear, E. (2010). Converging views
of endocytosis in yeast and mam-
mals. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 22,
513–518.

Dacks,

J. B.,

and Field, M. C.
(2007). Evolution of the eukaryotic
membrane-trafﬁcking system: ori-
gin, tempo and mode. J. Cell. Sci.
120, 2977–2985.

Dacks, J. B., Peden, A. A., and Field, M.
C. (2009). Evolution of speciﬁcity in
the eukaryotic endomembrane sys-
tem. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 41,
330–340.

(2008).

Phylogeny

components

Dacks, J. B., Poon, P. P., and Field,
of
M. C.
endocytic
yields
insight into the process of nonen-
dosymbiotic organelle
evolution.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
588–593.

Paumet,

Delevoye, C., Nilges, M., Dehoux,
S.,
P.,
Subtil,
Dautry-Varsat, A.,
A. (2008). SNARE protein mimicry
by
bacterium.

Perrinet,
and

an intracellular

F.,

Pathog.

PLoS
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000022

e1000022.

4,

Devos, D., Dokudovskaya, S., Alber, F.,
Williams, R., Chait, B. T., Sali, A.,
and Rout, M. P. (2004). Components
of coated vesicles and nuclear pore
complexes share a common molec-
ular architecture. PLoS Biol. 2, e380.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0020380

Devos, D. P. (2012). Regarding the pres-
ence of membrane coat proteins in
bacteria: confusion? What confu-
sion? Bioessays 34, 38–39.

Devos, D. P., and Reynaud, E. G. (2010).
Evolution. Intermediate steps. Sci-
ence 330, 1187–1188.

Ettema, T. J., and Bernander, R. (2009).
Cell division and the ESCRT com-
plex: asurprise from the archaea.
Commun. Integr. Biol. 2, 86–88.

Field, M. C., and Dacks, J. B. (2009).
First and last ancestors: reconstruct-
ing evolution of the endomembrane
system with ESCRTs, vesicle coat
proteins, and nuclear pore com-
plexes. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 21,
4–13.

Field, M. C., Sali, A., and Rout, M. P.
(2011). On a bender-BARs, ESCRTs,
COPs, and ﬁnally getting your coat.
J. Cell Biol. 193, 963–972.

Forterre, P.

(2011). A new fusion
hypothesis for the origin of eukarya:
better than previous ones, but prob-
ably also wrong. Res. Microbiol. 162,
77–91.

Forterre, P., and Gribaldo, S. (2010).
Bacteria with a eukaryotic touch:
a glimpse of ancient evolution?
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
12739–12740.

Frickey, T., and Kannenberg, E. (2009).
Phylogenetic analysis of the triter-
pene
cyclase protein family in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes suggests
bidirectional
lateral gene transfer.
Environ. Microbiol. 11, 1224–1241.

Fuerst, J. A. (2005). Intracellular com-
partmentation in Planctomycetes.
Annu. Rev. Microbiol.59, 299–328.

Fuerst, J. A., Jenkins, C., and Kedar,
V. (2002). Gene discovery within
the planctomycete division of the
domain bacteria using sequence
tags from genomic DNA libraries.
Genome Biol.
research0031–
research0031.11.

3,

Fuerst,

J. A.,

and Sagulenko, E.
(2010). Protein uptake by bac-
teria: an endocytosis-like process
in the planctomycete Gemmata
obscuriglobus. Commun. Integr. Biol.
3, 572–575.

Fuerst, J. A., and Sagulenko, E. (2011).
Beyond the bacterium: Plancto-
mycetes challenge our concepts of
microbial structure and function.
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 9, 403–413.

Glockner, F. O., Kube, M., Bauer,
M., Teeling, H., Lombardot, T.,
Ludwig, W., Gade, D., Beck, A.,
Borzym, K., Heitmann, K., Rabus,
R., Schlesner, H., Amann, R., and
(2003). Complete
Reinhardt, R.
genome sequence of
the marine
planctomycete Pirellula sp. strain 1.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100,
8298–8303.

Glockner, F. O., Teeling, H., Lombar-
dot, T., Bauer, M., and Ludwig,
W. (2004). Evaluation of the phy-
logenetic position of the plancto-
mycete ‘Rhodopirellula baltica’ SH 1
by means of concatenated ribosomal
protein sequences, DNA-directed
RNA polymerase subunit sequences
and whole genome trees. Int. J. Syst.
Evol. Microbiol. 54, 791–801.

Glockner, J., Kube, M., Shrestha, P. M.,
Weber, M., Glockner, F. O., Rein-
hardt, R., and Liesack, W. (2010).
Phylogenetic diversity and metage-
nomics of candidate division OP3.
Environ. Microbiol. 12, 1218–1229.

Goker, M., Cleland, D., Saunders, E.,
Lapidus, A., Nolan, M., Lucas, S.,
Hammon, N., Deshpande, S., Cheng,
J. F., Tapia, R., Han, C., Goodwin,
L., Pitluck, S., Liolios, K., Pagani, I.,
Ivanova, N., Mavromatis, K., Pati, A.,
Chen, A., Palaniappan, K., Land, M.,
Hauser, L., Chang, Y. J., Jeffries, C.
D., Detter, J. C., Beck, B., Woyke, T.,
Bristow, J., Eisen, J. A., Markowitz,
V., Hugenholtz, P., Kyrpides, N. C.,
and Klenk, H. P. (2011). Com-
plete genome sequence of Isosphaera
pallida type strain (IS1B). Stand.
Genomic Sci. 4, 63–71.

Gould, S. J. (2002). The Structure of Evo-
lutionary Theory. Cambridge, MA:
The Belknap Press of Harvard Uni-
versity Press.

Han, C., Spring, S., Lapidus, A., Del
Rio, T. G., Tice, H., Copeland, A.,
Cheng, J. F., Lucas, S., Chen, F.,
Nolan, M., Bruce, D., Goodwin, L.,
Pitluck, S., Ivanova, N., Mavromatis,
K., Mikhailova, N., Pati, A., Chen, A.,
Palaniappan, K., Land, M., Hauser,
L., Chang, Y. J., Jeffries, C. C., Saun-
ders, E., Chertkov, O., Brettin, T.,
Goker, M., Rohde, M., Bristow, J.,
Eisen, J. A., Markowitz, V., Hugen-
holtz, P., Kyrpides, N. C., Klenk, H.
P., and Detter, J. C. (2009). Com-
plete genome sequence of Pedobacter
heparinus type strain (HIM 762-3).
Stand. Genomic Sci. 1, 54–62.

Hieu, C. X., Voigt, B., Albrecht, D.,
Becher, D., Lombardot, T., Glockner,
F. O., Amann, R., Hecker, M., and
Schweder, T. (2008). Detailed pro-
teome analysis of growing cells of the
planctomycete Rhodopirellula baltica
SH1T. Proteomics 8, 1608–1623.

Huson, D. H., Henz, S. R., Auch, A. F.,
Nieselt-Struwe, K., and Schuster, S.
C. (2005). Whole-genome prokary-
otic phylogeny. Bioinformatics 21,
2329–2335.

Hyatt, D., Chen, G. L., Locascio, P.
F., Land, M. L., Larimer, F. W.,
and Hauser, L. J. (2010). Prodigal:
prokaryotic gene recognition and
translation initiation site identiﬁca-
tion. BMC Bioinformatics 11, 119.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-11-119

Iborra, F. J., Jackson, D. A., and Cook,
P. R. (2001). Coupled transcrip-
tion and translation within nuclei
of mammalian cells. Science 293,
1139–1142.

Iborra, F. J., Jackson, D. A., and Cook, P.
R. (2004). The case for nuclear trans-
lation. J. Cell. Sci. 117, 5713–5720.

Ivanova, N., Sikorski, J., Jando, M.,
Lapidus, A., Nolan, M., Lucas, S.,
Del Rio, T. G., Tice, H., Copeland,
A., Cheng, J. F., Chen, F., Bruce,
D., Goodwin, L., Pitluck, S., Mavro-
matis, K., Ovchinnikova, G., Pati,
A., Chen, A., Palaniappan, K., Land,
M., Hauser, L., Chang, Y. J., Jef-
fries, C. D., Chain, P., Saunders, E.,
Han, C., Detter, J. C., Brettin, T.,
Rohde, M., Goker, M., Bristow, J.,
Eisen, J. A., Markowitz, V., Hugen-
holtz, P., Klenk, H. P., and Kyrpides,
N. C. (2010a). Complete genome
sequence of Gordonia bronchialis
type strain (3410). Stand. Genomic
Sci. 2, 19–28.

J.,

Ivanova, N., Sikorski, J., Jando, M.,
Munk, C., Lapidus, A., Glavina
Del Rio, T., Copeland, A., Tice,
H., Cheng, J. F., Lucas, S., Chen,
F., Nolan, M., Bruce, D., Good-
win, L., Pitluck, S., Mavromatis, K.,
Mikhailova, N., Pati, A., Chen, A.,
Palaniappan, K., Land, M., Hauser,
L., Chang, Y.
Jeffries, C. D.,
Meincke, L., Brettin, T., Detter, J.
C., Rohde, M., Goker, M., Bris-
tow, J., Eisen, J. A., Markowitz, V.,
Hugenholtz, P., Kyrpides, N. C.,
and Klenk, H. P. (2010b). Com-
plete genome sequence of Geoder-
matophilus obscurus type strain (G-
20). Stand. Genomic Sci. 2, 158–167.
Jogler, C., Glockner, F. O., and Kolter, R.
(2011). Characterization of Plancto-
myces limnophilus and development
of genetic tools for its manipulation
establish it as a model species for
the phylum Planctomycetes. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 77, 5826–5829.

Johnson, S., Michalak, M., Opas, M., and
Eggleton, P. (2001). The ins and outs
of calreticulin: from the ER lumen
to the extracellular space. Trends Cell
Biol. 11, 122–129.

Jun, S. R., Sims, G. E., Wu, G. A., and
Kim, S. H. (2010). Whole-proteome

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 167 | 10

Fuerst and Sagulenko

Planctomycetes and evolution of cell complexity

phylogeny of prokaryotes by feature
frequency proﬁles: Aa alignment-
free method with optimal feature
resolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 107, 133–138.

Kamneva, O. K., Liberles, D. A.,
and Ward, N. L. (2010). Genome-
wide inﬂuence of
indel substitu-
tions on evolution of bacteria of the
PVC superphylum, revealed using
a novel
computational method.
Genome Biol. Evol. 2, 870–886.

Klis, F. M., Boorsma, A., and De Groot,
P. W. J. (2006). Cell wall construction
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 23,
185–202.

Komeili, A., Li, Z., Newman, D. K.,
and Jensen, G. J. (2006). Magneto-
somes are cell membrane invagina-
tions organized by the actin-like pro-
tein MamK. Science 311, 242–245.

Structural

Konorty, M., Kahana, N., Linaroudis,
A., Minsky, A., and Medalia, O.
(2008).
of
analysis
photosynthetic membranes
by
cryo-electron tomography of intact
Rhodopseudomonas viridis cells. J.
Struct. Biol. 161, 393–400.

Koonin, E. V. (2010). The origin and
early evolution of eukaryotes in
the light of phylogenomics. Genome
Biol. 11, 209.

Kuper, U., Meyer, C., Muller, V., Rachel,
R., and Huber, H. (2010). Energized
outer membrane and spatial separa-
tion of metabolic processes in the
hyperthermophilic Archaeon Ignic-
occus hospitalis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 107, 3152–3156.

Kurland, C. G., Canback, B., and Berg,
O. G. (2003). Horizontal gene trans-
fer: a critical view. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 100, 9658–9662.

Labutti, K., Sikorski, J., Schneider, S.,
Nolan, M., Lucas, S., Glavina Del Rio,
T., Tice, H., Cheng, J. F., Goodwin,
L., Pitluck, S., Liolios, K., Ivanova,
N., Mavromatis, K., Mikhailova, N.,
Pati, A., Chen, A., Palaniappan, K.,
Land, M., Hauser, L., Chang, Y. J.,
Jeffries, C. D., Tindall, B. J., Rohde,
M., Goker, M., Woyke, T., Bristow, J.,
Eisen, J. A., Markowitz, V., Hugen-
holtz, P., Kyrpides, N. C., Klenk, H.
P., and Lapidus, A. (2010). Com-
plete genome sequence of Plancto-
myces limnophilus type strain (Mu
290). Stand. Genomic Sci. 3, 47–56.

Lanfredi-Rangel, A., Attias, M., De Car-
valho, T. M., Kattenbach, W. M., and
De Souza, W. (1998). The peripheral
vesicles of trophozoites of the prim-
itive protozoan Giardia lamblia may
correspond to early and late endo-
somes and to lysosomes. J. Struct.
Biol. 123, 225–235.

Lang, E., Lapidus, A., Chertkov, O.,
Brettin, T., Detter, J. C., Han, C.,

J.,

Copeland, A., Glavina Del Rio, T.,
Nolan, M., Chen, F., Lucas, S., Tice,
H., Cheng, J. F., Land, M., Hauser,
L., Chang, Y.
Jeffries, C. D.,
Kopitz, M., Bruce, D., Goodwin, L.,
Pitluck, S., Ovchinnikova, G., Pati,
A., Ivanova, N., Mavrommatis, K.,
Chen, A., Palaniappan, K., Chain, P.,
Bristow, J., Eisen, J. A., Markowitz,
V., Hugenholtz, P., Goker, M., Rohde,
M., Kyrpides, N. C., and Klenk,
H. P. (2009). Complete genome
sequence of Dyadobacter fermentans
type strain (NS114). Stand. Genomic
Sci. 1, 133–140.

Leary, B. A., Ward-Rainey, N., and
Hoover, T. R. (1998). Cloning and
characterization of Planctomyces
limnophilus
rpoN: complementa-
tion of a Salmonella typhimurium
rpoN mutant
strain. Gene 221,
151–157.

Lee, K. C., Webb, R. I., and Fuerst, J. A.
(2009a). The cell cycle of the planc-
tomycete Gemmata obscuriglobus
with respect to cell compartmen-
talization. BMC Cell Biol. 10, 4.
doi:10.1186/1471-2121-10-4

Lee, K. C., Webb, R. I., Janssen, P. H.,
Sangwan, P., Romeo, T., Staley, J.
T., and Fuerst, J. A. (2009b). Phy-
lum Verrucomicrobia representa-
tives share a compartmentalized cell
plan with members of bacterial phy-
lum Planctomycetes. BMC Micro-
biol. 9, 5. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-9-5
Liberton, M., Howard Berg, R., Heuser,
J., Roth, R., and Pakrasi, H. B. (2006).
Ultrastructure of the membrane sys-
tems in the unicellular cyanobac-
terium Synechocystis sp. strain PCC
6803. Protoplasma 227, 129–138.

Liesack, W., and Stackebrandt, E.
(1989). Evidence
for unlinked
rrn operons in the planctomycete
Pirellula marina. J. Bacteriol. 171,
5025–5030.

Lindas, A. C., Karlsson, E. A., Lindgren,
M. T., Ettema, T. J., and Bernan-
der, R. (2008). A unique cell division
machinery in the Archaea. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 18942–18946.
Lindsay, M. R., Webb, R. I., Strous,
M., Jetten, M. S., Butler, M. K.,
Forde, R.
J. A.
(2001). Cell compartmentalisation
in Planctomycetes: novel types of
structural organisation for the bac-
terial cell. Arch. Microbiol. 175,
413–429.

J., and Fuerst,

Lonhienne, T. G., Sagulenko, E., Webb,
R. I., Lee, K. C., Franke, J., Devos, D.
P., Nouwens, A., Carroll, B. J., and
Fuerst, J. A. (2010). Endocytosis-like
protein uptake in the bacterium
Gemmata
Proc.
Natl. Acad.
107,
12883–12888.

obscuriglobus.

Sci. U.S.A.

Lowe, J., and Low, H. H. (2006). A bac-
terial dynamin-like protein. Nature
444, 766–769.

Makarova, K. S., Yutin, N., Bell, S. D.,
and Koonin, E. V. (2010). Evolution
of diverse cell division and vesicle
formation systems in archaea. Nat.
Rev. Microbiol. 8, 731–741.

Marti, M., Regos, A., Li, Y., Schraner, E.
M., Wild, P., Muller, N., Knopf, L. G.,
and Hehl, A. B. (2003). An ancestral
secretory apparatus in the protozoan
parasite Giardia intestinalis. J. Biol.
Chem. 278, 24837–24848.

Martin-Galiano, A. J., Oliva, M. A.,
Sanz, L., Bhattacharyya, A., Serna,
M., Yebenes, H., Valpuesta, J. M.,
and Andreu, J. M. (2011). Bacter-
ial tubulin distinct loop sequences
and primitive assembly properties
support its origin from a eukaryotic
tubulin ancestor. J.Biol. Chem. 286,
19789–19803.

McInerney, J. O., Martin, W. F., Koonin,
E. V., Allen, J. F., Galperin, M. Y.,
Lane, N., Archibald, J. M., and Emb-
ley, T. M. (2011). Planctomycetes
and eukaryotes: a case of analogy not
homology. Bioessays 33, 810–817.

Medema, M. H., Zhou, M., Van Hijum,
S. A., Gloerich, J., Wessels, H. J.,
Siezen, R. J., and Strous, M. (2010). A
predicted physicochemically distinct
sub-proteome associated with the
intracellular organelle of the anam-
mox bacterium Kuenenia stuttgar-
tiensis. BMC Genomics 11, 299.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-11-299

Meusser, B., Hirsch, C., Jarosch, E., and
Sommer, T. (2005). ERAD: the long
road to destruction. Nat. Cell Biol. 7,
766–772.

Munk, C., Lapidus, A., Copeland, A.,
Jando, M., Mayilraj, S., Glavina Del
Rio, T., Nolan, M., Chen, F., Lucas,
S., Tice, H., Cheng, J. F., Han, C.,
Detter, J. C., Bruce, D., Goodwin,
L., Chain, P., Pitluck, S., Goker, M.,
Ovchinikova, G., Pati, A., Ivanova,
N., Mavromatis, K., Chen, A., Pala-
niappan, K., Land, M., Hauser, L.,
Chang, Y. J., Jeffries, C. D., Bris-
tow, J., Eisen, J. A., Markowitz, V.,
Hugenholtz, P., Kyrpides, N. C.,
and Klenk, H. P. (2009). Complete
genome sequence of Stackebrandtia
nassauensis type strain (LLR-40K-
21). Stand. Genomic Sci. 1, 234–241.
Nevo, R., Charuvi, D., Shimoni, E.,
Schwarz, R., Kaplan, A., Ohad, I.,
and Reich, Z. (2007). Thylakoid
membrane perforations and con-
nectivity enable intracellular traf-
ﬁc in cyanobacteria. EMBO J. 26,
1467–1473.

Pallen, M. J., Snyder, L. a. S., Lornan,
N. J., and Futterer, K. (2009). Bacte-
rial ﬂagellar diversity and evolution:

seek simplicity and distrust it? Trends
Microbiol. 17, 1–5.

Pati, A., Ivanova, N. N., Mikhailova,
N., Ovchinnikova, G., Hooper, S.
D., Lykidis, A., and Kyrpides, N. C.
(2010). GenePRIMP: a gene pre-
diction improvement pipeline for
prokaryotic genomes. Nat. Methods
7, 455–457.

Paumet, F., Wesolowski, J., Garcia-Diaz,
A., Delevoye, C., Aulner, N., Shu-
man, H. A., Subtil, A., and Roth-
man,
Intracellular
bacteria encode inhibitory SNARE-
like proteins. PLoS ONE 4, e7375.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007375

J. E. (2009a).

Paumet, F., Wesolowski, J., Garcia-Diaz,
A., Delevoye, C., Aulner, N., Shu-
man, H. A., Subtil, A., and Roth-
man, J. E. (2009b).
Intracellular
bacteria encode inhibitory SNARE-
like proteins. PLoS ONE 4, e7375.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007375

Pelve, E. A., Lindas, A. C., Martens-
Habbena,W., De La Torre, J. R., Stahl,
D. A., and Bernander, R. (2011).
Cdv-based cell division and cell
cycle organization in the thaumar-
chaeon Nitrosopumilus maritimus.
Mol. Microbiol. 82, 555–566.

J.

(2011). Microtubules

Pilhofer, M., Ladinsky, M. S., Mcdowall,
A. W., Petroni, G., and Jensen,
in
G.
bacteria: ancient
tubulins build
a ﬁve-protoﬁlament homolog of
the eukaryotic cytoskeleton. PLoS
Biol. 9, e1001213. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pbio.1001213

Pilhofer, M., Rappl, K., Eckl, C., Bauer,
A. P., Ludwig, W., Schleifer, K. H.,
and Petroni, G. (2008). Character-
ization and evolution of cell divi-
sion and cell wall synthesis genes
in the bacterial phyla Verrucomi-
crobia, Lentisphaerae, Chlamydiae,
and Planctomycetes and phyloge-
netic comparison with rRNA genes.
J. Bacteriol. 190, 3192–3202.

Poole, A. M., and Penny, D. (2007). Eval-
uating hypotheses for the origin of
eukaryotes. Bioessays 29, 74–84.

Pukall, R., Lapidus, A., Glavina Del Rio,
T., Copeland, A., Tice, H., Cheng,
J. F., Lucas, S., Chen, F., Nolan,
M., Bruce, D., Goodwin, L., Pitluck,
S., Mavromatis, K., Ivanova, N.,
Ovchinnikova, G., Pati, A., Chen, A.,
Palaniappan, K., Land, M., Hauser,
L., Chang, Y.
Jeffries, C. D.,
Chain, P., Meincke, L., Sims, D.,
Brettin, T., Detter, J. C., Rohde,
M., Goker, M., Bristow, J., Eisen, J.
A., Markowitz, V., Kyrpides, N. C.,
Klenk, H. P., and Hugenholtz, P.
(2010). Complete genome sequence
of Conexibacter woesei type strain
(ID131577). Stand. Genomic Sci. 2,
212–219.

J.,

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 167 | 11

Fuerst and Sagulenko

Planctomycetes and evolution of cell complexity

Reeve, W., O’Hara, G., Chain, P., Ard-
ley,
J., Brau, L., Nandesena, K.,
Tiwari, R., Malfatti, S., Kiss, H.,
Lapidus, A., Copeland, A., Nolan,
M., Land, M., Ivanova, N., Mavro-
matis, K., Markowitz, V., Kyrpi-
des, N., Melino, V., Denton, M.,
Yates, R., and Howieson, J. (2010).
Complete
sequence of
Rhizobium leguminosarum bv tri-
folii strain WSM2304, an effective
microsymbiont of the South Amer-
ican clover Trifolium polymorphum.
Stand. Genomic Sci. 2, 66–76.

genome

Remsen, C. C., Watson, S. W., Water-
bury,
J. B., and Truper, H. G.
(1968). Fine structure of Ectoth-
iorhodospira mobilis Pelsh. J. Bacte-
riol. 95, 2374–2392.

Reynaud, E. G., and Devos, D. P.
(2011). Transitional forms between
the three domains of life and evo-
lutionary implications. Proc Biol Sci.
278, 3321–3328.

Santarella-Mellwig, R.,

Franke,

J.,
Jaedicke, A., Gorjanacz, M., Bauer,
U., Budd, A., Mattaj, I. W., and
Devos, D. P. (2010). The com-
partmentalized bacteria of
the
Planctomycetes-Verrucomicrobia-
Chlamydiae
membrane
teins. PLoS Biol. 8,
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000281

superphylum have
pro-
e1000281.

coat-like

Schlieper, D., Oliva, M. A., Andreu, J.
M., and Lowe, J. (2005). Structure
of bacterial tubulin BtubA/B: evi-
dence for horizontal gene transfer.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102,
9170–9175.

Schneider, D., Fuhrmann, E., Scholz,
I., Hess, W. R., and Graumann,
P. L. (2007). Fluorescence staining
of live cyanobacterial cells suggest
non-stringent chromosome segrega-
tion and absence of a connection
between cytoplasmic and thylakoid
membranes. BMC Cell Biol. 8, 39.
doi:10.1186/1471-2121-8-39

Schuler, D.

(2008). Genetics

and
cell biology of magnetosome for-
mation in magnetotactic bacte-
ria. FEMS Microbiol. Rev.
32,
654–672.

Sinninghe Damste,

J. S., Rijpstra,
W. I., Strous, M., Jetten, M. S.,
David, O. R., Geenevasen, J. A., and
Van Maarseveen, J. H. (2004). A
mixed ladderane/n-alkyl glycerol
diether membrane lipid in an anaer-
obic
bac-
terium. Chem. Commun. (Camb.)
2590–2591.

ammonium-oxidizing

Studholme, D. J., Fuerst, J. A., and
Bateman, A. (2004). Novel protein
domains and motifs in the marine
planctomycete
Rhodopirellula
baltica. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 236,
333–340.

Sun, H., Lapidus, A., Nolan, M., Lucas,
S., Del Rio, T. G., Tice, H., Cheng,
J. F., Tapia, R., Han, C., Goodwin,
L., Pitluck, S., Pagani, I., Ivanova,
N., Mavromatis, K., Mikhailova, N.,
Pati, A., Chen, A., Palaniappan,
K., Land, M., Hauser, L., Chang,
Y. J., Jeffries, C. D., Djao, O. D.,
Rohde, M., Sikorski, J., Goker, M.,
Woyke, T., Bristow, J., Eisen, J. A.,
Markowitz, V., Hugenholtz, P., Kyr-
pides, N. C., and Klenk, H. P. (2010).
Complete
sequence of
Nocardiopsis dassonvillei type strain
(IMRU 509). Stand. Genomic Sci. 3,
325–336.

genome

Sutcliffe, I. C. (2010). A phylum level
perspective on bacterial cell enve-
lope architecture. Trends Microbiol.
18, 464–470.

Tice, H., Mayilraj, S., Sims, D., Lapidus,
A., Nolan, M., Lucas, S., Glav-
ina Del Rio, T., Copeland, A.,
Cheng, J. F., Meincke, L., Bruce, D.,
Goodwin, L., Pitluck, S., Ivanova,
N., Mavromatis, K., Ovchinnikova,
G., Pati, A., Chen, A., Pala-
niappan, K., Land, M., Hauser,
L., Chang, Y.
Jeffries, C. D.,

J.,

Detter, J. C., Brettin, T., Rohde,
M., Goker, M., Bristow, J., Eisen,
J. A., Markowitz, V., Hugenholtz,
P., Kyrpides, N. C., Klenk, H.
P., and Chen, F.
(2010). Com-
plete genome sequence of Naka-
murella multipartita type strain
(Y-104). Stand. Genomic Sci. 2,
168–175.

Ting, C. S., Hsieh, C., Sundararaman, S.,
Mannella, C., and Marko, M. (2007).
Cryo-electron tomography reveals
the comparative three-dimensional
architecture
Prochlorococ-
cus, a globally important marine
cyanobacterium. J. Bacteriol. 189,
4485–4493.

of

van de Meene, A. M., Hohmann-
Marriott, M. F., Vermaas, W. F.,
and Roberson, R. W. (2006). The
three-dimensional structure of the
cyanobacterium Synechocystis
sp.
PCC 6803. Arch. Microbiol. 184,
259–270.

van Niftrik, L., Van Helden, M.,
Kirchen, S., Van Donselaar, E.
G., Harhangi, H. R., Webb, R.
I., Fuerst, J. A., Op Den Camp,
H. J., Jetten, M. S., and Strous,
M. (2010).
Intracellular localiza-
tion of membrane-bound ATPases
in the compartmentalized anammox
bacterium ‘Candidatus Kuenenia
stuttgartiensis’. Mol. Microbiol. 77,
701–715.

Wagner, M., and Horn, M. (2006).
The Planctomycetes, Verrucomi-
crobia, Chlamydiae
sister
phyla
superphylum
a
with biotechnological and medical
relevance. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.
17, 241–249.

comprise

and

Ward-Rainey, N., Rainey, F. A., and
Stackebrandt, E. (1997). The pres-
ence of a dnaK (HSP70) multi-
gene family in members of
the
orders Planctomycetales and Ver-
rucomicrobiales. J. Bacteriol. 179,
6360–6366.

Wilson, K. L., and Dawson, S. C. (2011).
Evolution: functional evolution of
nuclear structure. J. Cell Biol. 195,
171–181.

Woese, C. (1998). The universal ances-
tor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95,
6854–6859.

Woese, C. R. (1987). Bacterial evolution.

Microbiol. Rev. 51, 221–271.

Woese, C. R. (1990). Evolutionary ques-
tions: the “progenote.” Science 247,
789.

Woese, C. R., Kandler, O., and Wheelis,
M. L. (1990). Towards a natural
system of organisms: proposal for
the domains Archaea, Bacteria, and
Eucarya. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
87, 4576–4579.

Yutin, N., Wolf, M. Y., Wolf, Y. I., and
Koonin, E. V. (2009). The origins
of phagocytosis and eukaryogenesis.
Biol. Direct 4, 9.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 19 January 2012; accepted: 13
April 2012; published online: 04 May
2012.
JA and Sagulenko E
Citation: Fuerst
(2012) Keys
to eukaryality: Plancto-
mycetes and ancestral evolution of cel-
lular complexity. Front. Microbio. 3:167.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00167
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology,
a specialty of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Fuerst and Sagulenko.
This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non Commercial License,
which permits non-commercial use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in other
forums, provided the original authors and
source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 167 | 12

