REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 12 December 2011
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00245

Granuloma transplantation: an approach to study
Mycobacterium–host interactions

Jeffrey S. Harding 1,2, Heidi A. Schreiber 1,2,3 and Matyas Sandor 1,2*

1 Laboratory Medicine, Department of Pathology, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA
2 Cellular and Molecular Pathology Training Program, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA
3 The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA

Edited by:
Adel M. Talaat, University of
Wisconsin Madison, USA
Reviewed by:
Jordi Torrelles, Ohio State University,
USA
Michael L. Vasil, University of
Colorado Medical School, USA
*Correspondence:
Matyas Sandor , Laboratory Medicine,
Department of Pathology, School of
Medicine and Public Health,
University of Wisconsin, 1300
University Avenue, Madison, WI
53706, USA.
e-mail: msandor@wisc.edu

The host–pathogen biology during infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis is incredibly
complex and despite accelerating progress in research, remains poorly understood. Our
limited understanding hinders the development of new drugs, next generation vaccines,
and novel therapies.The granuloma is the site where mycobacteria are both controlled and
allowed to persist, but it remains one of the least studied aspects of the host–pathogen
relationship. Here, we review the development, application, potential uses, and limitations
of a novel model of granuloma transplantation as a tool to study speciﬁc host–pathogen
interactions that have been difﬁcult to probe. Application of this new model has already con-
tributed to our understanding of granuloma cell trafﬁc, repopulation, and the relationship
between systemic immunity and mycobacteria-containing granulomas. The data collected
highlight the dynamic interaction between systemic and local immune processes and sup-
port a paradigm that deﬁnes the granuloma as a highly dynamic structure. Granuloma
transplantation also has special potential as a novel latency model that can contribute to
our understanding of host protection factors and bacterial mutants, and serve as a platform
for drug testing.

Keywords: granuloma, transplantation, mycobacteria, host–pathogen interactions

INTRODUCTION
One-third of the world’s population is infected with Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis (Mtb; Barry et al., 2009), the bacterial cause
of tuberculosis (TB) that killed approximately 1.7 million people
in 2009 (2010). Over 90% of those infected harbor latent Mtb, a
dormant state in which bacilli can persist for decades in the host
without symptoms (Lin and Flynn, 2010). The HIV pandemic cou-
pled with evolving drug resistance (Iseman and Sbarbaro, 1992;
Cox et al., 2003; Gandhi et al., 2010; WHO Global Tuberculosis
Control Report 2010, 2010) has dramatically increased the suscep-
tibility of both infected and uninfected persons, especially those
in developing countries and Sub-Saharan Africa (Corbett et al.,
2003; Aaron et al., 2004). New antibiotics and improved vaccines
are desperately needed to combat the evolving Mtb threat, but have
been elusive in part because of a lack of basic understanding about
the complex host–pathogen biology that occurs during infection.
At the heart of these complex interactions is the granuloma,
the hallmark pathology of Mtb but also of other diseases, such as
Crohn’s disease, leprosy, and histoplamosis to name a few (Cham-
bers and Morson, 1979; Narayanan, 1988; Wheat et al., 2000; Wallis
et al., 2004). The granuloma is a type IV hypersensitivity reaction
formed by a special organization of immune cells that contains
and kills bacilli, but also provides the long-term home needed for
Mtb latency (Saunders and Cooper, 2000; Co et al., 2004; Russell,
2007; Davis and Ramakrishnan, 2008). The granuloma consists of
macrophages, T-cells, B-cells, dendritic cells (DCs), natural killer
(NK)-cells, and ﬁbroblasts. It is initiated by resident macrophages
that phagocytose bacilli and release proinﬂammatory cytokines,

such as TNFα, to recruit additional cells (Flynn et al., 1995; Roach
et al., 1999; Algood et al., 2005). CD4+ T-cells from the adap-
tive response are eventually recruited and enhance macrophage-
mediated killing of bacilli by the release of IFNγ (Orme, 1987;
Flynn et al., 1993; Stenger and Modlin, 1999). A ﬁbrotic cuff
encloses the granuloma after collagen deposition by ﬁbroblasts
(Dheda et al., 2005). Mtb have evolved special strategies to avoid
cell-mediated killing during initial control of infection, and there-
fore a few bacilli persist in granulomas indeﬁnitely (McCune et al.,
1966; Armstrong and Hart, 1975; Sturgill-Koszycki et al., 1994; Xu
et al., 1994; Via et al., 1997; Fortune et al., 2004; Deretic et al.,
2006). A better understanding is needed about all parts of gran-
uloma evolution – from its formation during acute infection, to
its maintenance during chronic infection. The latter is especially
important since any serious global attempt to combat TB will
have to target the two billion latently infected people acting as
Mtb reservoirs.

While Mtb was originally thought to have evolved around
10,000 years ago from Mycobacterium bovis (Sreevatsan et al.,
1997), mounting evidence has suggested a much earlier emer-
gence (Mostowy and Behr, 2005; Gibbons, 2008; Wirth et al., 2008;
Smith et al., 2009). The host–pathogen biology that unfolds in
the granuloma is one of the most complex of any host–pathogen
pair, likely owing to this long history of co-evolution. Proba-
bly the ultimate puzzle of infection is that Mtb’s evolutionary
strategy is built around the robust, acute granuloma responses
that are required for host protection. Mtb hijacks the granuloma,
leveraging both its formation and maintenance to allow a few

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 245 | 1

Harding et al.

Granuloma transplantation

bacilli to escape macrophage anti-microbial responses and persist
(Hingley-Wilson et al., 2003; Volkman et al., 2004). Nevertheless,
the granuloma as a host protective response prevents bacilli from
disseminating to other tissues by constraining bacterial replication
and survival. Bacterial persistence in the granuloma during peak
anti-microbial responses is accompanied by changes in bacterial
metabolism and changes in host cell metabolism that are in part
driven by Mtb effector proteins and lipids (Hingley-Wilson et al.,
2003; Russell, 2007). Up to decades after dormancy Mtb can again
change its own metabolism, reactivate, and exert an entirely dif-
ferent pressure on the granuloma that leads to necrotic cell death
(Gan et al., 2008; Porcelli and Jacobs, 2008; Divangahi et al., 2009).
Necrosis of the granuloma center facilitates bacterial repopula-
tion, dissemination, and ﬁnally transmission to other hosts after
the granuloma cuff is ruptured during the physical stress of cough-
ing (Manabe and Bishai, 2000; Lin and Flynn, 2010). The timing
for reactivation of latent bacilli corresponds most closely with
suppression or decay of important host immune factors which
can impair granuloma integrity and set the stage for granuloma
necrosis (Saunders and Cooper, 2000).

Many questions remain about the details of the complex
granuloma–mycobacteria interactions in an infected host. For
instance, what cells and at what rate do they trafﬁc to and from
granulomas? Cell trafﬁc has important consequences on gran-
uloma formation and maintenance, as well as the priming of
systemic immunity by antigen-carrying cells that leave granulomas
and migrate to secondary lymphoid organs. It can be technically
challenging, however, to know if antigen-carrying cells identi-
ﬁed in the lymph nodes have come directly from granulomas.
Measuring rates of granuloma repopulation is also similarly difﬁ-
cult because it is almost impossible to know what cells have been
there since the formation and which cells are newly arrived. We
wanted to circumvent these conventional limitations and sought to
develop a system with different color-coded or genetically marked
cells to distinguish between cells of the local and systemic environ-
ment. We accomplished this goal by transplantation of infected
tissue from one mouse to another, in which the ﬂuorescent signa-
ture or cell allotype of donor and host tissue is different and can
therefore be tracked.

In the same way that the ﬂuorescent signature of donor and
host tissues can be differentiated by transplantation, so also can
the local and systemic immune environments during Mycobac-
terium infection. While granulomas may form during immune-
competent conditions, systemic depletion of important factors,
such as CD4+ T-cells, can lead to remodeling of the granuloma
structure and reactivation of disease (Kaufmann, 2002). Simply
infecting immune factor-deﬁcient animals is often an inadequate
approach in understanding the effects of systemic depletions on
granuloma biology since those same factors may be required for
granuloma formation. Transplantation can relocate granulomas
from wild (WT) or genetically altered hosts into a recipient with
WT or genetically altered characteristics, allowing us to measure
the resulting response. This approach helps characterize local and
systemic requirements for cells and molecules in the regulation of
granulomas. It can also provide insight into the mechanisms of
reactivation as well as what types of immune-deﬁcient conditions
put latently infected persons at risk.

Here, we highlight the development of this novel model of
granuloma transplantation and how it has been used to probe
cell trafﬁcking, systemic immune cell priming, and the systemic
vs. local requirements for host protection factors. We also outline
other applications of the system that include its potential as a new
latency model to test the effects of host protection factors, bac-
terial mutants, and new drugs. Ultimately, understanding parts
of the mycobacterial host–pathogen biology discussed here will
stem more targeted and thoughtful approaches toward new Mtb
therapies, and this new tool can help in that endeavor.

GRANULOMA TRANSPLANTATION: A NEW TOOL
In this model, donor liver infected with M. bovis strain bacillus
Calmette–Guerin (BCG) is transplanted into recipients by surgi-
cal insertion of an infected tissue piece underneath the recipient’s
kidney capsule (Figure 1A). The capsule is rich in blood and
oxygen, and so it is a permissive environment for transplanted
organ survival. A small 1 mm incision through the capsule is
made, and the capsule is pulled away from the kidney creating
an open pocket for a piece of infected donor tissue. Approxi-
mately 1% of infected donor liver is transplanted. The tautness
of the capsule holds the transplant piece in place and prevents it
from being dislodged during or after surgery. Humanization of
NOG/SCID mice is done by transplantation of human thymus in
an almost identical fashion (McCune et al., 1988; Kaneshima et al.,
1991).

Bacillus Calmette–Guerin-containing granulomas can be iden-
tiﬁed in donor-infected tissue both before and up to 2 weeks after
transplantation, clearly demonstrating the viability of the tissue
piece and survival of bacilli. Transplanted myeloid and lymphoid
cells from the donor are almost exclusively from transplanted
granulomas. Our experiments have taken advantage of the well-
characterized murine BCG liver infection, but the model could
also be used with any strain of Mycobacterium, including viru-
lent Mtb. Intraperitoneal (IP) infection of BCG in mice results
in the formation of liver granulomas that peak in size, bacte-
rial load, and anti-microbial activity by 3 weeks post infection
(Co et al., 2004). From 3 to 10 weeks post infection, bacterial
load decreases 100- to 1,000-fold, and bacilli persist in a non-
expanding state in smaller, more organized granulomas. Trans-
plant pieces infected with BCG for 10 weeks mimic some of the
latent conditions seen in humans infected with virulent Mtb. The
resolution of acute infection and persistence of chronic infection
mimics the progression of Mtb infection in humans that is con-
sidered a hallmark of the Mtb evolutionary strategy (Barry et al.,
2009).

With this model both the location and approximate num-
ber of transplanted granuloma cells and bacilli can be estimated
(Figure 1B). These calculations require knowing the total number
of granuloma cells and bacterial CFU per organ, the proportion of
transplanted organ to the whole, and the individual cell ratio out
of the whole cell population. In our hands, IP injection of BCG
in mice results in 1× 107 (±2× 106) granuloma cells and 5× 105
CFU (±1× 105) per gram of liver 3 weeks after infection. At this
time granulomas are roughly 70% macrophage, 10% CD4, and 5%
CD8. By 10 weeks, infection results in 3× 106 (±3× 105) granu-
loma cells and 5× 104 CFU (±1× 104) per liver, granulomas are

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 245 | 2

Harding et al.

Granuloma transplantation

FIGURE 1 | Intraperitoneal infection of BCG in mice results in mycobac-
teria-containing liver granulomas [(A), left panels]. In this transplant model,
approximately 1% of infected donor liver tissue is transplanted underneath the
kidney capsule of recipient mice [(A), right panels]. The high oxygen/blood-rich

environment maintains the viability of the tissue piece, and BCG-containing
granulomas can be identiﬁed by microscopy 2 weeks after surgery. With this
model, the total number of transplanted granuloma cells and bacterial CFU can
be calculated for both acute and chronic transplant pieces (B).

roughly 70% macrophage, 8% CD4, and 8% CD8. The remain-
ing cellular composition of 3 and 10 week granulomas consists
of roughly 5–10% B-cells, 3–5% DCs, 1–2% NK-cells, and 1–2%
γδ T-cells (not shown in Figure 1B). In our hands, per gram of
liver there are approximately 5× 105 (±1× 105) CFU 3 weeks post
infection and 5× 103 (±1× 103) CFU 10 weeks post infection.
Since protocols, mice, and bacilli vary between labs, the number
of transplanted cells and bacterial CFU will vary as well.

CELL TRAFFIC
Granuloma cell trafﬁc is difﬁcult to study on an individual gran-
uloma basis, but undoubtedly plays an important role in several
components of granuloma biology. First, cell trafﬁc is required not
only in forming granulomas, but also in repopulating short-lived
effector cells like CD4+ lymphocytes in existing granulomas. The
susceptibility to Mtb reactivation in AIDS patients with ablated
CD4+ T-cell numbers demonstrates the importance of this repop-
ulation. Second, cell trafﬁc is a key regulator of systemic immune
priming/activation, since mycobacterial antigen from granulomas
is captured by mobile cells such as DCs and carried to the lymph
nodes (Reljic et al., 2005; Humphreys et al., 2006; Schreiber and
Sandor, 2010). One important gap in our knowledge is how, if
at all, antigen trafﬁc regulates systemic immune responses dur-
ing chronic infection and Mtb latency. Mtb’s persistence in the
granuloma is reﬂective of its unique ability to inﬂuence its local
environment and manipulate the processing, trafﬁcking, and pre-
sentation of its own antigens (Gercken et al., 1994; Stenger et al.,
1998; Hanekom et al., 2003). These processes help Mtb shape the
overall immune response in a way that is favorable to its long-
term survival in the granuloma. They may also help explain why
the current BCG vaccine, while invaluable for protecting children
from death by TB meningitis, does not actually prevent infection
or provide long-term protection (Fine, 1988; Colditz et al., 1994,

1995). Understanding cell trafﬁc and how it regulates antigen
trafﬁcking has important consequences on the development of
next generation vaccines.

RATES OF REPOPULATION
To better understand the dynamics and rates of cell trafﬁc into
acute and chronic granulomas we transplanted both acutely
and chronically BCG-infected colorless liver into GFP-expressing
recipients (Schreiber et al., 2011a). This system, when coupled
with immunohistochemistry, allows a convenient way to mea-
sure both donor- and recipient-derived cells by comparing GFP+
(R) and GFP− (D) cells in transplanted granulomas (Figure 2A).
It remains poorly understood how different cell subsets repopu-
late the granuloma over time, and how this repopulation, if any,
differs between acute and chronic granulomas. The data show
that 7 days after transplantation, approximately 35% (±4.7%) of
CD4+ T-cells in acute granulomas are of recipient origin, and,
surprisingly, 40% (±4.3) of CD4+ T-cells are of recipient origin
after transplantation of chronic granulomas. Furthermore mono-
clonal, mycobacterial antigen-speciﬁc T-cells migrated into acutely
and chronically infected transplanted tissue at a higher rate than
of a non-speciﬁc polyclonal population. Together, these results
show that both antigen-speciﬁc and non-speciﬁc CD4+ T-cells
not only have access to, but also repopulate acute and chronic
granulomas at a high rate. Measurements were also made of CD8+
T-cell, B-cell, and NK-cell migration. Seven days after transplant,
CD8+ T-cells repopulate acute and chronic granulomas at com-
parable rates to CD4+ T-cells, while B-cells repopulate chronic
granulomas more so than acute ones. Seven days after trans-
plantation 2/3 of B-cells in chronic granulomas are of recipient
origins, while only 1/3 are of recipient origin in acute granulomas
(Figure 2B). NK-cells repopulate acute and chronic granulomas
less than T-cells or B-cells. That many cell types have greater

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 245 | 3

Harding et al.

Granuloma transplantation

FIGURE 2 | Transplantation of BCG-infected liver from colorless donor
mice into GFP-expressing mice provides a simple way to distinguish
donor and recipient tissues [(A), left]. When coupled with cell-speciﬁc
antibodies, the proportion of donor (D) and recipient (R) cells in
BCG-containing granulomas can be measured. Colocalization of cell-speciﬁc
(shown here is CD4+ T-cells) and GFP ﬂuorescent signals identiﬁes recipient

cells, while cell-speciﬁc signal alone identiﬁes donor cells. In the image
shown, donor cells are blue only (DAPI) or blue and red (donor CD4+ T-cell),
while recipient cells are green (GFP) only or green and red (recipient CD4+
T-cell). Recipient B-cells repopulate chronic granulomas at a higher rate than
acute granulomas (B). Seven days after transplant, 2/3 of B-cells in
transplanted granulomas are of recipient origin.

access to chronic granulomas than acute granulomas was an espe-
cially novel ﬁnding. Understanding these differences, as well as
why certain cellular subsets such as B-cells have faster exchange
rates, has yet to be investigated. Taken together, these results show
a dynamic cell migration into both acute and chronic granulo-
mas, and challenge the paradigm that deﬁnes chronic granulomas
as static structures isolated from the systemic immune envi-
ronment. These results also demonstrate the ability to measure
cell-speciﬁc granuloma repopulation over time using granuloma
transplantation.

This system not only allows measurements of cells that get into
granulomas, but also cells that get out. We transplanted infected,
GFP-expressing donors into colorless recipients and looked for
GFP+ cells in recipient organs like spleen and lymph nodes. The
results show that only a limited number of lymphocytes egress
from the granuloma, which is not surprising considering most
granuloma-resident T- and B-cells are effector cells that live only
for a short time. Still, it is unknown if the few lymphocytes that
do get out have any inﬂuence on the course of infection and
anti-microbial immunity. Unlike for lymphocytes, we measured
a high rate of DC egress, a cell type that is known to induce sys-
temic immune responses and contribute to bacterial dissemination
(Reljic et al., 2005; Humphreys et al., 2006; Schreiber and Sandor,
2010). The consequences of this DC egress is discussed in the next
section.

ANTIGEN SAMPLING
Dendritic cells in chronic granulomas (unlike in acute) express
high levels of inhibitory molecules of T-cell activation like pro-
grammed death ligand 1 and 2 and low levels of costimulatory
molecules (CD40 and B7), and therefore downregulate T-cell
responses (Schreiber et al., 2010). In the same paper that describes
these ﬁndings, the authors show that the same DCs that down-
regulate granuloma T-cell responses in the granuloma can also
support systemic anti-microbial ones outside of the granuloma. A
better understanding of systemic immune priming during latency
will contribute to the development of next generation vaccines
and novel therapies. Since the granuloma may be the only niche
for mycobacteria during latency, any priming/upkeep of systemic

responses likely requires antigen sampling (the removal of anti-
gen from the granuloma by cells that transplant it to the lymph
nodes to activate T-cells). Only recently has the fact that anti-
gen sampling occurs during latency gained momentum, supported
by studies highlighted in this review (below) and another report
that identiﬁed antigen-speciﬁc T-cells in the peripheral blood of
latently infected patients (Schuck et al., 2009). Still, the mecha-
nisms and frequency of antigen sampling during Mtb infection
remain poorly understood, as well as how these processes might
explain the inefﬁcacies of the BCG vaccine. Simply transferring
antigen-speciﬁc T-cells into chronically infected mice is a limited
approach because any measured priming could result from extra-
granulomatous bacilli or newly formed lesions. Since the recipients
of infected tissue are not infected themselves, the transplant model
excludes these possibilities. The only mycobacteria in the system
are in transplanted tissue in a known quantity. This makes it an
excellent model to study the rate and mechanisms of systemic
mycobacterial-speciﬁc T-cell priming during infection.

We transplanted infected CD11c-EYFP donors into WT recip-
ients (and vice versa) and adoptively transferred mycobacterial-
speciﬁc T-cells into recipients to measure T-cell priming that
results directly from DC-mediated antigen sampling of acute and
chronic granulomas (Schreiber et al., 2011b). The results show
that not only do donor DCs migrate out of transplanted gran-
ulomas, but recipient ones also migrate in. Surprisingly, there
was a higher rate of recipient DC migration into chronic gran-
ulomas than into acute ones. Seven days post-transplant, 35% of
DCs in chronic granulomas have been repopulated with recipient
DCs, while only 25% have been repopulated in acute granu-
lomas. The data also show that DCs from acute and chroni-
cally infected transplants migrate out of granulomas into sec-
ondary lymph organs, but do not carry live bacilli, the absence
of which was conﬁrmed by ﬂuorescent microscopy and CFU
of recipient spleen and lymph nodes. Antigen-speciﬁc T-cells
undergo proliferation after transfer into recipients of both acute
and chronic granulomas. This T-cell priming requires recipient
MHC II after transplantation of acute or chronic granulomas.
It also requires donor CCR7 (responsible for migration of DCs
to secondary lymphoid organs; Cyster, 1999; Randolph, 2001;

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 245 | 4

Harding et al.

Granuloma transplantation

Martin-Fontecha et al., 2003) from acute granulomas, but not
chronic ones. These data demonstrate that after transplantation
of acute granulomas, local, donor-derived DCs carry antigen
to the lymph node, which is then transferred by an unknown
mechanism to recipient DCs and presented to antigen-speciﬁc
T-cells (Figure 3). Antigen sampling after transplantation of
chronic granulomas also occurs despite the low bacteria load and
restricted amount of antigen. Taken together, these data demon-
strate several key points: that both acute and chronic granulomas
are intensely surveyed by local and systemic antigen-presenting
cells, and that chronic granulomas have previously unappre-
ciated and dynamic interactions with the systemic immune
environment.

DISSECTION OF THE LOCAL AND SYSTEMIC REQUIREMENTS
OF HOST PROTECTION FACTORS
It is known that host protection factors such as T-cells, IFNγ, and
TNFα play a vital role in the control of Mtb infection and also the
maintenance of latent disease. Lymphocyte-deﬁcient RAG knock-
out (KO) mice, which are missing the genes required for T- and
B-cell receptor recombination, have a limited ability to form gran-
ulomas in response to BCG infection. TNFαKO mice form large,
unorganized lesions resulting from altered chemokine expression
(Bean et al., 1999). IFNγKO mice are unable to induce potent anti-
microbial response from mycobacteria-carrying macrophages
(Cooper et al., 1993; Flynn et al., 1993). Unlike WT mice, all three
KO animals ultimately die from uncontrolled bacterial replication,
highlighting the absolute requirement for these host protection
factors.

Many factors required for protection and granuloma forma-
tion have been described, but it is not always clear if these
factors have to be produced in the granuloma or the systemic

environment, or both. The transplant system allows us to better
understand the local vs. systemic requirements for host protec-
tion factors. We transplanted acutely infected WT donor tissue
into RAG KO recipients (Figure 4A, left) and did not detect
bacterial dissemination from the transplants (Figure 4B, left).
When we transplanted acutely infected RAG KO donor tissue
into WT recipients (Figure 4A, right), however, bacteria dissem-
inated into spleen and draining renal lymph nodes (Figure 4B,
right). Similar results were obtained when chronically infected
donors were transplanted. These results were especially surpris-
ing, since we expected conditions that mimic the ablated CD4+
T-cell numbers seen in AIDs patients to result in extensive bac-
terial dissemination. That we detected no dissemination sug-
gests that the presence of some local, granuloma-contained host
factors like lymphocytes can buffer, even if transiently, against
systemic depletions (Figure 4C). This may explain why many
types of stress on the immune system, such as infection with
the common ﬂu, do not usually result in reactivation of latent
Mtb.

Transplantation of acutely and chronically BCG-infected WT
donors into TNFαKO recipients, on the other hand, resulted in
bacterial dissemination and expansion (data not shown). These
show that, unlike lymphocytes, local TNFα cannot buffer against
systemic depletions. Taken together with the lymphocyte-deﬁcient
transplants, the data reveal that not only can there be different local
and systemic requirements for a single given protection factor,
but also that this local/systemic balance is likely different between
factors. The transplants we have done so far have allowed us to
measure this requirement for only a handful of known important
host factors (manuscript in preparation), but this transplant sys-
tem can be used to measure any factor of interest for which there
is a KO or over-expressing mouse.

FIGURE 3 | Transplantation of BCG-infected liver using CD11c-EYFP
donors or recipients allows tracking of DC migration in and out of
acute and chronic granulomas. After transplantation, donor DCs migrate
out of granulomas, and recipient DCs also migrate in. The ability of DCs to
prime systemic immune responses after surveying granulomas can be
measured when coupled with adoptive transfer of antigen-speciﬁc T-cells
into transplant recipients. Systemic T-cell priming after transplantation of
acute granulomas results from CCR7-dependent migration to the lymph
nodes of donor DCs that have BCG antigen. The antigen is transferred to
recipient DCs and presented to mycobacterial-speciﬁc, transferred T-cells.
Priming after transplantation of both acute and chronic granulomas was
absolutely dependent on recipient MHC II.

FIGURE 4 | Bacillus Calmette–Guerin-infected WT or RAG KO donors
are transplanted into WT or RAG KO recipients (A). Four weeks after
transplantation, bacterial dissemination is measured by CFU and
ﬂuorescent microscopy of recipient spleen and renal lymph nodes (B).
Transplantation of infected RAG KO donors into WT recipients, but not WT
donors into RAG KO recipients, results in bacterial dissemination (C).

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 245 | 5

Harding et al.

Granuloma transplantation

LATENCY AND DISSEMINATION MODEL
Over 90% of the two billion people harboring Mtb are latently
infected (Lin and Flynn, 2010). After immune stress such as
HIV infection or anti-TNFα therapy, Mtb can reactivate and dis-
seminate (Corbett et al., 2003). Dormant bacteria are incredibly
difﬁcult to detect, isolate, or grow during latency, and so the
host–pathogen relationship during this stage remains especially
poorly understood. For these same reasons the mechanisms and
conditions needed for reactivation and dissemination of latent
bacteria is also not well understood. One problem in unravel-
ing Mtb latency and reactivation is the lack of animal latency
models. Of the few, the Cornell model from the 1950s is the
best described. In this model, Mtb-infected mice are treated with
isoniazid and pyrazinamide for several months until there are
no detectable bacilli in organ cultures (McCune and Tompsett,
1956; McCune et al., 1956). After ending treatment, Mtb in 1/3
of infected animals spontaneously reactivate; reactivation can also
be induced after immunosuppressants. While this model mim-
ics human disease in that it achieves low bacterial loads during
latency, the artiﬁcial suppression of bacterial replication has made
it controversial – antibiotics are started only 20 min after infec-
tion. The outcome of the Cornell model is also heavily dependent
on the experimental parameters, including the dose of inoculum
and dose of antibiotics (Scanga et al., 1999). New animal models
of Mtb latency would be invaluable tools for the study of latent
disease.

In the transplant model presented here, a small number of
non-expanding mycobacteria at a known anatomical site can be
maintained and then induced to disseminate and proliferate after
transplantation into immune-deﬁcient hosts such as TNFαKO
recipients. Transplantation of chronically, BCG-infected donors
into TNFαKO, but not WT recipients, results in dissemination
(Figure 5). That granulomas with live, non-expanding bacilli
disseminate when put into TNFαKO, but not WT recipients, high-
lights this model’s usefulness and relevance to human disease, as
well as its potential to act as a latency and dissemination model.
Additionally, granuloma transplantation can serve as a new plat-
form for probing the effects of host protection factors, bacterial
mutants, and the effects of new drugs during mycobacterial latency
and dissemination. An advantage to the system is that the dis-
semination pattern and movement of bacteria can be tracked
since transplant recipients have no pre-established granulomas
or mycobacteria themselves.

HOST FACTORS NEEDED TO PREVENT BACTERIAL DISSEMINATION
Our dissemination experiments show the model’s capacity to test
how chronic granulomas containing non-expanding mycobacte-
ria respond to systemic deﬁciencies of important immune factors.
While systemic deﬁciencies are often the precursor to reactivation
of latent Mtb, the extent to which and exactly what types of deﬁ-
ciencies matter is not well known. The importance of TNFα in
maintaining latent disease was underlined by the observation that
arthritis patients on anti-TNFα therapy had higher incidences of
reactivation (Gardam et al., 2003; Wolfe et al., 2004; Keane, 2005).
This model can test any host factor for which there is a KO animal –
the unique advantage is that it tests systemic deﬁciencies against
granulomas that evolved under immune-competent conditions.

FIGURE 5 | Non-expanding BCG from WT chronic granulomas can be
induced to disseminate and expand after transplantation into TNFαKO,
but not WT, recipients. Disseminated bacteria are measured by CFU and
ﬂuorescent microscopy of recipient target organs such as spleen and renal
lymph node. These experiments highlight the system’s potential as a new
model of bacterial dissemination to study host protection factors (bottom),
bacteria mutants, and new drugs/therapies.

BACTERIAL FACTORS REQUIRED FOR DISSEMINATION
In addition to host factors, the bacterial proteins and pathways
involved in Mtb reactivation and dissemination, while potentially
important drug targets, remain poorly understood. Mtb tran-
sitions to and persists during latency by undergoing dramatic
changes in its own metabolism – by shifting toward lipid-based
food sources, for example – and by manipulating the cellular envi-
ronment it occupies to create a niche for survival. Bacteria deﬁcient
in Mce4, a cholesterol transporter that facilitates cholesterol catab-
olism (with other enzymes like HsaC), have an impaired ability to
survive during the chronic stages of infection (Pandey and Sas-
setti, 2008). Mice with defective isocitrate lyase 1, an enzyme that
helps Mtb retain carbon instead of losing it to carbon dioxide
during limited supply, have a similar inability to survive during
chronic infection (Behr et al., 1999; Gordon et al., 1999; McKinney
et al., 2000). While these strategies demonstrate Mtb’s metabolic
adaptability during the transition into latency, they also imply an
equivalent set of metabolic changes that drive Mtb out of latency
to reactivate and disseminate.

The transplant model could help identify these lipid or protein
factors by testing the inﬂuence of speciﬁc bacterial mutations on
the dissemination of non-expanding mycobacteria (assuming the
mutant reaches a non-expanding state). To do so would require
transplantation of mutant BCG-infected donors into immune-
deﬁcient recipients, where any dissemination and expansion of
mycobacteria can be measured. Admittedly, looking at factors dri-
ving the dissemination of non-dividing mycobacteria is only part
of the total reactivation equation. One limitation in this approach
is that IP infection of BCG in mice does not induce granuloma
necrosis, which in humans is an important facilitator of bacter-
ial dissemination (Tsai et al., 2006; Russell et al., 2009). Still, to
uncover even a fraction of the total bacterial strategy related to
reactivation and dissemination is an important contribution. The
generation of any new “hits” on bacterial factors related to the
dissemination of non-expanding BCG in mice could provide a

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 245 | 6

Harding et al.

Granuloma transplantation

more focused lens to examine the genome of virulent Mtb, which
is 99.9% identical to that of BCG (Philipp et al., 1996). It is also
likely that granuloma transplantation can be extended to include
Mtb-infected donors, although at this point it is not clear if bac-
teria would be contained in the transplant (as in the case of BCG)
or disseminate when put into WT recipients.

DRUG TESTING ON MYCOBACTERIAL LATENCY AND DISSEMINATION
Most of the ﬁrst-line anti-TB drugs preferentially target actively
dividing mycobacteria. Some persisting mycobacteria escape the
action of these drugs either through the development of drug
resistance and/or the transition into dormancy (Wallis et al., 1999;
Gomez and McKinney, 2004; Paramasivan et al., 2005; Zhang,
2005; Connolly et al., 2007). For this reason sterilization of an
infected person by antibiotics is difﬁcult. When drugs are admin-
istered during latent infection, the goal is to prevent reactivation
and dissemination of latent bacilli (Blumberg et al., 2005). Mtb’s
unique ability to transition into dormancy, coupled with the inef-
ﬁcacy of antibiotics against latent bacilli, has contributed to the
huge reservoir of Mtb-infected people. Even a breakthrough vac-
cine preventing infection would still leave this group susceptible
to reactivation and dissemination. Only recently have certain Mtb
proteins – such as the unique prokaryotic proteosome – been
identiﬁed that could have special potential as drug targets during
bacterial latency (Darwin et al., 2003; Cerda-Maira and Darwin,
2009; Lin et al., 2009a; Gandotra et al., 2010). The development
of drugs that target latent mycobacteria will require the identiﬁca-
tion of additional bacterial factors needed for dormancy and also
a system to test the efﬁcacy of new drugs on these targets. While
in vitro assays on stationary mycobacteria can screen huge libraries
of compounds to identify promising candidates, in vivo models
more accurately reﬂect the biology of latency, which is needed to
accurately measure the efﬁcacy of latent bacteria-targeting drugs.
The transplant system could be used as just this type of in vivo sys-
tem. New drugs would be administered to chronically infected WT
mice before transplantation into TNFαKO (or other KO) recipi-
ents to test if non-expanding mycobacteria can be eliminated by
drugs.

LIMITATIONS
As with most surgeries, there is induced stress on recipients from
incisions and displacement of transplanted tissues. The immune
reaction to physical stress could be different from or augment the
reaction resulting from mycobacteria-containing granulomas that
are not transplanted. For this reason transplantation of uninfected
tissue in any experiment is an important control in understanding
the consequences of surgery alone and stress-induced immunity.
The length of survival of transplanted tissue itself is also a
concern. While mycobacterial latency can persist indeﬁnitely, it
is unlikely that transplanted tissue would do so as well. We have
detected viable bacilli in transplanted tissue up to 1 month after
surgery. Two weeks after surgery viable BCG in transplanted tis-
sue can be removed and retransplanted into an immune-deﬁcient
host to induce bacterial dissemination. Granuloma cells have a
limited life-span, however, and our transplants using GFP+ recip-
ients demonstrate the intense repopulation of recipient tissue and
granulomas with donor cells. After a certain time transplanted

tissue will likely be made up almost exclusively of immigrating host
cells, and so there is a ﬁnite window to study mycobacterial–host
interactions by granuloma transplantation.

Modeling latency and dissemination in the mouse has been par-
ticularly controversial. While virulent Mtb infection in humans
usually results in control of infection and clinical latency, with-
out antibiotic treatment Mtb in mice leads to a non-resolving
acute infection (Sever and Youmans, 1957; Bloch et al., 1960;
Orme, 1995). Mouse BCG infection shares some important fea-
tures of human disease, such as the resolution of acute infection
with high bacterial loads to chronic infection with a few per-
sisting, non-expanding bacteria. There are, however, important
differences. BCG lacks the RD1 region of the genome, which in
Mtb encodes important virulence factors like ESAT6:CFP10, that
drive/control much the host immune response (Hsu et al., 2003;
Lewis et al., 2003; Guinn et al., 2004; Derrick and Morris, 2007;
Smith et al., 2008). These virulence factors undoubtedly play a role
in the overall shaping of the acute immune response required for
the transition to latency. Non-expanding BCG from chronically
infected mice can still be identiﬁed and cultured, but in humans
latency is partly deﬁned by the inability to ﬁnd or culture bacte-
ria. It is also unclear how closely the metabolic changes of BCG
leading to a non-expanding state mirror the metabolic changes of
Mtb in humans required for the transition to latency. The non-
human primate model has gained recent attention for more closely
resembling the spectrum of granulomas seen in humans, as well
as the ability to transition into clinical latency after infection with
virulent Mtb (Capuano et al., 2003; Lerche et al., 2008; Lin et al.,
2009b). Transplantation in non-human primates, however, would
be a costly and technically prohibitive procedure to almost any lab.
In mice the surgery is inexpensive, requires no special instruments,
and can be performed in less than 5 min per animal.

Technically the most feasible model for granuloma transplan-
tation is mouse liver infected with BCG or Mtb. There are many
important differences between mycobacterial granulomas in dif-
ferent hosts, different organs, and different mycobacterial species,
all of which generate different granulomatous lesions. In humans,
for example, some Mtb granulomas in the lung are necrotic and
caseating; granuloma caseation occurs only in a few mouse strains
(Tsai et al., 2006; Russell et al., 2009). There are, however, impor-
tant similarities between liver granulomas in the mouse and other
granulomas. The main cellular components of liver and lung gran-
ulomas are similar in most mycobacterial granulomas, as is the
crucial role of cytokines such as TNFα and INFγ. Granuloma
transplantation can be a useful tool as long as the limitations of
the model of infection are accounted for during the interpretation
of results. Many animal TB models, the differences of which are
outside the scope of this review, have been described that differ
in the strain of mycobacteria, the inoculation dose, the species of
animal, and the route/tissue of infection (McMurray et al., 1996;
Smith et al., 2000; Kaufmann, 2003; Gupta and Katoch, 2005), and
the model described here will not reﬂect all of those differences.

CONCLUSION
The complex host–pathogen relationship during infection with
mycobacteria, especially during bacterial latency, remains poorly
understood. Dissecting this relationship will help the development

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 245 | 7

Harding et al.

Granuloma transplantation

of next generation vaccines and new drugs needed to combat
the deadly TB-AIDS co-pandemic and Mtb drug resistance. Pre-
sented here is a new tool to help in this endeavor: granuloma
transplantation. This unique system has been used to study parts
of the host–pathogen biology that have been difﬁcult to study
with the available tools and animal models. First, we transplanted
mycobacteria-containing granulomas into GFP+ recipients to
study individual granuloma cell trafﬁc and repopulation by host
cells. The data show a complex and dynamic trafﬁc of cells into pre-
existing granulomas, a process that takes place not only in acute
granulomas with high bacterial load and anti-microbial activ-
ity, but also in chronic granulomas with low bacterial load and
low anti-microbial activity. Surprisingly, this repopulation takes
place at a higher rate in chronic granulomas compared to acute
ones for some cell types. These results challenge the idea that a
chronic granuloma is a static structure, instead suggesting that
it is repopulated with new cells and/or completely reformed at a
new location. Next, we showed that recipient DCs migrate into, and
donor DCs migrate out of, both acute and chronic granulomas and
that this migration supports systemic priming of mycobacterial-
speciﬁc CD4+ T-cells. The results suggest that even during times
of low antigen load in granulomas with little anti-microbial activ-
ity, DC surveillance and transportation of bacterial antigen to the
lymph nodes likely contribute to the maintenance and control of
infection.

While these studies highlight the connectedness of local and
systemic immune processes, we also studied the independence
of local and systemic requirements for host protection factors
by transplantation of immune-competent or -deﬁcient hosts and

donors. The results show that, for some host factors, the granu-
loma can protect against systemic deﬁciencies, but not for other
host factors. Local lymphocytes can prevent bacterial dissemina-
tion in the absence of systemic lymphocytes, at least transiently,
but local TNFα cannot prevent dissemination in the absence of
systemic TNFα.

Finally, the transplant system has potential to serve as a novel
latency and bacterial dissemination model. The best-known model
of latency, the Cornell model, has remained relatively unchanged
for over 50 years. Using our system, non-expanding mycobacteria
from chronic granulomas can be maintained and then induced to
disseminate by transplantation into TNFαKO mice. These condi-
tions are analogous to the immune-deﬁcient conditions that lead
to reactivation of latent Mtb in humans. Our approach shows
that the transplant system can be used to test the effects of any
host protection factor on mycobacterial latency and dissemina-
tion. Additionally, the system can be used to test how speciﬁc
bacterial mutants during chronic infection disseminate under
immune-deﬁcient conditions. These experiments could uncover
new bacterial proteins and lipids involved in reactivation and dis-
semination, processes that in humans are required for Mtb trans-
mission after latency. Finally, the system could serve as a useful
in vivo platform to test the effects of new drugs on non-expanding
bacilli.

New methods can provide new insights, and we have shown
that granuloma transplantation is a useful approach to study key
aspects of the host–mycobacterial relationship. Moving forward
we hope the technology will grow in the diversity of its application
and usefulness with other granuloma-inducing pathogens.

REFERENCES
Aaron, L., Saadoun, D., Calatroni, I.,
Launay, O., Memain, N., Vincent, V.,
Marchal, G., Dupont, B., Bouchaud,
O., Valeyre, D., and Lortholary,
O. (2004). Tuberculosis in HIV-
infected patients: a comprehensive
review. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 10,
388–398.

Algood, H. M., Lin, P. L., and Flynn,
J. L. (2005). Tumor necrosis factor
and chemokine interactions in the
formation and maintenance of gran-
ulomas in tuberculosis. Clin. Infect.
Dis. 41(Suppl. 3), S189–S193.

Armstrong,

J. A., and Hart, P. D.
(1975). Phagosome-lysosome inter-
actions in cultured macrophages
infected with virulent
tubercle-
bacilli. Reversal of usual nonfusion
pattern and observations on bacter-
ial survival. J. Exp. Med. 142, 1–16.

Barry, C. E. III., Boshoff, H. I., Dar-
tois, V., Dick, T., Ehrt, S., Flynn, J.,
Schnappinger, D., Wilkinson, R. J.,
and Young, D. (2009). The spec-
trum of latent tuberculosis: rethink-
ing the biology and intervention
strategies. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 7,
845–855.

Bean, A. G., Roach, D. R., Briscoe,
H., France, M. P., Korner, H.,

Sedgwick, J. D., and Britton, W.
J.
(1999). Structural deﬁciencies
in granuloma formation in TNF
gene-targeted mice underlie the
heightened susceptibility to aerosol
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
infec-
tion, which is not compensated for
by lymphotoxin. J. Immunol. 162,
3504–3511.

Behr, M. A., Wilson, M. A., Gill, W. P.,
Salamon, H., Schoolnik, G. K., Rane,
S., and Small, P. M. (1999). Com-
parative genomics of BCG vaccines
by whole-genome DNA microarray.
Science 284, 1520–1523.

Bloch, H., Yamamura, Y., and Walter,
A. (1960). Bacterial populations in
experimental murine tuberculosis.
II. Studies in vaccinated mice. J.
Infect. Dis. 106, 223–229.

Blumberg, H. M., Leonard, M. K. Jr.,
and Jasmer, R. M. (2005). Update
on the treatment of tuberculosis and
latent tuberculosis infection. JAMA
293, 2776–2784.

Capuano, S. V. III., Croix, D. A., Pawar,
S., Zinovik, A., Myers, A., Lin, P.
L., Bissel, S., Fuhrman, C., Klein,
E., and Flynn, J. L. (2003). Exper-
imental Mycobacterium tuberculosis
infection of cynomolgus macaques
closely resembles the various man-

ifestations of human M. tubercu-
losis infection. Infect. Immun. 71,
5831–5844.

Cerda-Maira, F., and Darwin, K. H.
(2009). The Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis proteasome: more than just
a barrel-shaped protease. Microbes
Infect. 11, 1150–1155.

Chambers, T. J., and Morson, B. C.
(1979). The granuloma in Crohn’s
disease. Gut 20, 269–274.

Co, D. O., Hogan, L. H., Kim, S. I.,
and Sandor, M. (2004). Mycobac-
terial granulomas: keys to a long-
lasting host-pathogen relationship.
Clin. Immunol. 113, 130–136.

Colditz, G. A., Berkey, C. S., Mosteller,
F., Brewer, T. F., Wilson, M. E., Bur-
dick, E., and Fineberg, H. V. (1995).
The efﬁcacy of bacillus Calmette-
Guerin vaccination of newborns
and infants in the prevention of
tuberculosis: meta-analyses of the
published literature. Pediatrics 96,
29–35.

Colditz, G. A., Brewer, T. F., Berkey, C. S.,
Wilson, M. E., Burdick, E., Fineberg,
H. V., and Mosteller, F. (1994). Efﬁ-
cacy of BCG vaccine in the preven-
tion of tuberculosis. Meta-analysis
of the published literature. JAMA
271, 698–702.

Connolly, L. E., Edelstein, P. H., and
Ramakrishnan, L. (2007). Why is
long-term therapy required to cure
tuberculosis? PLoS Med. 4, e120.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0040120
Cooper, A. M., Dalton, D. K., Stew-
art, T. A., Grifﬁn, J. P., Russell, D.
G., and Orme, I. M. (1993). Dis-
seminated tuberculosis in interferon
gamma gene-disrupted mice. J. Exp.
Med. 178, 2243–2247.

Corbett, E. L., Watt, C. J., Walker, N.,
Maher, D., Williams, B. G., Rav-
iglione, M. C., and Dye, C. (2003).
The growing burden of tuberculosis:
global trends and interactions with
the HIV epidemic. Arch. Intern. Med.
163, 1009–1021.

Cox, H., Hargreaves, S., and Ismailov,
G. (2003). Effect of multidrug resis-
tance on global tuberculosis control.
Lancet 362, 1858–1859.

Cyster,

J. G.

(1999). Chemokines
and cell migration in secondary
lymphoid organs.
286,
2098–2102.

Science

Darwin, K. H., Ehrt, S., Gutierrez-
Ramos,
J. C., Weich, N., and
Nathan, C. F. (2003). The protea-
some of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
is required for resistance to nitric
oxide. Science 302, 1963–1966.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 245 | 8

Harding et al.

Granuloma transplantation

Davis, J. M., and Ramakrishnan, L.
(2008). “The very pulse of
the
machine”:
the tuberculous gran-
uloma in motion. Immunity 28,
146–148.

Deretic, V., Singh, S., Master, S., Harris,
J., Roberts, E., Kyei, G., Davis, A., De
Haro, S., Naylor, J., Lee, H. H., and
Vergne, I. (2006). Mycobacterium
tuberculosis inhibition of phagolyso-
some biogenesis and autophagy as
a host defence mechanism. Cell.
Microbiol. 8, 719–727.

Derrick, S. C., and Morris, S. L. (2007).
The ESAT6 protein of Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis induces apopto-
sis of macrophages by activating cas-
pase expression. Cell. Microbiol. 9,
1547–1555.

Dheda, K., Booth, H., Huggett, J. F.,
Johnson, M. A., Zumla,A., and Rook,
G. A. (2005). Lung remodeling in
pulmonary tuberculosis. J. Infect.
Dis. 192, 1201–1209.

Divangahi, M., Chen, M., Gan, H.,
Desjardins, D., Hickman, T. T.,
Lee, D. M., Fortune, S., Behar, S.
M., and Remold, H. G. (2009).
Mycobacterium tuberculosis evades
macrophage defenses by inhibit-
ing plasma membrane repair. Nat.
Immunol. 10, 899–906.

Fine, P. E. (1988). BCG vaccination
against tuberculosis and leprosy. Br.
Med. Bull. 44, 691–703.

Flynn, J. L., Chan, J., Triebold, K. J.,
Dalton, D. K., Stewart, T. A., and
Bloom, B. R. (1993). An essential role
for interferon-gamma in resistance
to Mycobacterium-tuberculosis infec-
tion. J. Exp. Med. 178, 2249–2254.

Flynn, J. L., Goldstein, M. M., Chan, J.,
Triebold, K. J., Pfeffer, K., Lowen-
stein, C. J., Schreiber, R., Mak, T. W.,
and Bloom, B. R. (1995). Tumor-
necrosis-factor-alpha is required in
the protective
immune-response
against Mycobacterium-tuberculosis
in mice. Immunity 2, 561–572.

Fortune, S. M., Solache, A., Jaeger,
A., Hill, P. J., Belisle, J. T., Bloom,
B. R., Rubin, E. J., and Ernst, J.
D. (2004). Mycobacterium tubercu-
losis inhibits macrophage responses
to IFN-gamma through myeloid
differentiation factor 88-dependent
and -independent mechanisms. J.
Immunol. 172, 6272–6280.

Gan, H., Lee, J., Ren, F., Chen, M.,
Kornfeld, H., and Remold, H. G.
(2008). Mycobacterium tuberculosis
blocks crosslinking of annexin-1
and apoptotic envelope formation
on infected macrophages to main-
tain virulence. Nat.
Immunol. 9,
1189–1197.

Gandhi, N. R., Nunn, P., Dheda, K.,
Schaaf, H. S., Zignol, M.,Van Soolin-
gen, D., Jensen, P., and Bayona,

J. (2010). Multidrug-resistant and
extensively drug-resistant tubercu-
losis:
con-
a
trol of
tuberculosis. Lancet 375,
1830–1843.

to global

threat

Gandotra, S., Lebron, M. B., and
Ehrt, S. (2010). The Mycobacterium
tuberculosis proteasome active site
for persis-
threonine is essential
repli-
tence yet dispensable for
cation and resistance
to nitric
oxide. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1001040.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1001040

Gardam, M. A., Keystone, E. C., Men-
zies, R., Manners, S., Skamene, E.,
Long, R., and Vinh, D. C. (2003).
Anti-tumour necrosis factor agents
and tuberculosis risk: mechanisms
of action and clinical management.
Lancet Infect. Dis. 3, 148–155.

Gercken,

J., Pryjma,

J., Ernst, M.,
and Flad, H. D. (1994). Defective
antigen presentation by Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis-infected mono-
cytes. Infect. Immun. 62, 3472–3478.
Gibbons, A. (2008). American Asso-
ciation of Physical Anthropologists
meeting. Tuberculosis jumped from
humans to cows, not vice versa.
Science 320, 608.

Gomez, J. E., and McKinney, J. D.
(2004). M. tuberculosis persistence,
latency, and drug tolerance. Tuber-
culosis (Edinb.) 84, 29–44.

Gordon, S. V., Brosch, R., Billault, A.,
Garnier, T., Eiglmeier, K., and Cole,
S. T. (1999). Identiﬁcation of vari-
able regions in the genomes of tuber-
cle bacilli using bacterial artiﬁcial
chromosome arrays. Mol. Microbiol.
32, 643–655.

Guinn, K. M., Hickey, M. J., Mathur, S.
K., Zakel, K. L., Grotzke, J. E., Lewin-
sohn, D. M., Smith, S., and Sher-
man, D. R. (2004). Individual RD1-
region genes are required for export
of ESAT-6/CFP-10 and for virulence
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Mol.
Microbiol. 51, 359–370.

Gupta, U. D., and Katoch, V. M.
(2005). Animal models of tuber-
culosis. Tuberculosis
(Edinb.) 85,
277–293.

Hanekom, W. A., Mendillo, M., Manca,
C., Haslett, P. A., Siddiqui, M. R.,
Barry, C. III., and Kaplan, G. (2003).
Mycobacterium tuberculosis inhibits
maturation of human monocyte-
derived dendritic cells in vitro. J.
Infect. Dis. 188, 257–266.
S. M.,

Hingley-Wilson,

Samban-
damurthy, V. K., and Jacobs, W.
R. Jr. (2003). Survival perspectives
from the world’s most
success-
pathogen, Mycobacterium
ful
tuberculosis. Nat.
4,
949–955.

Immunol.

Hsu, T., Hingley-Wilson, S. M., Chen,
B., Chen, M., Dai, A. Z., Morin, P.

M., Marks, C. B., Padiyar, J., Gould-
ing, C., Gingery, M., Eisenberg, D.,
Russell, R. G., Derrick, S. C., Collins,
F. M., Morris, S. L., King, C. H., and
Jacobs, W. R. Jr. (2003). The pri-
mary mechanism of attenuation of
bacillus Calmette-Guerin is a loss
of secreted lytic function required
for invasion of lung interstitial tis-
sue. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100,
12420–12425.

Humphreys, I. R., Stewart, G. R., Turner,
D. J., Patel, J., Karamanou, D., Snel-
grove, R.
J., and Young, D. B.
(2006). A role for dendritic cells
in the dissemination of mycobac-
terial infection. Microbes Infect. 8,
1339–1346.

Iseman, M. D., and Sbarbaro, J. A.
(1992). The increasing prevalence
of
resistance to antituberculosis
chemotherapeutic agents: implica-
tions for global tuberculosis con-
trol. Curr. Clin. Top. Infect. Dis. 12,
188–207.

Kaneshima, H., Shih, C. C., Namikawa,
R., Rabin, L., Outzen, H., Machado,
S. G., and Mccune, J. M. (1991).
Human immunodeﬁciency virus
infection of human lymph nodes
in the SCID-hu mouse. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 88, 4523–4527.

Kaufmann, S. H. (2002). Protection
tuberculosis: cytokines, T
against
cells, and macrophages. Ann. Rheum.
Dis. 61(Suppl. 2), ii54–ii58.

Kaufmann, S. H.

(2003).

Immune
response to tuberculosis: experi-
mental animal models. Tuberculosis
(Edinb.) 83, 107–111.

Keane, J. (2005). TNF-blocking agents
and tuberculosis: new drugs illu-
minate an old topic. Rheumatology
(Oxford) 44, 714–720.

Lerche, N. W., Yee, J. L., Capuano, S.
V., and Flynn, J. L. (2008). New
approaches to tuberculosis surveil-
lance in nonhuman primates. ILAR
J. 49, 170–178.

Lewis, K. N., Liao, R., Guinn, K. M.,
Hickey, M. J., Smith, S., Behr, M. A.,
and Sherman, D. R. (2003). Deletion
of RD1 from Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis mimics bacille Calmette-
Guerin attenuation. J. Infect. Dis.
187, 117–123.

Lin, G., Li, D., De Carvalho, L. P.,
Deng, H., Tao, H., Vogt, G., Wu,
K., Schneider, J., Chidawanyika, T.,
Warren, J. D., Li, H., and Nathan,
C. (2009a). Inhibitors selective for
mycobacterial versus human protea-
somes. Nature 461, 621–626.

Lin, P. L., Rodgers, M., Smith, L., Bigbee,
M., Myers, A., Bigbee, C., Chiosea, I.,
Capuano, S. V., Fuhrman, C., Klein,
E., and Flynn, J. L. (2009b). Quan-
titative comparison of active and
latent tuberculosis in the cynomol-

gus macaque model. Infect. Immun.
77, 4631–4642.

Lin, P. L., and Flynn, J. L. (2010). Under-
standing latent tuberculosis: a mov-
ing target. J. Immunol. 185, 15–22.

Manabe, Y. C., and Bishai, W. R. (2000).
Latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis-
persistence, patience, and winning
by waiting. Nat. Med. 6, 1327–1329.
Martin-Fontecha, A., Sebastiani, S.,
Hopken, U. E., Uguccioni, M., Lipp,
M., Lanzavecchia, A., and Sallusto,
F. (2003). Regulation of dendritic
cell migration to the draining lymph
node: impact on T lymphocyte traf-
ﬁc and priming. J. Exp. Med. 198,
615–621.

McCune,

J. M., Namikawa, R.,
Kaneshima, H., Shultz, L. D.,
Lieberman, M., and Weissman, I.
L. (1988). The SCID-hu mouse:
murine model for the analysis of
human hematolymphoid differen-
tiation and function. Science 241,
1632–1639.

McCune, R. M. Jr., Mcdermott, W.,
and Tompsett, R. (1956). The fate
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
in
mouse tissues as determined by the
microbial enumeration technique.
II. The conversion of tuberculous
infection to the latent state by the
administration of pyrazinamide and
a companion drug. J. Exp. Med. 104,
763–802.

McCune, R. M. Jr., and Tompsett, R.
(1956). Fate of Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis in mouse tissues as deter-
mined by the microbial enumera-
tion technique. I. The persistence of
drug-susceptible tubercle bacilli in
the tissues despite prolonged antimi-
crobial therapy. J. Exp. Med. 104,
737–762.

McCune, R. M., Feldmann, F. M., Lam-
bert, H. P., and Mcdermott, W.
(1966). Microbial persistence. I. The
capacity of tubercle bacilli to survive
sterilization in mouse tissues. J. Exp.
Med. 123, 445–468.

McKinney, J. D., Honer Zu Bentrup,
K., Munoz-Elias, E. J., Miczak, A.,
Chen, B., Chan, W. T., Swenson, D.,
Sacchettini, J. C., Jacobs, W. R. Jr.,
and Russell, D. G. (2000). Persis-
tence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
in macrophages and mice requires
the glyoxylate shunt enzyme isoci-
trate lyase. Nature 406, 735–738.

McMurray, D. N., Collins, F. M., Dan-
nenberg, A. M. Jr., and Smith, D. W.
(1996). Pathogenesis of experimen-
tal tuberculosis in animal models.
Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 215,
157–179.

Mostowy, S., and Behr, M. A. (2005).
The
evolution of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Clin.
Chest Med. 26, 207–216, v–vi.

origin and

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 245 | 9

Harding et al.

Narayanan,

R.

B.

Immunopathology
of
granulomas – current
review. Lepr. Rev. 59, 75–82.

(1988).
leprosy
status: a

Orme, I. (1995). Mechanisms under-
lying the increased susceptibility of
aged mice to tuberculosis. Nutr. Rev.
53, S35–S38; discussion S38–S40.

Orme, I. M. (1987). The kinetics of
emergence and loss of mediator T
lymphocytes acquired in response to
infection with Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis. J. Immunol. 138, 293–298.

Pandey, A. K., and Sassetti, C. M. (2008).
Mycobacterial persistence requires
the utilization of host cholesterol.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
4376–4380.

Paramasivan, C. N., Sulochana, S.,
Kubendiran, G., Venkatesan, P., and
Mitchison, D. A. (2005). Bactericidal
rifampin,
action of gatiﬂoxacin,
and
on logarithmic-
and
cultures
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49,
627–631.

isoniazid
stationary-phase

Philipp, W. J., Nair, S., Guglielmi, G.,
Lagranderie, M., Gicquel, B., and
Cole, S. T. (1996). Physical mapping
of Mycobacterium bovis BCG pasteur
reveals differences from the genome
map of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
H37Rv and from M. bovis. Microbi-
ology 142(Pt 11), 3135–3145.

Porcelli, S. A., and Jacobs, W. R. Jr.
(2008). Tuberculosis: unsealing the
apoptotic envelope. Nat. Immunol. 9,
1101–1102.
Randolph, G.

(2001). Dendritic
cell migration to lymph nodes:
cytokines, chemokines, and lipid
mediators. Semin.
Immunol. 13,
267–274.

J.

Reljic, R., Di Sano, C., Crawford, C.,
Dieli, F., Challacombe, S., and Ivanyi,
J. (2005). Time course of mycobacte-
rial infection of dendritic cells in the
lungs of intranasally infected mice.
Tuberculosis (Edinb.) 85, 81–88.

Roach, D. R., Briscoe, H., Baum-
gart, K., Rathjen, D. A., and Brit-
ton, W. J. (1999). Tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) and a TNF-mimetic
peptide modulate the granuloma-
tous
response to Mycobacterium
bovis BCG infection in vivo. Infect.
Immun. 67, 5473–5476.

Russell, D. G. (2007). Who puts the
tubercle in tuberculosis? Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 5, 39–47.

Russell, D. G., Cardona, P. J., Kim, M.
J., Allain, S., and Altare, F. (2009).
Foamy macrophages and the pro-
gression of the human tuberculo-
sis granuloma. Nat. Immunol. 10,
943–948.

Saunders, B. M., and Cooper, A. M.
(2000). Restraining mycobacteria:

role of granulomas in mycobacter-
ial infections. Immunol. Cell Biol. 78,
334–341.

Scanga, C. A., Mohan, V. P., Joseph, H.,
Yu, K., Chan, J., and Flynn, J. L.
(1999). Reactivation of latent tuber-
culosis: variations on the Cornell
murine model. Infect. Immun. 67,
4531–4538.

Schreiber, H. A., Harding, J. S., Altami-
rano, C. J., Hunt, O., Hulseberg,
P. D., Fabry, Z., and Sandor, M.
(2011a). Continuous repopulation
of
lymphocyte subsets in trans-
planted mycobacterial granulomas.
Eur. J. Microbiol. Immunol. (Bp) 1,
59–69.

Schreiber, H. A., Harding, J. S., Hunt,
O., Altamirano, C. J., Hulseberg,
P. D., Stewart, D., Fabry, Z., and
Sandor, M. (2011b). Inﬂammatory
dendritic cells migrate in and out
of transplanted chronic mycobac-
terial granulomas in mice. J. Clin.
Invest. 121, 3902–3913.

Schreiber, H. A., Hulseberg, P. D., Lee,
J., Prechl, J., Barta, P., Szlavik, N.,
Harding, J. S., Fabry, Z., and San-
dor, M. (2010). Dendritic cells in
chronic mycobacterial granulomas
restrict local anti-bacterial T cell
response in a murine model. PLoS
ONE 5, e11453. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0011453

Schreiber, H. A., and Sandor, M.
(2010). The role of dendritic cells
in Mycobacterium-induced granulo-
mas. Immunol. Lett. 130, 26–31.

Schuck, S. D., Mueller, H., Kunitz, F.,
Neher, A., Hoffmann, H., Franken,
K. L., Repsilber, D., Ottenhoff, T.
H., Kaufmann, S. H., and Jacobsen,
M. (2009). Identiﬁcation of T-cell
antigens speciﬁc for latent Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis infection. PLoS
ONE 4, e5590. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0005590

Sever, J. L., and Youmans, G. P. (1957).
Enumeration of
tubercle
bacilli from the organs of nonimmu-
nized and immunized mice. Am. Rev.
Tuberc. 76, 616–635.

viable

Smith, D., Wiegeshaus, E., and Balasub-
ramanian, V. (2000). Animal models
for experimental tuberculosis. Clin.
Infect. Dis. 31(Suppl. 3), S68–S70.

Smith, J., Manoranjan, J., Pan, M.,
Bohsali, A., Xu, J., Liu, J., Mcdonald,
K. L., Szyk, A., Laronde-Leblanc, N.,
and Gao, L. Y. (2008). Evidence for
pore formation in host cell mem-
branes by ESX-1-secreted ESAT-6
and its role in Mycobacterium mar-
inum escape from the vacuole. Infect.
Immun. 76, 5478–5487.

Smith, N. H., Hewinson, R. G., Kre-
mer, K., Brosch, R., and Gordon,
S. V. (2009). Myths and miscon-
ceptions: the origin and evolution

of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Nat.
Rev. Microbiol. 7, 537–544.

Sreevatsan, S., Pan, X., Stockbauer, K.
E., Connell, N. D., Kreiswirth, B.
N., Whittam, T. S., and Musser,
(1997). Restricted struc-
J. M.
tural
gene
polymorphism in
the Mycobacterium tuberculosis
complex
evolutionar-
ily recent global dissemination.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94,
9869–9874.

indicates

Stenger, S., and Modlin, R. L. (1999). T
cell mediated immunity to Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis. Curr. Opin.
Microbiol. 2, 89–93.

Stenger, S., Niazi, K. R., and Modlin,
R. L. (1998). Down-regulation of
CD1 on antigen-presenting cells
by infection with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.
161,
3582–3588.

Immunol.

J.

Sturgill-Koszycki, S., Schlesinger, P.
H., Chakraborty, P., Haddix, P. L.,
Collins, H. L., Fok, A. K., Allen,
R. D., Gluck, S. L., Heuser, J., and
Russell, D. G. (1994). Lack of acid-
iﬁcation in Mycobacterium phago-
somes produced by exclusion of
the vesicular proton-ATPase. Science
263, 678–681.

Tsai, M. C., Chakravarty, S., Zhu, G., Xu,
J., Tanaka, K., Koch, C., Tufariello, J.,
Flynn, J., and Chan, J. (2006). Char-
acterization of the tuberculous gran-
uloma in murine and human lungs:
cellular composition and relative tis-
sue oxygen tension. Cell. Microbiol.
8, 218–232.

Via, L. E., Deretic, D., Ulmer, R.
J., Hibler, N. S., Huber, L. A.,
and Deretic, V. (1997). Arrest of
mycobacterial phagosome matura-
tion is caused by a block in vesicle
fusion between stages controlled by
rab5 and rab7. J. Biol. Chem. 272,
13326–13331.

J. C.,

Volkman, H. E., Clay, H., Beery,
Sherman,
D., Chang,
and Ramakrishnan, L.
D. R.,
granu-
(2004).
enhanced
loma
by
a Mycobacterium virulence
determinant. PLoS Biol. 2, e367.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0020367

Tuberculous
is

formation

Wallis, R. S., Broder, M. S., Wong,
J. Y., Hanson, M. E., and Been-
houwer, D. O. (2004). Granulo-
matous infectious diseases associ-
ated with tumor necrosis factor
antagonists. Clin. Infect. Dis. 38,
1261–1265.

Wallis, R. S., Patil, S., Cheon, S. H.,
Edmonds, K., Phillips, M., Perkins,
M. D., Joloba, M., Namale, A., John-
son, J. L., Teixeira, L., Dietze, R., Sid-
diqi, S., Mugerwa, R. D., Eisenach, K.,
and Ellner, J. J. (1999). Drug toler-
ance in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Granuloma transplantation

Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 43,
2600–2606.

Wheat, J., Sarosi, G., Mckinsey, D.,
Hamill, R., Bradsher, R., Johnson, P.,
Loyd, J., and Kauffman, C. (2000).
Practice guidelines for the man-
agement of patients with histoplas-
mosis. Infectious diseases society
of America. Clin. Infect. Dis. 30,
688–695.

WHO Global Tuberculosis Control
(2010).

Report 2010. Summary.
Cent. Eur. J. Public Health 18, 237.

Wirth, T., Hildebrand, F., Allix-Beguec,
C., Wolbeling, F., Kubica, T., Kremer,
K.,Van Soolingen, D., Rusch-Gerdes,
S., Locht, C., Brisse, S., Meyer, A.,
Supply, P., and Niemann, S. (2008).
Origin,
spread and demography
of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis
complex. PLoS Pathog. 4, e1000160.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000160

Wolfe, F., Michaud, K., Anderson, J., and
Urbansky, K. (2004). Tuberculosis
infection in patients with rheuma-
toid arthritis and the effect of inﬂix-
imab therapy. Arthritis Rheum. 50,
372–379.

Xu, S., Cooper, A., Sturgill-Koszycki,
S., Van Heyningen, T., Chatterjee,
D., Orme, I., Allen, P., and Rus-
sell, D. G. (1994). Intracellular traf-
ﬁcking in Mycobacterium tubercu-
losis and Mycobacterium avium-
infected macrophages. J. Immunol.
153, 2568–2578.

Zhang, Y.

(2005). The magic bul-
lets and tuberculosis drug targets.
Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 45,
529–564.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

an

approach

Received: 19 September 2011; paper
pending published: 10 October 2011;
accepted: 23 November 2011; published
online: 12 December 2011.
Citation: Harding
JS, Schreiber HA
and Sandor M (2011) Granuloma
transplantation:
to
study Mycobacterium–host
interac-
tions. Front. Microbio. 2:245. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2011.00245
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Cellular and Infection Microbiology, a
specialty of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2011 Harding , Schreiber
and Sandor. This
is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 245 | 10

