ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 10 January 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00266

Mycobacterium tuberculosis RNA expression patterns in
sputum bacteria indicate secreted Esx factors contributing
to growth are highly expressed in active disease

Archana Bukka1, Christopher T. D. Price 1, Douglas S. Kernodle 2 and James E. Graham1*

1 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, USA
2 Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA

Edited by:
Adel M. Talaat, University of
Wisconsin Madison, USA
Reviewed by:
Srinand Sreevastan, University of
Minnesota, USA
Martin S. Pavelka, University of
Rochester, USA
Xin Li, The Ohio State University, USA
*Correspondence:
James E. Graham, Department of
Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Louisville School of
Medicine, Health Sciences Center
A405, 319 Abraham Flexner Way,
Louisville, KY 40202, USA.
e-mail: j.graham@louisville.edu

To identify factors contributing to the ability of tubercle bacilli to grow in the lung dur-
ing active infection, we analyzed RNA expression patterns in bacteria present in patient
sputum. Prominent among bacterial transcripts identiﬁed were those encoding secreted
peptides of the Esat-6 subfamily that includes EsxK and EsxL (Rv1197 and Rv1198). H37Rv
esxKL and esxJI transcripts were differentially expressed under different growth condi-
tions, and disruption of these genes altered growth phase kinetics in typical laboratory
batch broth cultures. These growth defects, including the reduced intracellular growth of
an ΔesxKL mutant in primary human macrophages, were reversed by either low multiplicity
co-infection or co-culture with wild-type bacteria, demonstrating the ability of the secreted
factors to rescue isogenic mutants. Complementing either only esxL or esxI alone (Rv1198
or Rv1037c) also reduced observed growth defects, indicating these genes encode factors
capable of contributing to growth. Our studies indicate that the Mycobacterium tuberculo-
sis Mtb9.9 family secreted factors EsxL and EsxI can act in trans to modulate growth of
intracellular bacteria, and are highly expressed during active human lung infection.

Keywords: QILLS-paired secreted factors, WGX100, ESX-5, esxO, esxN, esxV

INTRODUCTION
Mycobacterium tuberculosis exists largely within a natural reservoir
of latent infection estimated to comprise almost one-third of the
world’s population. These infections are often asymptomatic, as
an effective immune response is typically able to restrict bacterial
growth, frequently localizing bacilli within nodules or granulomas
in the lung. As the host’s immune status eventually declines with
age or other compromise, bacteria resume replication, and can
grow to high titers in a poorly deﬁned extracellular niche on the
interior walls of further-remodeled lung tissue cavities (Grosset,
2003; Hunter, 2011). Transmission to new hosts occurs primarily
by way of droplet nuclei generated when high numbers of bacteria
are aerosolized as cavities progress to merge with bronchial air-
ways (Mastorides et al., 1999). Although traditionally viewed as a
resident of alveolar macrophages, M. tuberculosis possess a rela-
tively large genetic capacity (Bishai, 1998), reﬂecting an ability to
adapt to several different intracellular and extracellular environ-
ments (Grosset, 2003; Rohde et al., 2007). These include those in
a wide variety of host tissues, and at least temporarily in sputum
and desiccated airborne droplet nuclei.

Speciﬁcally how M. tuberculosis adapts to these alternate envi-
ronments encountered during infection remains poorly charac-
terized. Survival and growth within different niches would require
activating alternate metabolic pathways, and the elaboration of
additional bacterial factors, including those needed to defend
against and alter host immune responses. Previous studies have
attempted to directly identify some of these by analyzing bacterial

gene expression following phagocytosis by resting or activated
murine and human macrophages (Graham and Clark-Curtiss,
1999; Schnappinger et al., 2003; Homolka et al., 2010), and within
inherently heterogeneous bacterial populations present in resected
lung tissues (Timm et al., 2003; Rachman et al., 2006) and sputum
(Garton et al., 2008) and in different animal models of disease
(Talaat et al., 2007; Kesavan et al., 2009). We therefore sought
to identify important features exhibited by tubercle bacilli in the
cavitary stage of active human disease by examining bacteria recov-
ered directly from the lungs of untreated patients in quick-frozen
sputum specimens.

Analysis of RNA expression patterns in these bacteria indicated
that transcripts encoding an Esat-6 subfamily of small secreted
proteins (Alderson et al., 2000; Pallen, 2002; Jones et al., 2010; Sut-
cliffe, 2011) are among the most abundantly expressed mRNAs.
The H37Rv genome contains ﬁve nearly identical pairs of co-
linear open reading frames (ORFs) designated esxKL, esxJI, esxMN,
esxPO, and esxWV. These ORFs show little sequence similarity
to esxBA (Cfp-10–Esat-6), other than encoding two short ∼100
residue peptides with the 5
ORF encoding a variant carboxyl ter-
minal “QILSS” motif and the 3
encoding the Mtb9.9 family of
secreted T-cell antigens. All contain a central “WXG100” esx fam-
ily structural motif, and are thought to encode effectors of an
uncharacterized ESX-5 transport system. Further examination of
the contributions of these small secreted peptides indicated they
are required for normal microbial growth, and likely to have a role
in bacterial multiplication during active infection.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 1

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

MATERIALS AND METHODS
See Section “Supplementary Materials and Methods” in Appendix
for additional details.

MYCOBACTERIAL CULTURES
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv (ATCC no. 25618) was
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and grown
in Middlebrook 7H9 OADC and 0.05% Tween-80 at 37˚C either
on a rotary shaker or as set cultures for use as frozen inocula.
Frozen stocks were used as inoculums for infections as previously
described (Price et al., 2008).

ISOLATION OF RNA FROM SPUTUM SAMPLES, BROTH-GROWN
BACTERIA, INFECTED CELLS, AND TISSUES
Tuberculosis patient sputum specimens were obtained by con-
sent from previously untreated and symptomatic walk in patients
at the Metro Health Department (Nashville, TN, USA) and the
Louisville Metro Department of Public Health and Wellness. Inde-
pendent un-induced specimens for the study were produced by
patients into 50 ml tubes on ice and frozen at −20˚C. Frozen
sputum samples from the ﬁrst six smear positive cases in 50 ml
tubes were thawed on ice and homogenized by vortexing with
4-mm glass beads and 10% of N -acetyl-l-cysteine solution as
previously described (Desjardin et al., 1996). Following centrifu-
gation at 8500× g for 10 min, pellets were resuspended in 4 ml of
TRIZOL (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) at 70˚C and 300 μl of
phenol reagent was added. The mixture was transferred to a tube
containing 0.1 mm zirconia silica beads (Biospec) and processed
in a Savant FP-120 homogenizer as previously described (Graham
and Clark-Curtiss, 1999). Following additional organic extraction
and ethanol precipitations, RNA pellets were washed with 70%
ethanol and resuspended in distilled water. RNA from mid-log
phase broth cultures and infected monolayers was isolated using
the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), according to the
manufacture’s instructions with minor modiﬁcations. M. tuber-
culosis infected C57BL6 mouse lung tissue specimens (∼0.1 g)
were obtained at 21 days in the active infection model previously
described (Shoen et al., 2004). All normal blood and sputum spec-
imens were obtained with donor consent as approved by the UofL
IRB, as was use of animal tissue by the UofL IACUC.

To prepare total RNAs, lysates in Qiagen lysis buffer on ice were
brieﬂy heated at 70˚C for 1 min and then homogenized with zirco-
nia beads in screw-cap vials with a Savant FP-120 instrument prior
to column puriﬁcation (Graham and Clark-Curtiss, 1999). RNAs
so obtained were then treated with DNAse I (Ambion, Austin,
TX, USA) as described by the enzyme manufacturer, and stored at
–80˚C in aliquots as ethanol precipitates.

cDNA SYNTHESIS AND QUANTITATIVE PCR (RT-qPCR)
RNA was converted to ﬁrst-strand cDNA with reverse transcriptase
Superscript III (Invitrogen) according to manufacture’s instruc-
tions using random non-amer primers (Price et al., 2008). For
selective capture of transcribed sequences (SCOTS; Graham and
Clark-Curtiss, 1999), we used previously described primer for
broth RNA (5
-GCCGGAGCTCTGCAGAATTCNNNNNNNNN-
(cid:2)
3
-GACACTCTCGAGACATCACC
GGTACCNNNNNNNNN-3

) and sputum-derived RNA (5

) For quantitative PCR measurements,

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

primers used speciﬁcally for measuring sigA and QILSS–Mtb9.9
mRNA levels were chosen using Primer3 software (see Materials
and Methods in Appendix) and tested for optimal PCR efﬁciency
using genomic DNA template. Fluorescence-monitored PCR was
carried out with an Opticon detection system (MJ Research,
Waltham, MA, USA), using Sybr green as the indicator. The major
housekeeping sigma factor gene sigA was used as an internal
control for the normalization of transcripts as H37Rv lacks the
regulation of sigA expression seen in many clinical strains (Man-
ganelli et al., 1999). A “no-reverse transcriptase” control was then
used to conﬁrm absence of genomic DNA. Change in steady-state
mRNA levels were calculated and statistically analyzed by compar-
ing expression level of sigA and target RNAs in different growth
conditions using the REST software tool and a threshold of P-value
of <0.05 (Pfafﬂ et al., 2002).

SELECTIVE CAPTURE OF TRANSCRIBED SEQUENCES
Mycobacterium tuberculosis cDNAs from total ampliﬁed cDNAs
from sputum specimens were selectively captured by hybridization
to denatured sonicated photobiotinylated M. tuberculosis genomic
DNA which has been prehybridized with blocking M. tuberculosis
ribosomal DNA (rDNA) fragments as previously described (Gra-
ham and Clark-Curtiss, 1999). Microbial cDNA–genomic DNA
hybrids were then collected by binding to streptavidin-coated
beads, and bacterial cDNAs were eluted by alkaline denaturation.
Eluted bacterial cDNAs were then ampliﬁed by PCR. After three
rounds of selective capture, bacterial cDNAs were used as template
to prepare radiolabeled probes.

ANALYSIS OF M. TUBERCULOSIS IN VIVO EXPRESSION BY GENOME
ARRAY HYBRIDIZATION
Mycobacterium tuberculosis genomic arrays on nylon from pro-
totype and limited production runs (Sigma-Genosys, Panorama
Gene Arrays) were used as previously described (Graham et al.,
2002). Random primed radiolabeled ﬁrst-strand cDNA was pre-
pared from four mid-log cultures using 10–20 μg of DNAse-
treated total RNA template by incorporation of alpha P[33] deoxy-
cytidine triphosphate (ICN Biomedicals, Irvine, CA, USA) with
Superscript III (Invitrogen). For SCOTS, radiolabeled probes were
made from 2 μg of captured ampliﬁed third round cDNA using
random non-amer primers and 50 μCi P[33] dCTP with the mod-
iﬁcation of including cold dCTP at 1/100 the level of the other
three dNTP’s. Nylon membranes were hybridized for 24 h, washed,
and exposed to a Fuji phosphorimager plate overnight prior to
scanning with a Fuji BAS FLA-2000 (Fuji Scientiﬁc Imaging).
Scanned images were quantiﬁed with ArrayVision software (Imag-
ing Research, ON, Canada) and data analyzed with BRB Array
Tools (Simon et al., 2007) extension for Microsoft Excel. Local
background subtraction was used correct regional background
variations within individual patterns from single-channel data
on nylon macro arrays. As SCOTS is intended as a qualitative
screening tool, we determined if cDNAs for mRNAs were detected
or not detected by comparison of levels for background based
on designated blank spots on arrays. Those features showing
hybridization levels greater than threefold over the average level
for blank array features was considered as detected expression of
the corresponding mRNA. Similarly for mid-log broth cultures,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 2

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

we considered the average hybridization value for blanks on all
four arrays relative to the average values for hybridization signals
for ORFs obtained with four cDNAs from four independent cul-
tures. The hybridization data from these experiments is available at
https://louisville.edu/medschool/microbiology/faculty/full-time-
faculty/james-e-graham-ph-d.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

-ATCTTCCCAGTTCAGCAC-3

IDENTIFICATION OF SPECIFIC esx mRNAs BY TARGETED SELECTIVE
HYBRIDIZATION
Homologous segment of the esxJI genomic DNA was PCR-
(cid:2)
ampliﬁed with (F) primer 5
-CGTGTGATGCGGACAAAG-3
and (R) primer 5
from H37Rv
genomic DNA. Three rounds of SCOTS captured cDNA from
sputum specimens 8 and 9 were then subjected to three rounds
of selective enrichment by hybridizing to biotinylated ampli-
ﬁed homologous segment of esxJI. After selective enrichment
cDNAs were cloned in pCR2.1-Topo vector (Invitrogen). Individ-
ual plasmid clones were characterized by sequencing insert cDNA
fragments.

(cid:2)

ALLELE INACTIVATION OF esxKL AND esxJI
An H37Rv ΔesxKL, esxJIi interrupted, and ΔesxJI mutants were
generated by specialized transduction method (Bardarov et al.,
2002) with the previously described modiﬁcations (Price et al.,
2008). Deletion of the entire gene was conﬁrmed by PCR, and
lack of mRNA signal in cDNA prepared from the mutant strain by
RT-qPCR. Complement strains were generated by cloning esxK or
esxL for ΔesxKL mutant, and esxI for esxJIi interrupted mutant,
downstream of constitutive hsp60 promoter in the single-copy
integrating vector pLou3.

PRIMARY HUMAN MACROPHAGES AND THP-1 CELL INFECTIONS
Monocyte derived macrophages (PBMCs) were obtained from two
healthy donors as previously described (Schlesinger and Horwitz,
1991; Graham et al., 2002; Price et al., 2008). Brieﬂy, mononuclear
cells were isolated by Ficoll (Sigma) gradients and total mononu-
clear cells incubated in Teﬂon wells for 5 days in RPMI media
(GIBCO). Adherent macrophages were then selected by attach-
ment in 24-well plate at a cell density of 5× 105 cells and incubated
for 5 days for further in vitro maturation prior to infection. Human
leukemia macrophage cell line THP-1 was grown in RPMI 1640
to density of 1–2× 106 cells per ml in 75 cm2 tissue culture ﬂasks.
As described by Theus et al. (2004), 3 days prior to infections cells
were seeded at 5× 105 cells per wells in 24-well plate with of
100 nM PMA and 150 units of human IFN-g. Bacterial strains
were opsonized with native FBS (ﬁnal concentration of 10% v/v)
and then diluted in RPMI supplemented with 2% v/v FBS for inoc-
ula. Monolayers were infected overnight in RPMI-2% FBS lacking
PMA and INF-g, and washed 3× prior to adding fresh media,
which was changed as 48 h. Colony-forming units (CFU) counts
were obtained by lysing triplicate wells at each time point with 1%
Triton-X 100.

SURFACE LABELING OF MYCOBACTERIA WITH FLUORESCEIN-TAGGED
SUCCINIMIDYL ESTER
H37Rv and ΔesxKL mutant were labeled with ﬂuorescein-tagged
succinimidyl ester (Alexa ﬂuor 488 and 594 from Molecular Probes

and Invitrogen) as previously described (Beatty and Russell, 2000).
Brieﬂy, bacteria were washed and added to buffer containing 1 mM
ﬂuorescein succinimidyl ester. Following 1.5 h incubation at 37˚C,
bacteria, was washed as inocula (prepared as described above) for
macrophage infections. For infections, 5× 105 cells adhering to
circular glass cover slips in 24-well culture plates were infected
at MOI of 1:1 with mixture consisting of 50:50 of ﬂuorescent
labeled wild-type and ΔesxKL mutant bacteria. At 24, 48, and 72 h
post-infections cells were washed three times with HANKS buffer
and were ﬁxed at 37˚C in 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate-
buffered saline (PBS) for 30 min. Following washing with PBS
cover slips were mounted on slide with the Prolong Antifade kit
(Invitrogen). Labeled mycobacteria in infected macrophages were
visualized directly using an Olympus F500 laser scanning confocal
microscope.

esxK AND esxL INTERACTION BY TWO-HYBRID SYSTEM
The BacterioMatch Two-Hybrid Vector system (Stratagene) was
used according to manufacturer’s instructions. Brieﬂy, the Bacte-
rioMatch two-hybrid vectors pBT bait containing the λcI domain
and pTRG target containing alpha-RNAP domain, were used as
starting plasmids for cloning esxK and esxL genes respectively.
The plasmids pBT–esxK and pTRG–esxL were then used for
cotransformation of Escherichia coli XL1-Blue cells containing the
reporter cassette. The transformed cells were plated on selective
media containing 5 mM 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole and incubated at
37˚C for 24 h.

RESULTS
ANALYSIS OF SPUTUM BACTERIA RNA
Mycobacterium tuberculosis gene expression during active lung
infection was investigated by SCOTS and genomic array hybridiza-
tion (Graham et al., 2002) by collecting sputum bacteria from
consenting patients directly into 50 ml centrifuge tubes on ice.
Originally developed to characterize RNA expression in M. tuber-
culosis growing in primary human macrophages, SCOTS uses
hybridization with biotinylated bacterial genomic DNA to obtain
the microbial component of total cDNA prepared from specimens
containing low numbers of bacteria (Graham and Clark-Curtiss,
1999; Graham et al., 2002). A limited number of un-induced spu-
tum specimens were obtained from patients prior to initiating
therapy as described in Section “Materials and Methods.” Radio-
labeled probes prepared from total normalized bacterial cDNA
obtained by three rounds of SCOTS were hybridized with M.
tuberculosis H37Rv genomic arrays on nylon. Complex hybridiza-
tion patterns were observed for ﬁve sputum specimens (Figure 1),
while a sixth showed very few hybridizations (not shown), and was
removed from our analysis of the remaining ﬁve specimen cDNAs.
Analyses of 16S rRNA copy number by reverse transcription
and quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) indicated an estimated 103–105
genome equivalents per specimen; it is therefore likely that some
specimens contained bacteria at levels where variable detection of
RNAs occurred at threshold levels (see Figure 1 and below).

In order to test the reproducibility of SCOTS and array
hybridization at the lowest levels of bacteria present in our set of
sputum specimens (i.e., 103 bacteria), we simulated these analy-
ses using a mixture of bacterial RNA derived from broth-grown

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 3

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

2007). A simple visual inspection of all six array hybridization
patterns readily indicated a group of features hybridizing to all
specimen cDNAs. These were nearly identical paired ORFs esxKL
and esxPO (Figure 1). A more thorough image analysis indi-
cated a group of 121 array features showing hybridization with
SCOTS cDNAs from either all specimens, or four of ﬁve speci-
mens (Table S1 in Supplementary Material). Those showing the
highest levels of hybridization included the QILSS–Mtb9.9 paired
ORFs noted above, and at lower levels esxB (encoding Cfp-10), and
esxF. Among these readily detected RNAs we also found a much
smaller subset of 29 array features (Table 1) that also consistently
showed hybridization intensities close to local background lev-
els (<3×) when ﬁrst-strand cDNAs from mid-logarithmic phase
cultures were used as array probes (data not shown). As shown in
Table 1, these included genes potentially unique to M. tuberculosis
annotated as “hypothetical,” those with potential roles in dipep-
tide, asparagine, phosphate, and sulfate transport, in riboﬂavin
and trehalose synthesis, and notably the glyoxylate shunt (aceA),
and transcriptional regulation (sigM and Rv0195).

(cid:2)

IDENTIFICATION OF RNAs ANNOTATED AS esx HIGHLY EXPRESSED IN
SPUTUM BACTERIA
Visually apparent array hybridization patterns among SCOTS
cDNAs from sputum specimens (Figure 1) included array features
corresponding to two nearly identical pairs of ORFs annotated as
“esx” or esat -6 like genes in the H37Rv genome (as per Tuberculist,
Lew et al., 2011). These ORFs in fact show only 10–30% amino
acid similarity to Cfp-10 and Esat-6 (Louise et al., 2001), and have
also been described as a “QILSS family” (Cole et al., 1998; Sut-
cliffe, 2011) based on encoding a shared carboxyl terminal motif
ORFs, or “Mtb9.9 family” based on of protective CD4+
in the 5
(cid:2)
T-cell antigens encoded by the 3
ORFs (Alderson et al., 2000).
(cid:2)
The 5
ORFs among these ﬁve pairs encode proteins with
greater than 90% amino acid sequence similarity, and except for
esxPO (Rv2396–Rv2397), are located just downstream of regions
encoding paired PE and PPE gene family members (Cole et al.,
1998; Bitter et al., 2009). Only one of these pairs, esxMN (Rv1792–
Rv1793) lies within a region encoding a putative esx-type secretion
system (Gey Van Pittius et al., 2001), designated ESX-5 (Bitter et al.,
2009). This locus may be involved in secretion of QILLS–Mtb9.9
factors, which has been shown to be independent of apparatus
encoded at ESX-1 (Champion et al., 2006).

(cid:2)
and 3

FIGURE 1 | Mycobacterium tuberculosis genomic array hybridized with
radiolabeled cDNAs obtained by SCOTS from sputum bacteria. Array
patterns obtained by hybridizing cDNAs obtained by three rounds of SCOTS
from bacteria in ﬁve un-induced sputum specimens as described in Section
“Materials and Methods” are shown. Array features showing the highest
levels of hybridization for patient 2 (circled) were readily detected for all
specimens, and correspond to ORFs Rv1197 (esxK ) and Rv1198 (esxL) on
the left, and Rv2346c (esxP), Rv2347c (esxO), and Rv1047 on the right.

bacterial cultures (0.01 ng) and 5 μg of HeLa cell RNA. Our results
indicated that only hybridization signals in the upper half of
the range of relative intensities among those apparent (threefold
above background pixel intensity) were consistently detected in
all three parallel control samples (data not shown). These exper-
iments indicated that only abundant RNAs were reliably detected
in our patient specimens. We therefore focused on identifying
highly expressed RNAs in sputum bacteria, including identify-
ing those most likely differentially expressed relative to those
at mid-logarithmic phase in standard laboratory broth cultures.
(Table 1 and Table S1 in Supplementary Material). Identiﬁcation
of abundant transcripts has been previously described as equally
likely to identify important characteristics of different bacteria,
and their growth within different environments (Sidders et al.,

As array features for QILLS–Mtb9.9 family ORFs were likely to
have cross-hybridized cDNAs, we extended the SCOTS approach
to capture and clone the speciﬁc relevant cDNA for RNAs highly
expressed in sputum bacteria. A PCR-ampliﬁed biotinylated DNA
fragment corresponding to the randomly selected EsxJI coding
region was used to hybridize relevant cDNAs from normalized
cDNA already obtained by SCOTS from sputum specimens 8 and
9 as described in Section “Materials and Methods.” Cloning of
cDNAs captured in an E. coli plasmid and sequencing as described
indicated that the most abundant cDNAs in the bacteria in both
of these specimens were likely those for the esxKL gene pair
(Table 2), while those for esxPO were also frequently identi-
ﬁed. As these were also the esx transcripts most readily detected
by array hybridization in the patient specimen 2 (that showing
the least amount of hybridization, Figure 1), we do not think

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 4

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

Table 1 | Mycobacterium tuberculosi s ORFs corresponding to mRNAs detected either in four or ﬁve sputum specimens and potentially
expressed in response to growth in the lung.

Gene name

Synonym

Gene description

No. of sputum specimens

ribC
Rv0520
Rv0988
Rv2626c
cethA
hsp
Rv0779c
Rv0836c
lpqQ
Rv3362c
Rv2627c
pstA2
Rv3542c
ansP
sigM
glgX
Rv3054c
Rv0195
pcnA
cysW
Rv1767
Rv1045
dppC
Rv3737
Rv3779
Rv2567
Rv2293c
Rv2823c
aceA

Rv1412
Rv0520
Rv0988
Rv2626c
Rv3854c
Rv0251c
Rv0779c
Rv0836c
Rv0835
Rv3362c
Rv2627c
Rv0936
Rv3542c
Rv2127
Rv3911
Rv1564c
Rv3054c
Rv0195
Rv3907c
Rv2398c
Rv1767
Rv1045
Rv3664c
Rv3737
Rv3779
Rv2567
Rv2293c
Rv2823c
Rv0467

Probable riboﬂavin synthase
Probable methyltransferase
Possible conserved exported protein
Conserved hypothetical protein
Monooxygenase
Heat shock protein
Possible transmembrane protein
Hypothetical protein
Predicted surface lipoprotein
Probable ATP/GTP binding protein
Conserved hypothetical protein
Phosphate-transport ABC transporter
Hypothetical protein
Probable asparagine permease
Sigma factor SigM
Probable maltooligotrehalose synthase
Conserved hypothetical protein
Two component transcriptional regulator
Probable polyA-polymerase
Probable sulfate-transporter ABC transporter
Conserved hypothetical protein
Hypothetical protein/MΦ survival
Probable dipeptide ABC transporter
Conserved transmembrane protein
Conserved transmembrane protein
Conserved transmembrane protein
Conserved hypothetical protein
Conserved hypothetical secreted protein
Isocitrate lyase

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

The Table lists arrays features that showed hybridization above background with SCOTS cDNA from sputum bacteria but not ﬁrst-strand cDNA from mid-log broth
cultures. Hybridization signal levels at least threefold over background were considered detection of the corresponding mRNAs. cDNA probes were prepared from
shaking mid-log phase M7H9 OADC broth-grown cultures of M. tuberculosis H37Rv and sputum bacteria as described in Section “Materials and Methods.” ORFS
are annotated as per Tuberculist (Genolist, Pasteur Institute).

that expected biases in plasmid cloning of cDNAs prevented us
from distinguishing among gene family transcripts by this novel
approach. PCR analysis of cDNA prepared from H37Rv grown
in laboratory cultures with primers spanning intergenic and ORF
junctions in the esxKL coding regions indicated that ORFs Rv1197
and Rv1198 and upstream Rv1196 (PPE-18) and Rv1195 (PE-
13) can be transcribed in a single polycistronic mRNA (data not
shown). Although Goldstone et al. (2009) showed that expres-
sion of an upstream transcript encoding PE-13 and PPE-18 can
also be independently regulated, analysis by RT-qPCR indicated
that mRNA steady-state levels for corresponding upstream PE and
PPE ORFs were reduced at least ﬁvefold in both ΔesxKL and esxJIi
mutants (data not shown).

esxKL AND esxJI mRNAs ARE DIFFERENTIALLY EXPRESSED
Duplication and conservation of nearly identical protein coding
capacity among the ﬁve QILLS–Mtb9.9 allele pairs (esxJI, esxKL,

esxMN, esxPO, and esxWV ) suggests that the encoded products
are important contributors for M. tuberculosis colonization of
normal ecological niches (Cole et al., 1998). In additional to
increasing gene copy number, retaining duplications with min-
imal variation may also reﬂect capacity for differential expres-
sion under different growth conditions (Kumar et al., 2005). We
therefore determined steady-state mRNA levels for these gene
pairs in M. tuberculosis H37Rv growing at mid-log in standard
media by targeting the different intergenic regions with RT-qPCR
primers. All transcripts were expressed at different steady-sate
levels during growth in broth culture (Table 3), ranging from
about fourfold lower (for esxJI ) to eightfold higher (for esxPO)
than a sigA reference transcript (Manganelli et al., 1999). Bacteria
growing in THP-1 macrophages at 48 h post-infection, and in
C57BL6 mouse lungs 21 day following high dose infections showed
greatly elevated esxJI and reduced esxKL transcript levels rela-
tive to bacteria at mid-log in broth cultures (Table 4). As esxJI

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 5

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

Table 2 | Mycobacterium tuberculosis esx transcripts identiﬁed by
novel targeted SCOTS in patient specimens 8 and 9.

cDNA clone

Gene

Predicted gene product

SPUTUM SPECIMEN NO. 8
8.1
8.2
8.3
8.4
8.5
8.6
8.7
8.8
8.9
8.10
SPUTUM SPECIMEN NO. 9
9.1
9.2
9.3
9.4
9.5
9.6
9.7
9.8
9.9
10

esxK
esxL
umaA
Rv3474
esxK
umaA
esxL
esxO
Rv2263
umaA

esxO
mmp19
esxL
Rv3474
esxL
esxL
esxL
Rv3661
Rv3474
esxK

Esx factor “K”
Esx factor “L”
Cell wall synthase
Transposase
Esx factor “K”
Cell wall synthase
Esx factor “L”
Esx factor “O”
Oxidoreductase
Cell wall synthase

Esx factor “O”
Transport
Esx factor “L”
Transposase
Esx factor “L”
Esx factor “L”
Esx factor “L”
Hypothetical protein
Transposase
Esx factor “L”

cDNAs from bacteria in patient sputum that hybridized to an ampliﬁed biotinylated
esxJI DNA region common to ﬁve previously identiﬁed esx gene pairs of interest
was obtained by SCOTS and cloned into an E. coli vector. Corresponding RNA’s
were then identiﬁed by sequencing plasmid cDNA clones as shown.

mRNA levels were at dramatically higher levels (46- to 48-fold)
at 21 days post-infection in bacteria present in mouse lung tis-
sues, we attempted to determine levels in bacteria present in a
few additional sputum specimens and a single human patient
tissue specimen directly by RT-qPCR, but were only able to con-
sistently measure abundant rRNA levels. Taken together, our data
demonstrate the differential regulation of esxJI and esxKL mRNA
expression in environments including those encountered during
infection.

esxKL CONTRIBUTES TO THE GROWTH OF M. TUBERCULOSIS IN
MACROPHAGES
As we identiﬁed esxKL as highly expressed by M. tuberculosis
during active human disease, we sought to investigate contribu-
tions of the encoded factors to growth in a cell culture model of
infection (Theus et al., 2004; Price et al., 2008). Human mono-
cytic THP-1 cell monolayers were infected at a low MOI of 1:
1 either with H37Rv, an H37Rv ΔesxKL deletion mutant, or
esxK or esxL complemented isogenic strains (see Materials and
Methods). Mycobacterial growth was monitored as CFU in lysates
at 24 and 96 h post-infection. As shown in Figure 2, the abil-
ity of the ΔesxKL mutant to colonize these cells was impaired
(P < 0.0001 at 4 days) relative to the wild-type. Complementation
of the ΔesxKL mutant with esxL, but not esxK, restored intra-
cellular growth (Figure 2B). Additional similar experiments with

Table 3 | QILSS–Mtb9.9 family mRNA are expressed at different levels.

mRNA

sigA
sigA
sigA
esxWV
esxWV
esxWV
esxJI
esxJI
esxJI
esxKL
esxKL
esxKL
esxPO
esxPO
esxPO
esxMN
esxMN
esxMN

C t

17.05
17.28
17.43
18.47
18.18
18.72
19.07
19.51
19.33
14.66
15.10
15.29
14.17
14.27
14.63
16.15
15.96
16.06

Average C t

17.2

18.4

19.3

15.0

14.3

16.1

SD

0.19

0.27

0.22

0.32

0.24

0.09

The table shows differences in the steady-state mRNA expression levels for
mRNAs encoding esx subfamily members in H37Rv growing at mid-logarithmic
phase in ﬁlter capped shaking ﬂasks as described in Section “Materials and Meth-
ods.” Results including those for a sigA reference transcript are shown as cycle
detection thresholds, and are triplicate determinations from one of two cDNAs
that showed similar relative levels.

Table 4 | esxJI and esxKL mRNAs are differentially expressed in
different in vivo environments.

In vivo environment

Fold change

HUMAN PBMC (48 h)
esxJI
esxKL
MOUSE LUNG (22 DAYS-HIGH DOSE)
esxJI
esxKL

+5.1
−9.8
+30.2
−14.8

Table shows changes in mRNA steady-state expression levels as determined by
RT-qPCR. Fold-changes were determined by the comparative Ct approach using
REST software as described by Pfafﬂe (Pfafﬂ et al., 2002), and were signiﬁcant
at the P < 0.05 level. H37Rv sigA transcript levels were used as an internal ref-
erence for comparing levels of esx transcripts in the two experimental infection
models as previously described (Manganelli et al., 1999). Results representing
those of two independent experiments are shown.

experimental infection of primary single-donor PBMC as pre-
viously described (Graham and Clark-Curtiss, 1999; Price et al.,
2008) conﬁrmed these results (Figure 2C). These comparisons of
isogenic recombinant strains indicated that the partial but signif-
icant intracellular growth defect seen in this model was due to a
lack of esxL expression. Further analyses, as describe below, indi-
cated that this defect was also apparent in replication rate during
growth in laboratory broth (but not plate) media.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 6

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

ESXK AND ESXL DO NOT INTERACT IN AN E. COLI TWO-HYBRID
SYSTEM
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Cfp-10 and Esat-6 proteins show only
limited similarity to EsxK and EsxL, but are encoded within related
chromosomal regions (Gey Van Pittius et al., 2001) and interact
to form a 1:1 dimer (Renshaw et al., 2002). This dimerization
is an essential aspect of their function (Renshaw et al., 2005). We
therefore determined if we could demonstrate an EsxK–EsxL inter-
action in an E. coli two-hybrid system (Dove et al., 1997). Although
all controls gave appropriate results, no colonies were obtained on
selective media when E. coli was co-transformed with pBT–EsxK
and pTRG–EsxL fusion plasmids. Western blot analyses conﬁrmed
soluble cytoplasmic expression of both EsxK and EsxL fusions
protein partners (data not shown). We were therefore unable to
demonstrate this QILLS–Mtb9.9 family pair interaction. Mah-
mood et al. (2011) have recently shown interaction of the most
similar pair, EsxWV (Rv3619c–Rv3620c), but with an approximate
10-fold lower K d than the Cfp-10–Esat-6-pair. If EsxK and EsxL do
interact, we were unable to show it with this assay, and as described
above, and complementation of esxL alone in the ΔesxKL mutant
reversed an intracellular growth defect (Figure 2).

CO-INFECTION WITH WILD-TYPE RESTORES GROWTH OF A ΔesxKL
MUTANT
Previous studies have shown that esxL is exported, and found in
M. tuberculosis H37Rv culture supernatants (Mattow et al., 2003;
Champion et al., 2006). To determine if the esxL encoded secreted
protein factor produced by wild-type bacteria could rescue the
partial growth defect of the ΔesxKL mutant, THP-1 macrophages
were co-infected with equal numbers of H37Rv and ΔesxKL
mutant at an MOI of 1:1. Intracellular growth of H37Rv and the
ΔesxKL mutant sub-populations and controls were determined
by plating cell lysates on different selective agars and determining
CFUs (Figure 3A). Even with this relatively insensitive approach,
it was clear that co-infection with H37Rv fully restored growth
of the ΔesxKL mutant (P < 0.0001) as determine by total lysate
CFUs. We then co-infected cells with ΔesxKL, and decreasing
numbers of H37Rv. ΔesxKL CFUs in monolayer lysates declined
with decreased H37Rv co-Infection levels (Figure 3B). Similar
experiments with human primary PBMCs conﬁrmed that wild-
type co-infection at low MOI was able to restore the ability of
the mutant population to replicate in the same monolayer (data
not shown). These results indicated that wild-type bacteria con-
fer normal growth either directly via by providing a trans-acting
EsxL secreted protein in the monolayer, or by inhabiting shared
cells or phagosomes and modulating a common intracellular
environment.

To distinguish between these possibilities, we examined the dis-
tribution of differentially labeled bacteria in these low multiplicity
infections by ﬂuorescent microscopy. THP-1 macrophages were
inoculated with equal numbers of surface labeled wild-type (green
dye) and ΔesxKL mutant (red dye) at MOI of 1:1 as described in
the Section “Materials and Methods.” At 24, 48, and 72 h post-
infection, infected cells were examined by confocal microscopy.
As shown in Figure 4, few if any wild-type and ΔesxKL mutant
bacteria resided within in the same cells during the course of these
infections. Our data are therefore consistent with a secreted EsxL

FIGURE 2 | ΔesxKL mutant is defective in intracellular growth. (A)
THP-1 cells were infected with wild-type (open squares) or ΔesxKL mutant
(open triangles) at a MOI of 1: l. Data points indicate the mean number of
CFUs for three independently infected wells and error bars indicate SD
from means. Intracellular growth of the ΔesxKL mutant was signiﬁcantly
reduced in three independent experiments (P < 0.005)* at 96 h as
determined by unpaired t-test. (B) THP-1 cells were infected at MOI of 1:1
and a growth index as CFU at 96 h relative to CFU at 24 h was determined
for wild-type (open bar), ΔesxKL (light gray bar), esxK complemented (dark
gray bar), and esxL complemented (black bar) strains. Reduced intracellular
growth of ΔesxKL (P < 0.005)* was reversed by restoring only esxL. Data
shown is a representative of two independent experiments. (C) The
ΔesxKL mutant showed this growth defect in similar experiments with a
primary single-donor PBMC infection model, and restoring esxL allowed
normal intracellular growth.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 7

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

FIGURE 3 | Co-infection with wild-type allows intracellular growth of
the ΔesxKL mutant population. (A) THP-1 monolayers were infected with
wild-type or ΔesxKL mutant or 1:1 ratio of wild-type and ΔesxKL mutant
strains at a MOI of 1:1. CFUs were determined at 24 and 96 h post-infection.
Growth indices are shown for wild-type (open bar), ΔesxKL (gray bar), and
ΔesxKL sub-population in co-infection (black bar). Reduced intracellular
growth of ΔesxKL mutant (P < 0.005)* was rescued by co-infection with
wild-type bacteria. A representative of three independent experiments is
shown (B) THP-1 monolayers were co-infected with ﬁxed number of
ΔesxKL and varying concentration of wild-type H37Rv. Growth index at
96 h post-infection for wild-type (open bar) and ΔesxKL (gray bar) in each
co-infection well was determined. Data from a single experiment is shown.

factor produced by wild-type bacteria able to restore growth to
bacteria lacking this factor in independently infected cells.

FIGURE 4 | esxK L mutant and wild-type bacteria do not inhabit the
same cells during low MOI co-infection. A representative confocal
microscopy image of THP-1 cells simultaneously infected with equal
proportion of ﬂuorescently labeled wild-type (red) and ΔesxKL mutant
(green) at MOI of 1:1 is shown. Cells were infected and ﬁxed at (A) 24 h,
and (B) 72 h post-infection as described in Section “Materials and
Methods.”

QILLS–Mtb9.9 MUTANTS HAVE GROWTH DEFECTS IN LABORATORY
CULTURES
While characterizing the contribution of esxKL to the ability of M.
tuberculosis to colonize human cell line macrophages, we also ini-
tiated experiments to compare the role of esxJI. esxJI was chosen
among the four other QILLS pairs because of its different mRNA
expression pattern (Table 4), and otherwise highly similar protein
product. Although EsxI and EsxL differ by only two amino acids,
both differences are predicted to alter alpha-helical content of the
amino terminal halves of the proteins (Figure 5). In an extended
effort to generate a ΔesxJI mutant, we were consistently unable
to recover hygromycin resistant transformants following allele
exchange approach successful in obtaining ΔesxKL strain pairs
(see Materials and Methods). We were eventually able to obtain
the desired ΔesxJI knockout by allowing transformants plates to
incubate for over 2 months (rather than 3 weeks, not shown), but

our efforts were then inhibited by the inability of this extremely
slow growing ΔesxJI knockout mutant to grow in broth cultures.
As an alternate strategy, we instead replaced the intergenic spacer
region between esxJ and esxI with a selectable hygromycin resis-
tance marker leaving the two ORFs intact. This“esxJI -interrupted”
(esxJIi) mutant formed colonies with a more limited delay (1 week)
and was of interest in exhibiting several different growth defects
in broth cultures. esxJIi showed an extended lag period prior to
replicating at a reduced rate, and then reached stationary phase at
a lower density compared to both wild-type and ΔesxKL mutant
bacteria (Figure 6A). These growth defects could also be reversed
by co-culturing with wild-type bacteria (Figure 6B) or by comple-
menting only the esxI region with a single-copy integrating vector
(Figure 6A).

As esxI was clearly important for the growth of M. tuberculosis
in the absence of any host, we re-examined our ΔesxKL mutant

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 8

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

FIGURE 5 | Secondary structure prediction for M. tuberculosis EsxL (Rv1198) and EsxI (Rv1037c). The ﬁgures depicts the difference in the alpha-helical
secondary structures of EsxL and EsxI based on analysis with nnpredict (Kneller et al., 1990).

more closely to determine if we had previously failed to detect any
similar in vitro growth defects. When comparing H37Rv, ΔesxKL
knockout, and esxL complemented strains we were able to observe
that the ΔesxKL mutant was growing at a slower growth rate com-
pared to wild-type and complemented strains (Figure 7). Unlike
either esxJI mutant, ΔesxKL grew normally on plates (not shown),
and unlike esxJIi, to normal stationary population density and
without an extended lag in broth cultures (Figure 7). As both
mutants showed growth defects in the absence of host cells, our
experiments indicate the EsxI and EsxL secreted factors make basic
contributions to growth, rather than being speciﬁcally involved in
colonizing host macrophages.

DISCUSSION
As active human infections proceed from only a few bacteria sur-
viving aerosol transmission in droplet nuclei to initiate growth
within resting alveolar macrophages, and eventually to replication
to high titers on the inner walls of pulmonary cavities, tubercle
bacilli inhabit quite different in vivo environments. Colonization
of these multiple natural ecological niches requires coordinated
expression of different sets of genes, including not only those
encoding factors that directly inﬂuence hosts, but also those that
govern both basic and alternative microbial metabolism. Central
to the multiple strategies used by tubercle bacilli to evade host
immune responses is a need for temporal regulation of bacterial
growth and replication among microbes residing in cells and tis-
sues. In both latent and active human disease, the dynamic results
of temporal immune responses remodel lung tissue into novel
structures that are the hallmark of the disease, potentially ben-
eﬁting both host and pathogen (Russell, 2007). Among multiple
and heterogeneous bacterial populations found in these lesions in
human pulmonary infections, individual local races may be won
and lost, even at different sites within the same lung. We remain
largely unable to answer central questions of how and why the
balance between bacterial replication and effective cell-mediated
immunity can readily tip in one direction or another. The ability
of bacteria to grow within these niches must therefore be viewed
as a critical aspect of successful colonization, encompassing fun-
damental aspects of the ability to both provoke and avoid immune
responses, and thereby ultimately determine disease progress and
outcome.

Bacteria are traditionally viewed as autonomous free-living
single-celled organisms capable of initiating growth in the absence

of others and without need of exogenous signals or growth factors
typical of eukaryotic cells. Over the last decade, roles for intercel-
lular signaling molecules have become well deﬁned, particularly
the serine lactones produced by Gram-negative organisms that
modulate density dependent gene expression (Shank and Kolter,
2009), and peptides that regulate genetic exchange and production
of adherence factors and exoenzymes in Gram positive bacteria
(Thoendel and Horswill, 2010). Previous studies have so far iden-
tiﬁed only one such putative signal molecule produced by M.
tuberculosis, that designated “Rfp” or resuscitation-promoting-
factor (Kana et al., 2008). The ﬁve members of this family present
in H37Rv were identiﬁed based on sequence similarity to a Micro-
coccus luteus protein with a role in emergence from long-term
starvation in laboratory cultures. In M. tuberculosis these were
also originally described as autocrine growth factors (Mukamolova
et al., 2002). However, determinations of the crystal structures of
the M. tuberculosis Rfps indicate that they are likely instead actually
peptidoglycan hydrolases that remodel bacterial cell walls, thereby
allowing new synthesis involved in growth, septation, and cell divi-
sion (Kana and Mizrahi, 2010). This emphasizes the potential for
secreted proteins recognized as acting as “growth factors” to be
other than signal molecules per se. Rather they may be diffusible
enzymes with mechanistic roles in growth that may or may not
be expressed in response to other well-described types of signal
molecules.

We do not yet know how EsxI and EsxL contribute to the
growth of M. tuberculosis, nor how EsxL secreted by wild-type cells
is able to rescue the intracellular growth phenotype of ΔesxKL
mutant bacteria growing in different cells in the same mono-
layer. We believe that there are several likely scenarios. First, even
the smallest bacterial proteins would require an active process
to exit and enter host cells. It has recently been described by J.
S. Schorey’s laboratory that experimentally infected murine cell
line macrophages release exosomes containing secreted M. tuber-
culosis factors. Treatment of cells with bacterial culture ﬁltrate
proteins also causes cells to take up and release these microbial
factors as membrane enclosed exosomes capable of delivering con-
tents into other cells (Giri et al., 2010). Cells that are not infected
are thereby altered, including becoming attenuated in responding
to IFN-gamma, and thereby more permissive from intracellular
growth of M. tuberculosis (Singh et al., 2011). As macrophage
phagosomes containing M. tuberculosis remain in an early endo-
cytic pathway capable of exchanging cellular material with the

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 9

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

FIGURE 7 | Reduced in vitro growth of ΔesxKL mutant. Cultures were
grown in M7H9 broth supplemented with 0.05% Tween and OADC and
optical density measurements taken at 600 nm. Circles indicate optical
density for wild-type, squares for ΔesxKL mutant, and triangles for esxL
complemented mutant strain. The reduced growth rate of the mutant was
restored to wild-type levels by complementing with esxL. A representative
of three experiments is shown.

here), and some of these cells get higher number of bacteria (6–
10 or more as determined by acid fast staining and microscopy
(data not shown). Some cells are therefore likely to lyse early
in the experimental time course, and release both bacteria and
secreted factors. Uptake of EsxL could therefore also occur by nor-
mal macrophage pinocytosis, and complement mutant bacteria
through normal endocytic vesicle trafﬁcking. Alternately, Renshaw
et al. (2005) showed that the Cfp-10–Esat-6 dimer binds speciﬁ-
cally to human monocytic cells. NMR solution structure modeling
indicated that the complex is unlikely to have a pore forming
(cytolytic) or catalytic role, and a requirement for a speciﬁc car-
boxyl terminal domain of Cfp-10 in the interaction is consistent
with a host receptor interaction. The authors propose that this may
exploit a host cell signaling interaction and alter host cell behav-
ior in a way favorable to the pathogen. Subsequently Pathak et al.
(2007) showed that Cfp-10–Esat-6 directly binds Toll-like receptor
2, and thereby inhibits macrophage inﬂammatory signaling path-
ways. We do not yet know if these properties are shared by other the
Esat-6 subfamily members who contributions to bacterial growth
we describe.

Determining the speciﬁc mechanisms by which these less well-
described Cfp-10–Esat-6 like QILLS–Mtb9.9 secreted factors are
able to inﬂuence bacterial growth in the absence of host cells,
and then during intracellular growth and growth in the lung dur-
ing active disease will be an important goal for future research.
The ability of M. tuberculosis to grow slowly, and to modulate its
growth during infection is undoubtedly a key factor in its ability
to frequently avoid a sterilizing host immune response. Further
deﬁning the contributions of this family of secreted factors to that

FIGURE 6 | esxJIi mutation reduces growth in cultures. (A) Cultures
were grown in 7H9 broth supplemented with 0.05% Tween and OADC and
optical density measurements taken at 600 nm. Growth of wild-type is
indicated with squares, esxJIi mutant with circles, and esxI complemented
strain with triangles. The inset shows wet weight measurements of
wild-type (bar), esxJIi (gray bar), and esxI complemented strain (black bar)
at 15 days of growth. A representative of three independent experiments is
shown. (B) Co-culturing with wild-type bacteria rescues growth of esxJIi
mutant. Growth of H37Rv (squares), the esxJIi mutant (triangles), and the
esxJIi mutant in co-culture (closed circles) were determined by
enumerating CFUs. Plate counts were in triplicate and averaged. Inset
shows growth indices for wild-type (bar), esxJIi mutant (gray bar), and
esxJIi mutant in co-culture (black bar) calculated as CFU at 9 days relative
day 0. Data shown is a representative of three independent experiments
where the wild-type and mutant were grown both independently and in
co-culture, and showed this difference in growth of the mutant.

host cell and the environment (Beatty et al., 2001), secreted EsxK
may be able to leave and enter phagosomes of infected host
cells through an exocytic pathway. We do not yet know if this
is can account for the nearly complete mutant rescue we see with
low MOI co-infection in our human primary PBMC infection
model.

Alternately, in any cell culture infection model only a percent-
age of host cells are infected (i.e., 10–30% at the 1:1 MOI used

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 10

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

ability will be important in better understanding this common
and deadly disease.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Public Health Service grant RO1A1
48635 from the National Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Dis-
ease to James E. Graham. The authors thank Michael Cynamon at
SUNY Upstate Medical University for providing mouse lung tis-
sue specimens. We thank Linda Reeves-Hammock in Nashville
and Forest Arnold, MD in Louisville for their assistance with
identifying patients and obtaining patient sputum specimens.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at
http://www.frontiersin.org/Cellular_and_Infection_Microbiology
_-_closed_section/10.3389/fmicb.2011.00266/abstract

Table S1 | Highly expressed mRNAs in sputum bacteria. Table shows a list of
H37Rv array features that were detected as expressed by hybridizing SCOTS
cDNAs probes from bacteria in at least four or ﬁve patient sputum specimens.
ORFs highlighted in green are those whose mRNAs were not detected (3× over
background) by conventional ﬁrst-strand cDNA probes from H37Rv in standard
mid-log shaking broth cultures. Those in blue encode QILLS–Mtb9.9 family
pairs. ORFS are annotated as per Tuberculist (Lew et al., 2011).

REFERENCES
Alderson, M. R., Bement, T., Day, C. H.,
Zhu, L., Molesh, D., Skeiky, Y. A.,
Coler, R., Lewinsohn, D. M., Reed,
S. G., and Dillon, D. C. (2000).
Expression cloning of an immun-
odominant family of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis antigens using human
CD4(+) T cells. J. Exp. Med. 191,
551–560.

Bardarov, S., Bardarov, S. Jr., Pavelka, M.
S. Jr., Sambandamurthy, V., Larsen,
M., Tufariello, J., Chan, J., Hatfull,
G., and Jacobs, W. R. Jr. (2002).
Specialized transduction: an efﬁ-
cient method for generating marked
and unmarked targeted gene disrup-
tions in Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
M. bovis BCG and M. smegmatis.
Microbiology 148, 3007–3017.

Beatty, W. L., and Russell, D. G. (2000).
Identiﬁcation of mycobacterial sur-
face proteins
released into sub-
cellular compartments of infected
macrophages.
Immun. 68,
6997–7002.

Infect.

Beatty, W. L., Ullrich, H. J., and Russell,
D. G. (2001). Mycobacterial surface
moieties are released from infected
macrophages by a constitutive exo-
cytic event. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 80,
31–40.

Bishai, W. (1998). The Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
sequence:
anatomy of a master adaptor. Trends
Microbiol. 6, 464–465.

genomic

Bitter, W., Houben, E. N., Bottai, D.,
Brodin, P., Brown, E. J., Cox, J.
S., Derbyshire, K., Fortune, S. M.,
Gao, L. Y., Liu, J., Gey van Pit-
tius, N. C., Pym, A. S., Rubin, E.
J., Sherman, D. R., Cole, S. T., and
Brosch, R. (2009). Systematic genetic
nomenclature for type VII secretion
systems. PLoS Pathog. 5, e1000507.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000507

Champion, P. A., Stanley, S. A., Cham-
pion, M. M., Brown, E. J., and
Cox, J. S. (2006). C-terminal signal
sequence promotes virulence factor
secretion in Mycobacterium tubercu-
losis. Science 313, 1632–1636.

Cole, S. T., Brosch, R., Parkhill, J., Gar-
nier, T., Churcher, C., Harris, D.,

Gordon, S. V., Eiglmeier, K., Gas, S.,
Barry, C. E. III, Tekaia, F., Badcock,
K., Basham, D., Brown, D., Chill-
ingworth, T., Connor, R., Davies, R.,
Devlin, K., Feltwell, T., Gentles, S.,
Hamlin, N., Holroyd, S., Hornsby,
T., Jagels, K., Krogh, A., McLean, J.,
Moule, S., Murphy, L., Oliver, K.,
Osborne, J., Quail, M. A., Rajan-
dream, M. A., Rogers, J., Rutter, S.,
Seeger, K., Skelton, J., Squares, R.,
Squares, S., Sulston, J. E., Taylor, K.,
Whitehead, S., and Barrell, B. G.
(1998). Deciphering the biology of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis from the
complete genome sequence. Nature
393, 537–544.

Desjardin, L. E., Perkins, M. D., Teix-
eira, L., Cave, M. D., and Eisenach,
K. D. (1996). Alkaline decontamina-
tion of sputum specimens adversely
stability of mycobacterial
affects
mRNA.
J. Clin. Microbiol. 34,
2435–2439.

Dove, S. L., Joung, J. K., and Hochschild,
A. (1997). Activation of prokary-
otic transcription through arbitrary
protein-protein contacts. Nature
386, 627–630.

Garton, N. J., Waddell, S. J., Sherratt, A.
L., Lee, S. M., Smith, R. J., Senner,
C., Hinds, J., Rajakumar, K., Adeg-
bola, R. A., Besra, G. S., Butcher, P. D.,
and Barer, M. R. (2008). Cytological
and transcript analyses reveal fat and
lazy persister-like bacilli in tuber-
culous sputum. PLoS Med. 5, e75.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0050075
Gey Van Pittius, N. C., Gamieldien, J.,
Hide, W., Brown, G. D., Siezen, R. J.,
and Beyers,A. D. (2001). The ESAT-6
gene cluster of Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis and other high G+ C Gram-
positive bacteria. Genome Biol. 2,
44.

Giri, P. K., Kruh, N. A., Dobos, K. M.,
and Schorey, J. S. (2010). Proteomic
analysis identiﬁes highly antigenic
proteins in exosomes from M. tuber-
culosis-infected and culture ﬁltrate
protein-treated macrophages. Pro-
teomics 10, 3190–3202.

Goldstone, R. M., Goonesekera, S. D.,
Bloom, B. R., and Sampson, S. L.

(2009). The transcriptional regula-
tor Rv0485 modulates the expression
of a pe and ppe gene pair and is
required for Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis virulence. Infect. Immun. 77,
4654–4667.

Graham, J. E., and Clark-Curtiss, J. E.
(1999). Identiﬁcation of Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis RNAs synthe-
sized in response to phagocytosis
by human macrophages by selec-
tive capture of transcribed sequences
(SCOTS). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 96, 11554–11559.

Graham,

J. E., Peek, R. M.

Jr.,
Krishna, U., and Cover, T. L. (2002).
Global analysis of Helicobacter pylori
gene expression in human gas-
tric mucosa. Gastroenterology 123,
1637–1648.

Grosset, J. (2003). Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis in the extracellular compart-
ment: an underestimated adversary.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 47,
833–836.

Homolka, S., Niemann, S., Russell,
D. G., and Rohde, K. H. (2010).
Functional genetic diversity among
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
com-
plex clinical isolates: delineation of
conserved core and lineage-speciﬁc
transcriptomes during intracellular
survival. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000988.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000988

Hunter, R. L. (2011). Pathology of post
primary tuberculosis of the lung: an
illustrated critical review. Tuberculo-
sis (Edinb) 91, 497–509.

Jones, G. J., Gordon, S. V., Hewinson, R.
G., and Vordermeier, H. M. (2010).
Screening of predicted secreted anti-
gens
from Mycobacterium bovis
reveals the immunodominance of
the ESAT-6 protein family. Infect.
Immun. 78, 1326–1332.

Kana, B. D., Gordhan, B. G., Down-
ing, K.
J., Sung, N., Vostrok-
tunova, G., Machowski, E. E., Tsen-
ova, L., Young, M., Kaprelyants, A.,
Kaplan, G., and Mizrahi, V. (2008).
The resuscitation-promoting factors
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis are
required for virulence and resus-
citation from dormancy but are

collectively dispensable for growth
in vitro. Mol. Microbiol. 67, 672–684.
Kana, B. D., and Mizrahi, V. (2010).
Resuscitation-promoting factors as
lytic enzymes for bacterial growth
and signaling. FEMS Immunol. Med.
Microbiol. 58, 39–50.

Kesavan, A. K., Brooks, M., Tufariello, J.,
Chan, J., and Manabe, Y. C. (2009).
Tuberculosis genes expressed during
persistence and reactivation in the
resistant rabbit model. Tuberculosis
(Edinb) 89, 17–21.

Kneller, D. G., Cohen, F. E., and Lan-
gridge, R. (1990). Improvements in
protein secondary structure predic-
tion by an enhanced neural network.
J. Mol. Biol. 214, 171–182.

Kumar, A., Chandolia, A., Chaudhry,
U., Brahmachari, V., and Bose, M.
(2005). Comparison of mammalian
cell entry operons of mycobacte-
ria:
in silico analysis and expres-
sion proﬁling. FEMS Immunol. Med.
Microbiol. 43, 185–195.

Lew, J. M., Kapopoulou, A., Jones, L. M.,
and Cole, S. T. (2011). TubercuList –
10 years after. Tuberculosis (Edinb)
91, 1–7.

Louise, R., Skjot, V., Agger, E. M.,
and Andersen, P.
(2001). Anti-
gen discovery and tuberculosis vac-
cine development
in the post-
genomic era. Scand. J. Infect. Dis. 33,
643–647.

Mahmood,A., Srivastava, S., Tripathi, S.,
Ansari, M. A., Owais, M., and Arora,
A. (2011). Molecular characteriza-
tion of secretory proteins Rv3619c
and Rv3620c from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis H37Rv. FEBS J. 278,
341–353.

Manganelli, R., Dubnau, E., Tyagi, S.,
Kramer, F. R., and Smith, I. (1999).
Differential expression of 10 sigma
factor genes in Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis. Mol. Microbiol. 31, 715–724.
Mastorides, S. M., Oehler, R. L., Greene,
J. N., Sinnott, J. T., Kranik, M., and
Sandin, R. L. (1999). The detection
of airborne Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis using micropore membrane
air sampling and polymerase chain
reaction. Chest 115, 19–25.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 11

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

Mattow, J., Schaible, U. E., Schmidt,
F., Hagens, K., Siejak, F., Brestrich,
G., Haeselbarth, G., Muller, E. C.,
Jungblut, P. R., and Kaufmann, S.
H. (2003). Comparative proteome
analysis of culture supernatant pro-
teins from virulent Mycobacterium
tuberculosis H37Rv and attenuated
M. bovis BCG Copenhagen. Elec-
trophoresis 24, 3405–3420.

Mukamolova, G. V., Turapov, O. A.,
Young, D. I., Kaprelyants, A. S., Kell,
D. B., and Young, M. (2002). A
family of autocrine growth factors
in Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Mol.
Microbiol. 46, 623–635.

J.

Pallen, M.

(2002). The ESAT-
6/WXG100 superfamily – and a
new Gram-positive secretion sys-
tem? Trends Microbiol. 10, 209–212.
Pathak, S. K., Basu, S., Basu, K.
K., Banerjee, A., Pathak, S., Bhat-
tacharyya, A., Kaisho, T., Kundu,
M., and Basu,
J. (2007). Direct
extracellular
interaction between
the early secreted antigen ESAT-
6 of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
and TLR2 inhibits TLR signaling
in macrophages. Nat. Immunol. 8,
610–618.

Pfafﬂ, M. W., Horgan, G. W., and
Dempﬂe, L. (2002). Relative expres-
sion software tool (REST) for group-
wise
comparison and statistical
analysis of relative expression results
in real-time PCR. Nucleic Acids Res.
30, e36.

J. E.

Price, C. T., Bukka, A., Cynamon,
M., and Graham,
(2008).
Glycine betaine uptake by the ProX-
VWZ ABC transporter contributes
to the ability of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
to initiate growth in
human macrophages. J. Bacteriol.
190, 3955–3961.

Rachman, H., Strong, M., Ulrichs,
T., Grode, L., Schuchhardt,
J.,
Mollenkopf, H., Kosmiadi, G. A.,
Eisenberg, D., and Kaufmann, S.
H. (2006). Unique transcriptome

signature of Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis in pulmonary tuberculosis.
Infect. Immun. 74, 1233–1242.

Renshaw, P. S., Lightbody, K. L.,Veverka,
V., Muskett, F. W., Kelly, G., Frenkiel,
T. A., Gordon, S. V., Hewinson, R. G.,
Burke, B., Norman, J.,Williamson, R.
A., and Carr, M. D. (2005). Structure
and function of the complex formed
by the tuberculosis virulence factors
CFP-10 and ESAT-6. EMBO J. 24,
2491–2498.

Renshaw, P. S., Panagiotidou, P., Whe-
lan, A., Gordon, S. V., Hewinson,
R. G., Williamson, R. A., and Carr,
M. D. (2002). Conclusive evidence
that the major T-cell antigens of the
Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex
ESAT-6 and CFP-10 form a tight,
1:1 complex and characterization of
the structural properties of ESAT-
6, CFP-10, and the ESAT-6∗CFP-10
complex. Implications for pathogen-
esis and virulence. J. Biol. Chem. 277,
21598–21603.

Rohde, K., Yates, R. M., Purdy, G. E., and
Russell, D. G. (2007). Mycobacterium
tuberculosis and the environment
within the phagosome. Immunol.
Rev. 219, 37–54.

Russell, D. G. (2007). Who puts the
tubercle in tuberculosis? Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 5, 39–47.

complement

Schlesinger, L. S., and Horwitz, M. A.
(1991). Phagocytosis of Mycobac-
terium leprae by human monocyte-
derived macrophages is mediated
by
receptors CR1
(CD35), CR3 (CD11b/CD18), and
CR4
and IFN-
gamma activation inhibits com-
plement
function and
phagocytosis of this bacterium. J.
Immunol. 147, 1983–1994.

(CD11c/CD18)

receptor

Schnappinger, D., Ehrt, S., Voskuil, M.
I., Liu, Y., Mangan, J. A., Monahan, I.
M., Dolganov, G., Efron, B., Butcher,
P. D., Nathan, C., and Schoolnik, G.
K. (2003). Transcriptional adapta-
tion of Mycobacterium tuberculosis

within macrophages: insights into
the phagosomal environment. J. Exp.
Med. 198, 693–704.

Shank, E. A., and Kolter, R. (2009). New
developments in microbial
inter-
species signaling. Curr. Opin. Micro-
biol. 12, 205–214.

Shoen, C. M., DeStefano, M. S., Sklaney,
M. R., Monica, B. J., Slee, A. M.,
and Cynamon, M. H. (2004). Short-
course treatment regimen to identify
potential antituberculous agents in
a murine model of tuberculosis. J.
Antimicrob. Chemother. 53, 641–645.
Sidders, B., Withers, M., Kendall, S. L.,
Bacon, J., Waddell, S. J., Hinds, J.,
Golby, P., Movahedzadeh, F., Cox,
R. A., Frita, R., Ten Bokum, A.
M., Wernisch, L., and Stoker, N.
G. (2007). Quantiﬁcation of global
transcription patterns in prokary-
otes using spotted microarrays.
Genome Biol. 8, R265.

Simon, R., Lam, A., Li, M. C., Ngan,
M., Menenzes, S., and Zhao, Y.
(2007). Analysis of gene expression
data using BRB-ArrayTools. Cancer
Inform 3, 11–17.

Singh, P. P., LeMaire, C., Tan, J. C., Zeng,
E., and Schorey, J. S. (2011). Exo-
somes released from M. tuberculo-
sis infected cells can suppress IFN-
gamma mediated activation of naive
macrophages. PLoS ONE 6, e18564.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0018564

Sutcliffe, I. C. (2011). New insights into
the distribution of WXG100 pro-
tein secretion systems. Antonie Van
Leeuwenhoek 99, 127–131.

Talaat, A. M., Ward, S. K., Wu, C.
W., Rondon, E., Tavano, C., Ban-
nantine, J. P., Lyons, R., and John-
ston, S. A. (2007). Mycobacterial
bacilli are metabolically active dur-
ing chronic tuberculosis in murine
lungs: insights from genome-wide
transcriptional proﬁling. J. Bacteriol.
189, 4265–4274.

Theus, S. A., Cave, M. D., and Eisenach,
K. D. (2004). Activated THP-1 cells:

an attractive model for the assess-
ment of intracellular growth rates of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis isolates.
Infect. Immun. 72, 1169–1173.

Biosynthesis

Thoendel, M., and Horswill, A. R.
pep-
(2010).
tide
in Gram-positive
bacteria. Adv. Appl. Microbiol. 71,
91–112.

signals

of

Timm, J., Post, F. A., Bekker, L. G.,
Walther, G. B., Wainwright, H. C.,
Manganelli, R., Chan,W. T., Tsenova,
L., Gold, B., Smith, I., Kaplan, G.,
and McKinney, J. D. (2003). Differ-
ential expression of iron-, carbon-,
and oxygen-responsive mycobacte-
rial genes in the lungs of chroni-
cally infected mice and tuberculosis
patients. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
100, 14321–14326.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 23 June 2011; accepted: 15
December 2011; published online: 10 Jan-
uary 2012.
Citation: Bukka A, Price CTD, Kern-
odle DS and Graham JE (2012)
Mycobacterium tuberculosis RNA expres-
sion patterns in sputum bacteria indi-
cate secreted Esx factors contributing to
growth are highly expressed in active
disease. Front. Microbio. 2:266. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2011.00266
This article was submitted to Frontiers
in Cellular and Infection Microbiology, a
specialty of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Bukka, Price, Kern-
odle and Graham. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 12

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

APPENDIX
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mycobacterial cultures
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv (ATCC no. 25618) was
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and grown
in Middlebrook 7H9 broth supplemented with OADC enrich-
ment [Oleic acid, albumin(bovine, fraction V,) dextrose, cata-
lase (DIFCO)] and 0.05% Tween-80 at 37˚C on a rotary shaker.
Aliquots (1 ml) of logarithmic phase bacteria (grown as set cul-
tures at 37˚C) were frozen at −80˚C. Frozen stocks were used as
inoculums for infections by adding 0.1 mm zirconia silica beads
(Biospec, Barltesville, OK, USA) and incubating for 48 h at 37˚C
prior to vortexing and allowing to settle for 1 h prior to with-
drawing the upper aqueous phase containing uniform single-cell
suspensions (Price et al., 2008).

Isolation of RNA from sputum samples, broth-grown bacteria,
infected cells, and tissues
Frozen sputum samples in 50 ml tubes were thawed on ice and
homogenized by vortexing with 4-mm glass beads and 10% of
N -acetyl-l-cysteine solution as previously described (Desjardin
et al., 1996). The homogenate was then centrifuged at 8500× g
for 10 min. The pellet was resuspended in 4 ml of TRIZOL (InVit-
rogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) at 70˚C and 300 μl of phenol reagent
was added. The mixture was transferred to a tube containing
0.1 mm zirconia silica beads (Biospec) and processed in a Savant
FP-120 homogenizer at a setting of 6.5 for 20 s four times and
allowed to stand for 5 min on ice. Tubes were centrifuged at
500× g for 3 min to pellet the glass beads, and the entire aque-
ous phase was transferred to a new tube and subjected to two
rounds of organic extraction. About 200 μl of chloroform was
then added to the tube, which was vortexed for 1 min, and then
centrifuged at 13,000× g for 5 min. The aqueous phase portion
was removed and subjected to re-extraction with acid phenol–
chloroform and then with chloroform–isoamyl alcohol (24:1) and
precipitated with an equal volume of isopropanol in presence
of 20 μg of glycogen (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA). RNA pellets
were washed with 70% ethanol and resuspended in distilled water.
Tubes were centrifuged and entire aqueous phase was subjected to
two rounds of organic extraction and precipitation at the end of
each extraction.

Total RNA form broth-grown mid-log phase bacterial cultures
and infected primary human monocyte derived macrophages or
THP-1 cells were isolated using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen,
Valencia, CA, USA), according to the manufacture’s instructions
with modiﬁcations as described below. M. tuberculosis infected
C57BL6 mouse lung tissue specimens (∼0.1 g) were obtained
at 21 days in the active infection model previously described
(Shoen et al., 2004). Corresponding lysates and tissues in Qia-
gen lysis buffer on ice were brieﬂy heated at 70˚C for 1 min and
then homogenized with zirconia beads in screw-cap vials with a
Savant FP-120 instrument prior to column puriﬁcation (Graham
and Clark-Curtiss, 1999). RNA’s so obtained were then treated
with DNAse I (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA) as described by the
enzyme manufacturer, and stored at –80˚C in aliquots as ethanol
precipitates.

(cid:2)
sequence and nine random 3

cDNA synthesis
RNA isolated from broth-grown bacilli, infected macrophages,
infected mouse lung tissue specimens or sputum specimens was
converted to ﬁrst-strand cDNA with reverse transcriptase Super-
script III (Invitrogen) according to manufacture’s instructions.
For quantitative PCR measurements ﬁst-strand cDNA was syn-
thesized using 5 μg of total RNA with random nonamers (NEB,
Ipswitch, MA, USA). For SCOTS analysis, a primer with deﬁned
(cid:2)
5
nucleotides were used for
both ﬁrst- and second-strand synthesis as previously described
(Froussard, 1992). Primers used for cDNA synthesis from
broth RNA (5
-GCCGGAGCTCTGCAGAATTCNNNNNNNNN-
(cid:2)
3
-GACACTCTCGAGACATCACC
GGTACCNNNNNNNNN-3
) differ in their terminal sequences.
Second-strand synthesis was carried out with Klenow fragment
of DNA polymerase I (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) follow-
ing denaturation and reannealing of ﬁrst-strand cDNA with the
primers. Double-strand cDNAs were puriﬁed with QIAquick PCR
puriﬁcation columns (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA) and PCR
ampliﬁcation was carried out using appropriate primers lack-
ing the 3
-terminal random nucleotides that were used in cDNA
synthesis.

) and sputum-derived RNA (5

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

Selective capture of transcribed sequences
Mycobacterium tuberculosis cDNAs from total ampliﬁed cDNAs
from sputum specimens were selectively captured by hybridization
to denatured sonicated photobiotinylated M. tuberculosis genomic
DNA which has been prehybridized with blocking M. tuberculosis
ribosomal DNA (rDNA) fragments as previously described (Gra-
ham and Clark-Curtiss, 1999). Microbial cDNA–genomic DNA
hybrids were then collected by binding to streptavidin-coated
beads, and bacterial cDNAs were eluted by alkaline denaturation.
Eluted bacterial cDNAs were then ampliﬁed by PCR. After three
rounds of selective capture, bacterial cDNAs were used as template
to prepare radiolabeled probes.

Analysis of M. tuberculosis in vivo expression by genome array
hybridization
Mycobacterium tuberculosis genomic arrays on nylon from pro-
totype and limited production runs (Sigma-Genosys, Panorama
Gene Arrays) were used as previously described (Graham et al.,
2002). These arrays consist of PCR-ampliﬁed and size veriﬁed
fragments corresponding to the 3875 ORFs of the M. tuberculosis
H37Rv genome. Quadruplicate cultures for H37Rv were grown
independently for mid-logarithmic phase RNA. Random primed
radiolabeled ﬁrst-strand cDNA was prepared from 10 to 20 μg of
DNase-treated total RNA template by incorporation alpha P[33]
deoxy cytidine triphosphate (ICN Biomedicals, Irvine, CA, USA)
with Superscript III (Invitrogen). To analyze the composition of
M. tuberculosis cDNAs obtained by SCOTS, radiolabeled probes
were made from 2 μg of captured ampliﬁed cDNA using random
non-amer primers and 50 μCi P[33] dCTP with the modiﬁcation
of including cold dCTP at 1/100 the level of the other three dNTP’s.
Unincorporated nucleotides were removed by Sephadex G50 col-
umn chromatography then probes were denatured with 0.2 M
NaOH and incubation at 55˚C for 15 min. Radiolabeled cDNA

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 13

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

were added to the roller containing 10 ml of hybridization solu-
tion (Fawcett et al., 2000). Nylon membranes were hybridized for
24 h, washed, covered in a single layer of plastic ﬁlm (Sara Wrap,
3 M) and exposed to a Fuji phosphorimager plate overnight prior
to scanning with a Fuji BAS FLA-2000 (Fuji Scientiﬁc Imaging).
Quadruplicate scanned images were quantiﬁed with ArrayVision
software (Imaging Research, ON, Canada) and data analyzed with
BRB Array Tools (Simon et al., 2007) extension for Microsoft Excel.
Local background subtraction was used correct regional back-
ground variations within individual patterns from single-channel
data on nylon macro arrays. As SCOTS is intended as a quali-
tative screening tool, we determined if cDNAs for mRNAs were
detected or not detected by comparison of levels for background
based on designated blank spots on arrays. Those features showing
hybridization levels greater than threefold over the average level
for blank array features was considered as detected expression of
the corresponding mRNA. Similarly for mid-log broth cultures we
considered the average hybridization value for blanks on all four
arrays relative to the average values for hybridization signals for
ORFs obtained with four cDNAs from four independent cultures.

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

-ATCTTCCCAGTTCAGCAC-3

Identiﬁcation of esx paralogs by targeted selective hybridization
Homologous segment of the esxJI genomic DNA was PCR-
(cid:2)
ampliﬁed with (F) primer 5
-CGTGTGATGCGGACAAAG-3
and (R) primer 5
from H37Rv
genomic DNA. Three rounds of SCOTS captured cDNA from
sputum specimens 8 and 9 were then subjected to three rounds
of selective enrichment by hybridizing to biotinylated ampli-
ﬁed homologous segment of esxJI. After selective enrichment
cDNA’s were cloned in pCR2.1-Topo vector (InVitrogen). Individ-
ual plasmid clones were characterized by sequencing insert cDNA
fragments.

(cid:2)

Quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) analysis
For quantitative PCR measurements, primers used speciﬁ-
cally for measuring sigA and QILSS–Mtb9.9 mRNA levels
were chosen using Primer3 software and tested for optimal
PCR efﬁciency using genomic DNA template. As esx parlaogs
share high sequence similarity, intergenic regions were targeted
and mRNA levels measured for relevant transcripts. Primers
used were: sigA (F)-GACGAAGACCACGAAGACC, sigA (R)-
CATCCCAGACGAAATCACC, esxKL (F)-AATGAACCCCTGGC
AGGCCG, esxKL (R)-CACAATACTTTTACAAGCGA, esxOP (F)-
GATGAACTCCTGGCAAGCCA, esxOP (R)-CACAATACTTTTA
CAAGCGA, esxIJ (F)-CTCCTGAGTCGTCGGGCCGG, esxIJ (R)-
GGGCGTCCGCGCAAAACATC, esxVW (F)-CTCCTGAGTCGT
CGGGCCGG.

esxVW (R)-GGGCGTCCGCGCAAAACATT,

esxMN (F)-
AATGTGAGAAAGCGTACGCA, esxMN (R)-CCGCGCAAAACA
TTTCCGGT. For ﬂuorescence PCR reaction mixture appropri-
ate dilution of the cDNA was mixed with primers (250 nM ﬁnal
concentrations) and 10 μl of 2× Dynamo SYBR green qPCR kit
(Finnzymes, Espoo, Finland). The PCR reaction was monitored
using an Opticon detection system (MJ research, Waltham, MA,
USA). The major housekeeping sigma factor gene sigA was used as
an internal control for the normalization of transcripts as H37Rv
lacks the regulation of sigA expression seen in many clinical strains

(Manganelli et al., 1999). A “no-reverse transcriptase” control was
then used to conﬁrm absence of genomic DNA. Change in steady-
state mRNA levels were calculated and statistically analyzed by
comparing expression level of sigA and target RNAs in different
growth conditions using the REST software tool and a threshold
of P-value of <0.05 (Pfafﬂ et al., 2002).

Allele inactivation of esxKL and esxJI
An H37Rv ΔesxKL, esxJ-Hyg-I interrupted, and ΔesxJI mutants
were generated by specialized transduction method (Bardarov
et al., 2002) with some minor modiﬁcations (Price et al., 2008).
Brieﬂy, 700 base pair regions immediately up and down stream
of the targeted region were cloned into up and down stream
of hygromycin resistance gene in plasmid pYUB854. Specialized
transducing phage were generated by in vitro Lambda packaging
(Gigapack XL, Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA) of ligation reac-
tion of PacI digested fragments of circularized phAE87 vector and
PYUB854 containing 700 bp up down regions. After transducing
in E. coli HB101, hygromycin resistant transductants were screened
for large desired product. Phasmid DNA was pooled from desired
transductants and electroporated into Mycobacterium smegmatis
mc2 155 and plates were incubated at 30˚C to generate mycobacte-
riophage plaques. High titer mycobacteriophage preparation were
propagated in M. smegmatis and analyzed for temperature sensi-
tivity at 37˚C before transducing into H37Rv at MOI 10:1. Mutants
were selected on 7H9 agar supplemented with hygromycin. Dele-
tion of the entire gene was conﬁrmed by PCR, and lack of mRNA
signal in cDNA prepared from the mutant strain by RT-qPCR.
Complement strains were generated by cloning esxK or esxL for
ΔesxKL mutant, and esxI for esxJ-Hyg-I interrupted mutant,
downstream of constitutive hsp60 promoter in vectors pLou3kan
(kanamycin resistance marker), and pL0u3apr (apramycin resis-
tance marker) respectively. These vectors contain the L5 mycobac-
teriophage attP and integrate the genes at single-copy at bacterial
chromosomal attB site.

Primary human macrophages and THP-1 cell infections
Monocyte derived macrophages were obtained from two healthy
donors as previously described (Schlesinger and Horwitz, 1991).
Brieﬂy, mononuclear cells were isolated by Ficoll (Sigma) gradients
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Mononuclear cells
were cultivated in Teﬂon wells for 5 days in RPMI media (GIBCO)
supplemented with 10% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS),
4 mM l-glutamine, 25 mM HEPES, non-essential amino acids, and
5 μg/ml vancomycin at 37˚C in a 5% CO2 humidiﬁed incubator.
Adherent macrophages were scraped and plated in 24-well plate
at a cell density of 5× 105 cells in RPMI media and incubated for
5 days for further in vitro maturation prior to infection. Human
leukemia macrophage cell line THP-1 were grown in RPMI 1640
to density of 1–2× 106 cells per ml in 75 cm2 tissue culture ﬂasks.
Three days prior to infection with M. tuberculosis, THP-1 cells
were cultured in 24-well plate at density of 5× 105 cells per well in
presence of 100 nM phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and
150 units of human recombinant IFN-gamma (Theus et al., 2004).
Bacterial strains were mixed with native FBS (ﬁnal concentration
of 10% v/v) and were incubated for 30 min. Opsonized bacteria
were then diluted in RPMI supplemented with 2% v/v FBS to

Frontiers in Microbiology | Cellular and Infection Microbiology

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 14

Bukka et al.

Esx factors and TB growth

obtain required multiplicity of infection of 1:1. Monolayers were
infected with bacteria for overnight and then washed three times
with HANKS buffer and fresh RPMI-2% FBS lack PMA and INF-
g media was added to monolayers, which changes as 48 h. CFU
counts were performed from triplicates wells at each time point by
lysis of monolayers with 1% Triton-X 100.

Surface labeling of mycobacteria with ﬂuorescein-tagged
succinimidyl ester
H37Rv and ΔesxKL mutant were labeled with ﬂuorescein-tagged
succinimidyl ester (Alexa ﬂuor 488 and 594 from Molecular Probes
and Invitrogen) as previously described (Beatty and Russell, 2000).
Brieﬂy, bacteria were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline
(PBS) – 0.5% Tween-80 – 0.2 M sodium bicarbonate (pH 8.8)
and resuspended in same buffer containing 1 mM ﬂuorescein suc-
cinimidyl ester. Following 1.5 h incubation at 37˚C, bacteria was
washed three times with PBS–Tween and then used as inocu-
lum (prepared as described above) for macrophage infections.
For macrophage infections, 5× 105 cells were made to adhere to
circular glass coverslips in 24-well culture plates and cells were

infected at MOI of 1:1 with mixture consisting of 50:50 of ﬂu-
orescent labeled wild-type and ΔesxKL mutant bacteria. At 24,
48, and 72 h post-infections cells were washed three times with
HANKS buffer and were ﬁxed at 37˚C in 4% paraformaldehyde in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 30. Following washing with
PBS coverslips were mounted on slide with the Prolong Antifade
kit (InVitrogen). Labeled mycobacteria in infected macrophages
were visualized directly using a Olympus F500 laser scanning
confocal microscope.

ESXK and ESXL interaction by two-hybrid system
The BacterioMatch Two-Hybrid Vector system (Stratagene) was
used according to manufacturer’s instructions. Brieﬂy, the Bacte-
rioMatch two-hybrid vectors pBT bait containing the λcI domain
and pTRG target containing alpha-RNAP domain, were used as
starting plasmids for cloning esxK and esxL genes respectively. The
plasmids pBT–esxK and pTRG–esxL were then used for cotrans-
formation of E. coli XL1-Blue cells containing the reporter cassette.
The transformed cells were plated on selective media containing
5 mM 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole and incubated at 37˚C for 24 h.

REFERENCES
Fawcett, P., Eichenberger, P., Losick, R., and Youngman, P. (2000). The transcriptional proﬁle of early to middle sporulation in Bacillus subtilis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.

97, 8063–8068.

Froussard, P. (1992). A random-PCR method (rPCR) to construct whole cDNA library from low amounts of RNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 20, 2900.

www.frontiersin.org

January 2012 | Volume 2 | Article 266 | 15

