MINI REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 10 May 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00176

Host defense pathways against fungi: the basis for
vaccines and immunotherapy

Agostinho Carvalho1,2,3*, Cristina Cunha1, Rossana G. Iannitti 1, Andrea Casagrande 1,4, Francesco Bistoni 1,
Franco Aversa5 and Luigina Romani 1

1 Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy
2 Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal
3 ICVS/3B’s – PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga, Portugal
4 Department of Cell Biology and Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy
5 Department of Internal Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Parma, Parma, Italy

Edited by:
Carlos Pelleschi Taborda, University of
São Paulo, Brazil
Reviewed by:
Carlos Pelleschi Taborda, University of
São Paulo, Brazil
Igor C. Almeida, University of Texas at
El Paso, USA
Luiz R. Travassos, Federal University
of São Paulo, Brazil
*Correspondence:
Agostinho Carvalho, Department of
Experimental Medicine and
Biochemical Sciences, University of
Perugia, Via del Giochetto, 06122
Perugia, Italy.
e-mail: aacarvalho2008@gmail.com

Fungal vaccines have long been a goal
in the ﬁelds of immunology and microbiology
to counter the high mortality and morbidity rates owing to fungal diseases, particularly
in immunocompromised patients. However, the design of effective vaccination formula-
tions for durable protection to the different fungi has lagged behind due to the important
differences among fungi and their biology and our limited understanding of the com-
plex host–pathogen interactions and immune responses. Overcoming these challenges is
expected to contribute to improved vaccination strategies aimed at personalized efﬁcacy
across distinct target patient populations.This likely requires the integration of multifaceted
approaches encompassing advanced immunology, systems biology, immunogenetics, and
bioinformatics in the ﬁelds of fungal and host biology and their reciprocal interactions.

Keywords: fungi, immune responses, vaccines, immunotherapy, vaccinomics

INTRODUCTION
Fungal diseases are epidemiological hallmarks of distinct settings
of at-risk patients, not only in terms of their underlying condi-
tion but in the spectrum of diseases they develop (Segal, 2009).
Although fungi are responsible for pulmonary manifestations and
cutaneous lesions in apparently immunocompetent individuals,
their impact is most relevant in patients with severe immune dys-
function, in which they can cause severe, life-threatening forms
of infection. As an increasing number of immunocompromised
individuals resulting from intensive chemotherapy regimens, bone
marrow or solid organ transplantation, and autoimmune diseases
has been witnessed in the last decades, so has the incidence of
fungal diseases (Segal, 2009). Therefore, fungal vaccination has
been regarded as a particularly promising strategy in these groups
of highly susceptible individuals. Indeed, the fact that a number
of well-deﬁned risk factors manifest before the onset of infec-
tion affords a window of opportunity to vaccinate. However,
many challenges confront the development of fungal vaccines
for humans. Among them, the insufﬁcient understanding of the
critical immune defects that predispose to pathogen-speciﬁc vul-
nerability in primary or secondary immunodeﬁcient patients and
the historical assumption that the immune system of these patients
would not respond properly to strategies relying on immunolog-
ical memory. However, it is noteworthy that the immunogenicity
and efﬁcacy of vaccines has been conﬁrmed even in patients
with profound lymphocyte defects, such as the case of human
immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV)-infected patients (Klugman et al.,
2003). However, a further degree of complexity has been recently

provided by the acknowledgment that immune responses criti-
cally rely on individual genetic proﬁles (Carvalho et al., 2010).
Hence, and despite the obvious advantages of “universal vaccine”
strategies to address protection from fungi (Cassone and Rappuoli,
2010), immunogenetic-based approaches have also revealed the
signiﬁcant contribution of the host’s genetic background to efﬁ-
cient vaccine responses (Carvalho et al., 2012b), thereby suggesting
that a more personalized approach would ultimately be of addi-
tional interest. The purpose of this review is therefore to present
an update of concepts relevant for the design of ideal antifungal
vaccines and the challenges faced in delivering them to speciﬁc
target populations.

DECODING ANTIFUNGAL IMMUNITY INTO VACCINATION
STRATEGIES
Although the global incidence of fungal diseases is currently rival-
ing those of many of the best known bacterial diseases, humans
have coevolved with ubiquitous or commensal fungi in host–
fungus relationships that for the most part are positive or neu-
tral (Romani, 2011). This is illustrated by a number of cases,
including that of Candida albicans, Pneumocystis jiroveci, and
Malassezia spp., that live as benign commensals in one or more
body locations in a majority of healthy individuals. As opportunis-
tic pathogens, they are poised to overgrow cavities and penetrate
tissue in response to alterations in host physiology that presumably
compromises the complex mechanisms of immune adaptation
that normally suppress their growth. Most fungi, however, such as
Aspergillus fumigatus, Cryptococcus neoformans, and the thermally

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 176 | 1

Carvalho et al.

Antifungal vaccines

dimorphic fungi (Histoplasma capsulatum, Blastomyces dermati-
tidis, Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, Coccidioides immitis, Penicil-
lium marneffei, and Sporothrix schenckii) are found ubiquitously
in nature and can cause a wide spectrum of diseases ranging
from acute pulmonary manifestations and cutaneous lesions in
immunocompetent individuals to allergic syndromes and severe
life-threatening infections in patients with primary or secondary
immune dysfunction.

It is now clear that the clinical manifestations of a given fun-
gal disease depend, to a great extent, on the immune ability of
the host (Casadevall and Pirofski, 2003; Romani, 2011). Indeed,
the paradoxical association of fungal diseases with either deﬁcient
or hyper-reactive states of immune activation is closely related
with the two types of defense mechanisms a host can evolve to
increase its ﬁtness when challenged with a pathogen: resistance
and tolerance (Schneider and Ayres, 2008). Mechanisms of resis-
tance delineate the host’s ability to limit the fungal growth by
directly countering pathogens through recognition and elimi-
nation systems. Mechanisms of tolerance, however, regulate the
self-harm that can be caused by an overactive immune response
and other mechanisms not directly related to immune resistance.
Given the different pathological and epidemiological effects these
mechanisms may prompt, a further detailed understanding of
the wide spectrum of host–pathogen interactions and immune
responses will ultimately be paramount for the design of effective
vaccination formulations affording comprehensive and durable
protection to different fungi (Figure 1). The design of fungal vac-
cines is however not only constrained by the nature of the target
populations, which may be genetically and immunologically dif-
ferent – not necessarily immunocompromised – but also by the
dynamics of fungal diversity. Indeed, and even considering the
premise that a fungal vaccine would be feasible even in patients
with severe immune dysfunction (Spellberg, 2011), no examples
can be cited up until today. Attempts at fungal vaccination have
been restricted to pre-clinical research essentially because of safety
concerns, as complex and ill-deﬁned antigenic mixtures do not
cope with present day safety restrictions. However, whole genome
sequencing and proteomic approaches have made available most –
if not all – fungal proteins, thereby allowing the selection of a
discrete number of fungal antigens to test for protection. This
has directed interest in subunit antigens, which however lack the
natural adjuvant properties of whole-cell or live vaccines, and con-
sequently optimal immunogenicity properties. In addition, the
human microbiota and their role in programming human metab-
olism is currently emerging as a key component required for the
deﬁnition of immune responses to fungi, in particular adaptive
immunity (Littman and Pamer, 2011). Thus, the symbiotic rela-
tionship of the microbial species with the host requires a tuned
response that prevents host damage while tolerating the presence
of potentially beneﬁcial microbes, meaning that the host and the
fungus exert control over each other in a way that fungal com-
mensalism ultimately beneﬁts the host (Bonifazi et al., 2009). As a
corollary, the shaping of intestinal and lung immune responses by
microbiota to achieve protection to vaccines will likely become an
area of intense research.

The growing understanding that fungal pathogens may thrive
in regulatory environments has to be integrated within the

protective immune responses developed in a context of vac-
cination. Although protective immunity may be accomplished
by means of preventing regulatory T (Treg) cell induction or
function – as Treg cells can indeed control the intensity of sec-
ondary responses to fungal infections (Cavassani et al., 2006;
Deepe and Gibbons, 2008; Loures et al., 2009) – their presence
upon secondary antigen exposure may prevent immunopathol-
ogy in the context of vaccination and favor long-term memory
(Romani and Puccetti, 2006; Bozza et al., 2009). This notion
is crucially exempliﬁed in infections spawned by the reactiva-
tion of latent commensal organisms, in which a vaccine can-
didate is expected to elicit protective memory responses in a
Treg-rich environment – that is, long-lasting sterilizing immu-
nity through the generation of effector T cells is not needed
here. This can be achieved by concurrently focusing on effector
mechanisms of resistance as well as on manipulation of toler-
ance to restrain immunopathology. However straightforward this
approach may sound, these mechanisms lie on a precarious bal-
ance that may differ with each fungal pathogen and even sites
of infection. This demands for a ﬁne prediction and deﬁnition
of fungal antigens and adjuvants that trigger the most appro-
priate classes of resistance and tolerance mechanisms as well as
the selection of sites for vaccination where their contribution
to protective memory could be properly and most signiﬁcantly
achieved.

is well accepted nowadays that

FUNGAL VACCINES: CHALLENGES AND PROMISES
A successful vaccination relies on the eliciting of pathogen-
speciﬁc immune responses and consequent immunological mem-
ory that mediates long-term protection from infection or dis-
ease. A plethora of chemical and antigenic formulations has
already been considered for active vaccination against all major
fungal pathogens in pre-clinical models of infection (Table 1;
Cassone, 2008) and it
the
immunogenic potential of fungal stimuli critically relies on their
innate immune recognition, particularly by pattern recogni-
tion receptors (PRRs). The most well-known PRRs for fungi
include Toll-like receptors (TLRs), C-type lectin receptors and
the nucleotide binding domain leucine-rich repeat containing
receptors which detect a vast array of fungal molecules or danger
signals (Romani, 2011). In this regard, systems biology analyses
of naïve to effector to memory transition has revealed changes
in expression of innate immune receptors to be one major
early molecular signature upon vaccination (Pulendran et al.,
2010).

Given the array of fungal

ligands present at the cell sur-
face, as well as those that become available to immune sens-
ing upon processing of the fungus by phagocytic cells, it is
now clear that vaccine-induced protection to attenuated fungal
strains occurs through distinct PRRs and downstream signal-
ing adapters (Wuthrich et al., 2011; De Luca et al., 2012). For
instance, T helper (Th)17-induced acquisition of vaccine immu-
nity to live attenuated strains of B. dermatitidis, H. capsulatum,
and C. posadasii was found to require myeloid differentiation
primary response gene 88 (MyD88) signaling (Wuthrich et al.,
2011), whereas Th1-induced protection to A. fumigatus relied on
TIR-domain-containing adapter inducing interferon-β (De Luca

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 176 | 2

Carvalho et al.

Antifungal vaccines

FIGURE 1 | Varieties of T helper (Th) and antibody cell responses to fungi and their correlates of protection.

et al., 2012). Of interest, vaccination with puriﬁed A. fumiga-
tus antigens was found to be dependent on the MyD88 pathway
in the presence of the appropriate adjuvant (Carvalho et al.,
2012b; De Luca et al., 2012), a ﬁnding pointing to the cru-
cial role of adjuvants in promoting T cell differentiation along
speciﬁc effector pathways. Thus, fungal innate sensing is one
critical step in mounting immune responses eventually deﬁning
appropriate effector responses to maximize protection (Levitz and
Golenbock, 2012). Moreover, given the intricacies of the com-
plex innate immune signaling networks activated in response to
fungal antigens (Romani, 2011), the use of individual PRRs or
in combinations will have to be weighed in order to achieve
the best vaccine-speciﬁc responses appropriate for each fungal
pathogen.

The thorough dissection of mechanisms regulating the mag-
nitude, quality, and persistence of vaccine-induced humoral and
T cell dependent immunity will add to a more rational design of
potentially useful vaccines (Pulendran and Ahmed, 2011). Exam-
ples of such approaches include the development of a novel
vaccine platform consisting of hollow yeast-derived β-glucan par-
ticles that combine adjuvancity and high load antigen delivery
to induce strong humoral and Th1- and Th17-biased T cell
responses (Huang et al., 2010) and the glycoconjugate vaccines
which elicit B-cell responses of increased potency by provision
of immunogenic epitopes to CD4
T cells (Torosantucci et al.,
2005; Rachini et al., 2007; Xin et al., 2008; Bromuro et al.,
2010). T cells are critical for protective immunity, as they mon-
itor host cells for infection and mobilize appropriate effector
functions, either by inducing cytokines and effector cytolytic
molecules or by attracting professional phagocytes to the site
of microbial deposition, where they activate their antimicrobial

+

+

+

+

T cells were maintained even in the absence of CD4

capacities. Although CD4
Th1 cells have been historically con-
sidered the cornerstone of cell-mediated defense against intra-
cellular fungi, CD8
T cells have also been found to perform
effector functions against these pathogens (Cutler et al., 2007).
Indeed, in a mouse model of vaccination against blastomycosis,
both the numbers and function of protective antifungal mem-
+
ory CD8
T cell help (Nanjappa et al., 2012). In any case, Th1-mediated
protection has been reported across nearly all clinically rele-
vant fungal infections. For example, crude antigen preparations
from A. fumigatus or recombinant fungal antigens alone (Diaz-
Arevalo et al., 2011) or in conjunction with CpG oligonucleotides
as adjuvants (Cenci et al., 2000; Ito et al., 2006; Bozza et al.,
2009; Stuehler et al., 2011), mannosylated cryptococcal antigens
(Lam et al., 2005), B. dermatitidis adhesin antigen (Wuthrich
et al., 2003), heat shock protein 60 from P. brasiliensis (de Bas-
tos Ascenco Soares et al., 2008) and H. capsulatum (Deepe and
Gibbons, 2002) and the multivalent vaccines, comprised of com-
plexes of protein antigens of Coccidioides spp., administered
in combinations with adjuvants (Shubitz et al., 2006; Tarcha
et al., 2006) have been associated with induction of strong Th1
responses.

The persistence of immunological memory and how it per-
tains to vaccination strategies is also a question of central impor-
tance. Memory T cells are derived from normal T cells that have
learned how to overcome a pathogen by “remembering” the strat-
egy used to defeat previous infections (Sallusto et al., 2010). In
addition to central memory T cells present in secondary lym-
phoid organs which scrutinize the presence of remote pathogens
via dendritic cells (DCs), effector memory T cells reside in periph-
eral non-lymphoid tissues such as the skin and mucosa. The latter

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 176 | 3

Carvalho et al.

Antifungal vaccines

Table 1 | Types of vaccines for fungal diseases and associated
mechanisms of protection.

Type of vaccines

Fungal diseases

Whole cells and
cell extracts

Subunits and gly-
coconjugates

DNA

and

Idiotypes
mimotopes
Antigen-pulsed
dendritic cells

Candidiasis
Aspergillosis
Cryptococcosis
Blastomycosis
Histoplasmosis
Coccidioidomycosis
Sporotrichosis
Candidiasis
Aspergillosis
Cryptococcosis
Blastomycosis
Histoplasmosis
Coccidioidomycosis
Paracoccidioidomycosis
Pneumocystosis
Candidiasis
Coccidioidomycosis
Paracoccidioidomycosis
Pneumocystosis
Candidiasis
Cryptococcosis
Candidiasis
Aspergillosis
Cryptococcosis
Paracoccidioidomycosis
Pneumocystosis

Mechanism(s)
of protection

Antibodies; Th1/Th2/Th17
immunity; CD8+ T cells

Antibodies; Th1/Th17/Treg
immunity

Antibodies; Th1/Th2
immunity

Antibodies

Antibodies; Th1 immunity

are heterogeneous in terms of homing receptor expression and
effector function and comprise the Th1, Th2, Th17, and Th22
cell subsets, as well as Treg cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
Although Th1 and Th17 cells mediate vaccine-induced protec-
tion from fungal infection through a variety of antifungal effector
mechanisms, Th22 cells are instead required for antifungal resis-
+
tance at mucosal surfaces (De Luca et al., 2010). Memory CD8
cytotoxic T cells are also induced in fungal infections (Nanjappa
et al., 2012) and exhibit a pleiotropic activity by mediating pro-
tection via production of IFN-γ and cytolytic activity against
fungus-laden cells or the fungus itself (Carvalho et al., 2012b;
+
De Luca et al., 2012). As such, CD8
T cells, especially if long-
lasting, are regarded as ideal candidates for expansion at mucosal
surfaces by vaccination strategies. The recent evidence propos-
ing a role for metabolism (Pearce et al., 2009) and bioenergetic
stability (van der Windt et al., 2012) in harnessing T cell mem-
ory opens up new perspectives on how epigenetic and environ-
mental mechanisms modulate memory differentiation and qual-
ity, thus opening new avenues for vaccine development. Finally,
additional subsets of T cells may also become important tar-
gets for new vaccines, such as the newly described invariant
natural killer T cells that activate antifungal responses through
the recognition of fungal cell wall β-1,3 glucans (Cohen et al.,
2011).

+

and CD8

ACTIVE VERSUS PASSIVE IMMUNOTHERAPY
Fungal vaccines are active immunotherapies in the sense they
boost the immune system to speciﬁcally attack fungi, honing
in on one or more speciﬁc fungal antigens (Carvalho et al.,
2012a). Alternatively, passive immunotherapy strategies are com-
prised of laboratory-synthesized antibodies or other immune
system components that are administered to patients. Thus, pas-
sive immunotherapies do not stimulate the immune system to
“actively” respond to infection in the way a vaccine does. In this
regard, a number of monoclonal human recombinant antibod-
ies and their fragments have already been tested in experimental
fungal infection (Table 1). Antifungal vaccines are known to
exploit the redundancy in the immune system to afford protection
through a multiplicity of mechanisms (Cutler et al., 2007; Cassone,
2008). Indeed, antibody responses are induced by most antifungal
vaccines and antibody titer threshold may therefore predict vaccine
efﬁcacy and may serve as a vaccine surrogate marker even when
the mechanism of protection is cell-mediated (Spellberg et al.,
2008). Indeed, and even though protection against intracellular
+
pathogens might be prevalently provided by CD4
T
cells, antibodies are now known to participate in all aspects of the
immune response, globally contributing to the optimal function
of T cell-mediated immunity (Casadevall and Pirofski, 2012). This
also suggests that administering antibodies together with a vaccine
may be potentially exploited to further enhance or modulate the
immune response. Given that passive antibody administration has
been deemed effective against fungal infection, it is now accepted
that vaccine-mediated protection not only relies on the produc-
tion and maintenance of speciﬁc antibodies, but also on their direct
activity (Cutler et al., 2007; Cassone, 2008). This is the case of anti-
β-glucan antibodies generated by immunization with laminarin,
a β-glucan from algae, conjugated with a genetically detoxiﬁed
diphtheria toxin (Bromuro et al., 2010) or antibodies generated
through idiotypic vaccination (Magliani et al., 2005) that proved
to be protective in passive vaccination experiments in different
fungal infection settings by acting directly on fungal cells. Because
of quantity restrictions, high cost, and the limited effectiveness
inherent to a pure antibody approach, it is difﬁcult to envis-
age antibody therapy against fungal infections in a near future.
Indeed, the development of efungumab (Mycograb), a monoclonal
recombinant antibody fragment against fungal HSP90 (Matthews
et al., 2003) has recently been discontinued. This may have been
related with concerns regarding speciﬁcity, afﬁnity, and even iso-
type. For instance, different immunoglobulin G (IgG) subclasses
with identical variable regions but different capacities to bind Fc
receptors displayed distinct efﬁcacy in terms of protection from
cryptococcosis (Beenhouwer et al., 2007). In addition, given that
immunocompromised patients may lack efﬁcient effector func-
tions, the use of antibodies that inhibit fungal growth or viability
should be favored in these patients.

PATIENT-TAILORED VACCINATION: THE COMING OF AGE OF
VACCINOMICS
The deciphering of the complexity of immune responses to
vaccines demands for the integration of advanced immunol-
ogy approaches, systems biology, immunogenetic proﬁling, and
bioinformatics in the areas of pathogen biology, host biology,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 176 | 4

Carvalho et al.

Antifungal vaccines

and the interaction between the two. Vaccinomics is an emer-
gent term in the ﬁeld of vaccinology that encompasses the use
of immunogenetics to the appreciation of mechanisms of het-
erogeneity in immune responses to vaccines (Poland and Oberg,
2010). A number of genetic variants in immune genes has already
been disclosed as major determinants of the immune response
to fungi (Carvalho et al., 2010) and are regarded as promis-
ing targets to exploit toward improved diagnosis and therapy
of fungal diseases, particularly in immunocompromised patients
(Cunha and Carvalho, 2012). A systematic evaluation of the func-
tional impact of genetic variability in the immune system will
pave the way to the discovery and interpretation of immuno-
genetic signatures and immune proﬁles that may be used to
discriminate response efﬁciencies to antifungal vaccines. The
recent ﬁnding that genetic deﬁciency of TLR3 was associated
with susceptibility to invasive aspergillosis and concomitant fail-
ure to activate memory protective CD8
T cells in allogeneic
stem cell transplanted patients is one ﬁrst example (Carvalho
et al., 2012b). Given the high degree of complexity in human
immune responses, overcoming the many challenges currently
restraining accurate prediction of vaccination efﬁciencies has

+

been recently proposed to rely on ﬁve state-of-the-art approaches
(Kennedy and Poland, 2011). By using whole genome immuno-
genetics, next generation sequencing, cutting-edge “omics” tech-
niques, advanced bioinformatics, and systems biology applied
to immune proﬁling and vaccine responses, it may be possi-
ble to identify the best predictors of vaccine efﬁcacy or adverse
responses – predictive vaccinology – in each target population,
thereby improving the management of these severe, often fatal
diseases.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Cristina Massi Benedetti for editorial assistance. The
studies were supported by the Speciﬁc Targeted Research Project
“ALLFUN” (FP7-HEALTH-2009-260338) and the Fondazione per
la Ricerca sulla Fibrosi Cistica (FFC#21/2010, with the con-
tribution of Francesca Guadagnin, Coca Cola Light® Tribute
to Fashion and Delegazione FFC di Belluno). Agostinho Car-
valho and Cristina Cunha were ﬁnancially supported by fel-
lowships from Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia, Portu-
gal (contracts SFRH/BPD/46292/2008 and SFRH/BD/65962/2009,
respectively).

REFERENCES
Beenhouwer, D. O., Yoo, E. M., Lai, C.
W., Rocha, M. A., and Morrison, S.
L. (2007). Human immunoglobulin
G2 (IgG2) and IgG4, but not IgG1
or IgG3, protect mice against Cryp-
tococcus neoformans infection. Infect.
Immun. 75, 1424–1435.

Bonifazi, P., Zelante, T., D’Angelo, C.,
De Luca, A., Moretti, S., Bozza,
S., Perruccio, K., Iannitti, R. G.,
Giovannini, G., Volpi, C., Fallar-
ino, F., Puccetti, P., and Romani,
L. (2009). Balancing inﬂammation
and tolerance in vivo through den-
dritic cells by the commensal Can-
dida albicans. Mucosal Immunol. 2,
362–374.

Bozza, S., Clavaud, C., Giovannini,
G., Fontaine, T., Beauvais, A., Sar-
fati, J., D’Angelo, C., Perruccio, K.,
Bonifazi, P., Zagarella, S., Moretti,
S., Bistoni, F., Latge,
J. P., and
Romani, L. (2009). Immune sens-
ing of Aspergillus fumigatus pro-
teins, glycolipids, and polysaccha-
rides and the impact on Th immu-
nity and vaccination. J. Immunol.
183, 2407–2414.

Bromuro, C., Romano, M., Chiani, P.,
Berti, F., Tontini, M., Proietti, D.,
Mori, E., Torosantucci, A., Costan-
tino, P., Rappuoli, R., and Cassone,A.
(2010). Beta-glucan-CRM197 con-
jugates as candidates antifungal vac-
cines. Vaccine 28, 2615–2623.

Carvalho, A., Cunha, C., Bistoni, F., and
Romani, L. (2012a). Immunother-
apy of aspergillosis. Clin. Microbiol.
Infect. 18, 120–125.

Carvalho, A., De Luca, A., Bozza, S.,
Cunha, C., D’Angelo, C., Moretti, S.,

Perruccio, K., Iannitti, R. G., Fal-
larino, F., Pierini, A., Latge, J. P.,
Velardi, A., Aversa, F., and Romani,
L. (2012b). TLR3 essentially pro-
motes protective class I-restricted
memory CD8 T-cell responses to
Aspergillus fumigatus in hematopoi-
etic transplanted patients. Blood 119,
967–977.

Carvalho, A., Cunha, C., Pasqualotto,
A. C., Pitzurra, L., Denning, D. W.,
and Romani, L. (2010). Genetic vari-
ability of innate immunity impacts
human susceptibility to fungal dis-
eases. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 14, e460–
e468.

Casadevall,A., and Pirofski, L. A. (2003).
The damage-response framework of
microbial pathogenesis. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 1, 17–24.

Casadevall,A., and Pirofski, L. A. (2012).
A new synthesis
for antibody-
mediated immunity. Nat. Immunol.
13, 21–28.

Cassone,A. (2008). Fungal vaccines: real
progress from real challenges. Lancet
Infect. Dis. 8, 114–124.

Cassone, A., and Rappuoli, R. (2010).
Universal vaccines: shifting to one
for many. MBio 1, e00042-10.

Cavassani, K. A., Campanelli, A. P., Mor-
eira, A. P., Vancim, J. O., Vitali, L.
H., Mamede, R. C., Martinez, R.,
and Silva, J. S. (2006). Systemic and
local characterization of regulatory
T cells in a chronic fungal infec-
tion in humans. J. Immunol. 177,
5811–5818.

Cenci, E., Mencacci, A., Bacci, A.,
Bistoni, F., Kurup, V. P., and Romani,
L. (2000). T cell vaccination in
mice with invasive pulmonary

aspergillosis.
381–388.

J.

Immunol.

165,

Cohen, N. R., Tatituri, R. V., Rivera,
A., Watts, G. F., Kim, E. Y.,
Chiba, A., Fuchs, B. B., Mylon-
akis, E., Besra, G. S., Levitz, S.
M., Brigl, M., and Brenner, M.
B. (2011). Innate recognition of
cell wall beta-glucans drives invari-
ant natural killer T cell responses
against fungi. Cell Host Microbe 10,
437–450.

Cunha, C., and Carvalho, A. (2012).
Host genetics and invasive fungal
diseases: towards improved diagno-
sis and therapy? Expert Rev. Anti.
Infect. Ther. 10, 257–259.

Cutler, J. E., Deepe, G. S. Jr., and Klein,
B. S. (2007). Advances in combat-
ing fungal diseases: vaccines on the
threshold. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 5,
13–28.

de Bastos Ascenco Soares, R., Gomez,
F. J., De Almeida Soares, C. M., and
Deepe, G. S. Jr. (2008). Vaccination
with heat shock protein 60 induces a
protective immune response against
Paracoccidioides
experimental
brasiliensis pulmonary
infection.
Infect. Immun. 76, 4214–4221.

De Luca, A., Iannitti, R. G., Bozza, S.,
Beau, R., Casagrande, A., D’Angelo,
C., Moretti, S., Cunha, C., Giovan-
nini, G., Massi-Benedetti, C., Car-
valho, A., Boon, L., Latge, J. P.,
and Romani, L. (2012). CD4 T
cell vaccination overcomes defective
cross-presentation of
fungal anti-
gens in murine chronic granulo-
matous disease. J. Clin. Invest. doi:
10.1172/JCI60862. [Epub ahead of
print].

De Luca, A., Zelante, T., D’Angelo, C.,
Zagarella, S., Fallarino, F., Spreca, A.,
Iannitti, R. G., Bonifazi, P., Renauld,
J. C., Bistoni, F., Puccetti, P., and
Romani, L. (2010). IL-22 deﬁnes a
novel immune pathway of antifun-
gal resistance. Mucosal Immunol. 3,
361–373.

Deepe, G. S.

Jr., and Gibbons, R.
S. (2002). Cellular and molecu-
lar regulation of vaccination with
heat shock protein 60 from Histo-
plasma capsulatum. Infect. Immun.
70, 3759–3767.

Deepe, G. S.

Jr., and Gibbons, R.
S. (2008). TNF-alpha antagonism
generates a population of antigen-
speciﬁc CD4+ CD25+ T cells
that inhibit protective immunity in
murine histoplasmosis. J. Immunol.
180, 1088–1097.

(2010). Robust

Diaz-Arevalo, D., Bagramyan, K., Hong,
T. B., Ito, J. I., and Kalkum, M.
(2011). CD4+ T cells mediate the
protective effect of the recombinant
Asp f3-based anti-aspergillosis vac-
cine. Infect. Immun. 79, 2257–2266.
Huang, H., Ostroff, G. R., Lee, C.
K., Specht, C. A., and Levitz,
stimula-
S. M.
tion of humoral
and cellular
immune responses following vac-
cination with antigen-loaded beta-
glucan particles. MBio 1, e00164-10.
Ito, J. I., Lyons, J. M., Hong, T. B.,
Tamae, D., Liu, Y. K., Wilczynski,
S. P., and Kalkum, M. (2006). Vac-
cinations with recombinant vari-
ants of Aspergillus fumigatus allergen
Asp f 3 protect mice against inva-
sive aspergillosis. Infect. Immun. 74,
5075–5084.

www.frontiersin.org

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 176 | 5

Carvalho et al.

Antifungal vaccines

Kennedy, R. B., and Poland, G. A.
(2011). The top ﬁve “game chang-
ers” in vaccinology: toward rational
and directed vaccine development.
OMICS 15, 533–537.

Klugman, K. P., Madhi, S. A., Hueb-
ner, R. E., Kohberger, R., Mbelle, N.,
and Pierce, N. (2003). A trial of a 9-
valent pneumococcal conjugate vac-
cine in children with and those with-
out HIV infection. N. Engl. J. Med.
349, 1341–1348.

Lam, J. S., Mansour, M. K., Specht,
C. A., and Levitz, S. M. (2005).
A model vaccine exploiting fungal
mannosylation to increase antigen
immunogenicity. J. Immunol. 175,
7496–7503.

Levitz, S. M., and Golenbock, D. T.
(2012). Beyond empiricism: inform-
ing vaccine development through
innate immunity research. Cell 148,
1284–1292.

Littman, D. R., and Pamer, E. G.
(2011). Role of
the commensal
microbiota in normal and patho-
genic host immune responses. Cell
Host Microbe 10, 311–323.

Loures, F. V., Pina, A., Felonato, M., and
Calich, V. L. (2009). TLR2 is a neg-
ative regulator of Th17 cells and tis-
sue pathology in a pulmonary model
of fungal infection. J. Immunol. 183,
1279–1290.

Magliani, W., Conti, S., Frazzi, R.,
Ravanetti, L., Maffei, D. L., and
Polonelli, L. (2005). Protective anti-
fungal yeast killer toxin-like anti-
bodies. Curr. Mol. Med. 5, 443–452.
Matthews, R. C., Rigg, G., Hodgetts, S.,
Carter, T., Chapman, C., Gregory,
C., Illidge, C., and Burnie, J. (2003).
Preclinical assessment of the efﬁ-
cacy of mycograb, a human recombi-
nant antibody against fungal HSP90.
Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 47,
2208–2216.

Nanjappa, S. G., Heninger, E., Wuthrich,
M., Sullivan, T., and Klein, B.
(2012). Protective antifungal mem-
ory CD8+ T cells are maintained
in the absence of CD4+ T cell help

and cognate antigen in mice. J. Clin.
Invest. 122, 987–999.

Pearce, E. L., Walsh, M. C., Cejas, P. J.,
Harms, G. M., Shen, H., Wang, L.
S., Jones, R. G., and Choi, Y. (2009).
Enhancing CD8 T-cell memory by
modulating fatty acid metabolism.
Nature 460, 103–107.

Poland, G. A., and Oberg, A. L.
(2010). Vaccinomics and bioinfor-
matics: accelerants
the next
golden age of vaccinology. Vaccine
28, 3509–3510.

for

Pulendran, B., and Ahmed, R. (2011).
of
Immunol. 12,

Immunological mechanisms
vaccination. Nat.
509–517.

Pulendran, B., Li, S., and Nakaya, H. I.
(2010). Systems vaccinology. Immu-
nity 33, 516–529.

Rachini, A., Pietrella, D., Lupo, P.,
Torosantucci, A., Chiani, P., Bro-
muro, C., Proietti, C., Bistoni, F.,
Cassone, A., and Vecchiarelli, A.
(2007). An anti-beta-glucan mon-
oclonal antibody inhibits growth
and capsule formation of Cryp-
tococcus neoformans
in vitro and
exerts therapeutic, anticryptococcal
activity in vivo. Infect. Immun. 75,
5085–5094.

Romani, L. (2011). Immunity to fun-
gal infections. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11,
275–288.

Romani, L., and Puccetti, P. (2006). Pro-
tective tolerance to fungi: the role
of IL-10 and tryptophan catabolism.
Trends Microbiol. 14, 183–189.

Sallusto, F., Lanzavecchia, A., Araki, K.,
and Ahmed, R. (2010). From vac-
cines to memory and back. Immu-
nity 33, 451–463.

Schneider, D. S., and Ayres, J. S. (2008).
Two ways to survive infection: what
resistance and tolerance can teach
us about treating infectious diseases.
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 8, 889–895.

Segal, B. H. (2009). Aspergillosis. N.

Engl. J. Med. 360, 1870–1884.

Shubitz, L. F., Yu, J. J., Hung, C. Y.,
Kirkland, T. N., Peng, T., Perrill, R.,
Simons, J., Xue, J., Herr, R. A., Cole,

G. T., and Galgiani, J. N. (2006).
Improved protection of mice against
lethal respiratory infection with Coc-
cidioides posadasii using two recom-
binant antigens expressed as a single
protein. Vaccine 24, 5904–5911.

Spellberg, B. (2011). Vaccines for inva-
sive fungal infections. F1000 Med.
Rep. 3, 13.

Spellberg, B., Ibrahim, A. S., Lin, L.,
Avanesian, V., Fu, Y., Lipke, P., Otoo,
H., Ho, T., and Edwards,
J. E.
Jr. (2008). Antibody titer threshold
predicts anti-candidal vaccine efﬁ-
cacy even though the mechanism
of protection is induction of cell-
mediated immunity. J. Infect. Dis.
197, 967–971.

Stuehler, C., Khanna, N., Bozza, S.,
Zelante, T., Moretti, S., Kruhm, M.,
Lurati, S., Conrad, B., Worschech,
E., Stevanovic, S., Krappmann, S.,
Einsele, H., Latge,
J. P., Loef-
ﬂer, J., Romani, L., and Topp, M.
S.
(2011). Cross-protective TH1
immunity against Aspergillus fumi-
gatus and Candida albicans. Blood
117, 5881–5891.

Tarcha, E.

J., Basrur, V., Hung, C.
Y., Gardner, M. J., and Cole, G.
T. (2006). A recombinant aspartyl
protease of Coccidioides posadasii
induces protection against pul-
monary coccidioidomycosis in mice.
Infect. Immun. 74, 516–527.

Torosantucci, A., Bromuro, C., Chiani,
P., De Bernardis, F., Berti, F., Galli,
C., Norelli, F., Bellucci, C., Polonelli,
L., Costantino, P., Rappuoli, R.,
and Cassone, A. (2005). A novel
glyco-conjugate vaccine against fun-
gal pathogens. J. Exp. Med. 202,
597–606.

van der Windt, G. J., Everts, B., Chang,
C. H., Curtis, J. D., Freitas, T. C.,
Amiel, E., Pearce, E. J., and Pearce,
E. L. (2012). Mitochondrial respira-
tory capacity is a critical regulator of
CD8+ T cell memory development.
Immunity 36, 68–78.

Wuthrich, M., Filutowicz, H. I., Warner,
T., Deepe, G. S. Jr., and Klein, B. S.

(2003). Vaccine immunity to patho-
genic fungi overcomes the require-
ment for CD4 help in exogenous
antigen presentation to CD8+ T
cells: implications for vaccine devel-
opment in immune-deﬁcient hosts.
J. Exp. Med. 197, 1405–1416.

Wuthrich, M., Gern, B., Hung, C. Y., Ers-
land, K., Rocco, N., Pick-Jacobs, J.,
Galles, K., Filutowicz, H., Warner, T.,
Evans, M., Cole, G., and Klein, B.
(2011). Vaccine-induced protection
against 3 systemic mycoses endemic
to North America requires Th17
cells in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 121,
554–568.

Xin, H., Dziadek, S., Bundle, D. R.,
and Cutler, J. E. (2008). Synthetic
glycopeptide vaccines
combining
beta-mannan and peptide epitopes
induce protection against candidia-
sis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
13526–13531.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 03 April 2012; accepted: 21
April 2012; published online: 10 May
2012.
Citation: Carvalho A, Cunha C, Iannitti
RG, Casagrande A, Bistoni F, Aversa F
and Romani L (2012) Host defense path-
ways against fungi: the basis for vaccines
and immunotherapy. Front. Microbio.
3:176. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00176
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Fungi and Their Interactions, a specialty
of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Carvalho, Cunha, Ian-
nitti, Casagrande, Bistoni, Aversa and
Romani. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Cre-
ative Commons Attribution Non Com-
mercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

May 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 176 | 6

