ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 09 March 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00087

Chemosensitization of plant pathogenic fungi to
agricultural fungicides

Vitaly Dzhavakhiya1*, Larisa Shcherbakova2,Yulia Semina1, Natalia Zhemchuzhina1 and Bruce Campbell 3

1 Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Russian Research Institute of Phytopathology, Moscow Region, Russia
2 Laboratory of Physiological Plant Pathology, Russian Research Institute of Phytopathology, Moscow region, Russia
3 Plant Mycotoxin Research Unit, Western Regional Research Center, United States Department of Agriculture – Agricultural Research Service,

Albany, CA, USA

Edited by:
Jong H. Kim, United States
Department of Agriculture –
Agricultural Research Service, USA
Reviewed by:
Michael Wink, Heidelberg University,
Germany
Ameeta Agarwal, University of
Mississippi, USA
*Correspondence:
Vitaly Dzhavakhiya, Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, Russian Research
Institute of Phytopathology, VNIIF, B.
Vyazyomy, Moscow Region 143050,
Russia.
e-mail: dzhavakhiya@yahoo.com

A common consequence of using agricultural fungicides is the development of resistance
by fungal pathogens, which undermines reliability of fungicidal effectiveness. A potentially
new strategy to aid in overcoming or minimizing this problem is enhancement of pathogen
sensitivity to fungicides, or “chemosensitization.” Chemosensitization can be accom-
plished by combining a commercial fungicide with a certain non- or marginally fungicidal
substance at levels where, alone, neither compound would be effective. Chemosensitiza-
tion decreases the probability of the pathogen developing resistance, reduces the toxic
impact on the environment by lowering effective dosage levels of toxic fungicides, and
improves efﬁcacy of antifungal agents.The present study shows that the antifungal activity
of azole and strobilurin fungicides can be signiﬁcantly enhanced through their co-application
with certain natural or synthetic products against several economically important plant
pathogenic fungi. Quadris (azoxystrobin) combined with thymol at a non-fungitoxic concen-
tration produced much higher growth inhibition of Bipolaris sorokiniana, Phoma glomerata,
Alternaria sp. and Stagonospora nodorum than the fungicide alone. The effect of Dividend
(difenoconazole) applied with thymol signiﬁcantly enhanced antifungal activity against B.
sorokiniana and S. nodorum. Folicur (tebuconazole) combined with 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde
(4-HBA), 2,3-dihydroxybenzaldehyde or thymol signiﬁcantly inhibited growth of Alternaria
alternata, at a much greater level than the fungicide alone. In addition, co-application of Foli-
cur and 4-HBA resulted in a similar enhancement of antifungal activity against Fusarium
culmorum. Lastly, we discovered that metabolites in the culture liquid of Fusarium sam-
bucinum biocontrol isolate FS-94 also had chemosensitizing activity, increasing S. nodorum
sensitivity to Folicur and Dividend.

Keywords: chemosensitization, plant pathogenic fungi, agricultural fungicides

INTRODUCTION
Co-application of some conventional industrial fungicides (tri-
azoles and strobilurins) with certain phenolic acids or benzo
analogs, which target cellular oxidative stress-response systems,
enhanced antifungal activity of these fungicides against patho-
genic yeasts and ﬁlamentous fungi causing invasive mycoses in
humans or postharvest decay in agricultural products (Kim et al.,
2008, 2010b; Faria et al., 2011; Kim and Campbell, 2011). Based on
these ﬁndings and preliminary screening of substances showing
promise as chemosensitizing agents, we selected several natural
and synthetic compounds, viz. 2,3-dihydroxybenzaldehyde (2,3-
DHBA), 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde (4-HBA), thymol (2-isopropyl-
5-methylphenol), as putative chemosensitizers to test against plant
pathogenic fungi exposed to fungicides extensively used in agri-
culture. Two of the aforementioned benzaldehydes are effective
chemosensitizers for Candida, Aspergillus, and Penicillium strains
and species (Faria et al., 2011). For instance, in vitro co-application
of 2,3-DHBA and kresoxim-methyl or antimycin A resulted in
complete inhibition of A. fumigatus and P. expansum growth, and
70% inhibition of A. ﬂavus growth. Alternatively, application of

these compounds individually resulted in only slight inhibition of
fungal growth (Kim et al., 2008). In addition, 2,3-DHBA acted as
a chemosensitizing agent to overcome ﬂudioxonil resistance of P.
expansum, commonly referred to as blue mold of apples, in vitro
(Kim et al., 2010b). Thymol, a natural monoterpene derivative of
cymene from Thymus vulgaris oil, is believed to disrupt fungal cell
membrane integrity by reducing ergosterol content (Pinto et al.,
2006). This natural product, alone, has been reported to com-
pletely block growth of toxigenic Aspergillus spp. and P. expansum
at concentration of 5 mM (Kim et al., 2006b). However, when
thymol is combined with the antimycotic drugs, amphotericin B,
ﬂuconazole, or itraconazole, there is a synergistic increase in anti-
fungal activity against C. albicans and Cryptococcus neoformans
(Faria et al., 2011).

Along with plant derived thymol, we selected metabolites
of a non-pathogenic and non-toxigenic fungus, Fusarium sam-
bucinum isolate FS-94, for testing as putative chemosensitizers.
These metabolites were tested because the culture liquid from FS-
94 on specially selected media was found to produce substances
that at very low concentrations inhibited spore germination of the

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 87 | 1

Dzhavakhiya et al.

Chemosensitization of phytopathogenic fungi

wheat glume/leaf blotch agent, Stagonospora nodorum (Semina
et al., 2011).

fungicides and test compounds in co-application experiments to
deﬁne putative chemosensitization to the fungicides.

This paper reports results of in vitro examination of 2,3-DHBA,
4-HBA, thymol, and FS-94 metabolites to signiﬁcantly increase the
sensitivity of certain plant pathogenic fungi, of economic impor-
tance to Russian agriculture, to several commercial fungicides.
The fungicides include commercial azoles and strobilurins, which
are routinely applied as fungicides on cereals, potato, and many
other crops.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
FUNGI
Phytopathogenic fungi
tested included Alternaria alternata,
Alternaria sp., Bipolaris sorokiniana, Fusarium culmorum, Phoma
glomerata, and S. nodorum, from strains maintained in the Russian
State Collection of Phytopathogenic Organisms.

FUNGICIDES
The commercial fungicides tested included Quadris, SC 25% (a.i.
Azoxystrobin), Dividend, SC 3% (a.i. Difenoconazole), and Foli-
cur, EC 25% (a.i. Tebuconazole), which are commonly applied on
cereals and grains. Concentrations of the active ingredients of the
fungicide are indicated in the tables and ﬁgures.

PUTATIVE CHEMOSENSITIZERS
Thymol (2-isopropyl-5-methylphenol), 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde
(4-HBA), and 2,3-dihydroxybenzaldehyde (2,3-DHBA), were pur-
chased from Sigma Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA). Filtrates of culture
liquids (FCL) of F. sambucinum isolate FS-94 were obtained by ﬁl-
tration after culturing on a liquid molasses–sucrose–ammonium
medium according to Semina et al. (2011).

ANTIFUNGAL BIOASSAY
To study the inﬂuence of chemosensitizers on the plant pathogens
and on their sensitivity to fungicides, the fungi were grown on
agar media supplemented with different concentrations of the
sensitizers or various doses of the fungicides.

Thymol, 4-HBA, 2,3-DHBA, or the fungicides were sterilized
by ﬁltration of their solutions through a Millipore 0.22 μm mem-
brane. The ﬁltrates were added, individually, to PDA or Czapek
agar medium, to ﬁnal concentrations ranging from 10 to 90 ppm
(thymol), 10 to 1000 ppm (4-HBA), 1 to 500 ppm (2,3-DHBA),
0.1 to 100 ppm (Quadris), 0.25 to 100 ppm (Folicur), and 1 to
20 ppm (Dividend), prior to being poured into Petri dishes and
before inoculation with test pathogenic fungi. Two microvolumes
of FCL, 20 and 100 μl/ml of PDA, were used in the experiments
with S. nodorum (strain #13-1/3), making the ﬁnal FCL concen-
trations 2 and 10 volume percent, respectively. Culture media,
supplemented with putative chemosensitizers and/or the fungi-
cides, were then inoculated by placing small fragments of fungal
mycelia in the center of the dishes. Effects of treatments on growth
were determined by culturing fungi in the dark at 25˚C for 7 days,
followed by measurement of colony diameter. We ﬁrst determined
the concentrations of sensitizers and fungicides that slightly sup-
pressed growth of fungi, as compared to controls, and considered
these as sub-fungicidal concentrations. These sub-fungicidal con-
centrations were selected for determining interactions between

After determinating sub-fungicidal concentrations of

test
chemosensitizers and fungicides, Petri plate bioassays of com-
binations of chemosensitizers and fungicides were used against
plant pathogens. The fungi were cultivated in the dark at 25˚C
from 7 to 23 days, depending on the tested pathogen. Control cul-
tures, without addition of the test chemosensitizers, fungicides or
their combinations, were grown under the same conditions. By the
end of the culture period, fungal colony diameters were measured
and colony size calculated as the area of a circle (cm2). Growth
inhibition was determined as percentage of diminished growth of
treated fungi based on average diameter or area of colonies, as
compared to controls. Enhanced antifungal activity was deﬁned
as where inhibition of fungal growth in co-application of puta-
tive chemosensitizers and a test fungicide signiﬁcantly (p < 0.05)
exceeded growth inhibition calculated as an arithmetical sum of
either individual component.

STATISTICAL TREATMENT
Each experiment on fungal growth in the presence of putative
sensitizers, commercial fungicides, or their combinations was per-
formed in triplicate, per each concentration used, then replicated
once. Quantitative data of the experiments were statistically ana-
lyzed with Microsoft software STATISTICA 6.0 (StatSoft Inc.).
Means of different treatments, SE and SD, and signiﬁcant differ-
ences (p < 0.05) of means among treatments and controls were
determined using a t -test for independent variables. In the ﬁgures,
bars on bracketing points on line graphs and histograms repre-
sent SEM or SD. Error bars on histogram columns representing
arithmetical sums of effects of fungicides, alone, and chemosen-
sitizing test agents, alone, are averages of SEM of the individual
treatments.

RESULTS
The capability of thymol to increase fungicidal activity was inves-
tigated in combination with Quadris, toward P. glomerata, B.
sorokiniana, Alternaria sp., and S. nodorum, and with Dividend,
against B. sorokiniana and S. nodorum, and with Folicur, toward
A. alternata.

Among these plant pathogens, the maximal synergistic effect
resulted from co-applications of thymol and Quadris, at selected
concentrations of 10 ppm (0.07 mM) and 100 ppm, respectively,
was observed toward B. sorokiniana. When thymol was applied
separately at 10 ppm there was practically no inhibition of
pathogen growth (1.1%). However, a thymol–Quadris combi-
nation produced almost three times higher growth inhibition
(40.9%) than the individual fungicide (14.8%; Table 1). In the
case of P. glomerata and Alternaria sp., the thymol-fungicide
combinations were also signiﬁcantly higher in antifungal activ-
ity than either thymol or Quadris applied individually. There was
an almost doubling of growth inhibition from thymol–Quadris
co-applications than Quadris alone, for both pathogens (Table 1).
Co-application of thymol with Quadris resulted in 88.8% inhi-
bition of P. glomerata growth. This inhibition was almost two
times higher in comparison to this fungicide application alone.
This inhibition exceeded by 27.5% the arithmetical sum of 61.3%

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 87 | 2

Dzhavakhiya et al.

Chemosensitization of phytopathogenic fungi

of thymol (12.5%) and Quadris (48.8%), alone, respectively. The
growth inhibition of Alternaria sp. produced by the thymol–
Quadris combination (36.4%) was, again, signiﬁcantly greater
by 13%, as compared to the arithmetical sum of growth inhibi-
tion (23.8%) of individual fungicide (19.3%) and thymol (4.5%)
applications.

Application of thymol and Quadris at 10 ppm, alone, resulted in
either minor or no growth inhibition of S. nodorum and P. glomer-
ata. Whereas, when these substances were co-applied at these same
concentrations there was a signiﬁcant enhancement of antifungal
activity of Quadris (Figure 1).

Subsequent experiments showed thymol also sensitized B.
sorokiniana and S. nodorum to Dividend, and A. alternata to

Folicur. Much greater inhibition of B. sorokiniana and S. nodorum
colony growth was induced by Dividend in combinations with
thymol as compared to treatments with the individual substances.
Most notable is that addition of 1 ppm of Dividend in nutrient
media together with thymol (10 ppm) produced as high a fungi-
cidal effect on both these fungi as would require a 10-fold higher
concentration (10 ppm) of Dividend alone (Figures 2 and 3).
Moreover, a signiﬁcant increase in antifungal activity was observed
when a combination of Dividend and thymol, each applied at
sub-fungicidal concentrations (1+ 10 ppm, respectively) was used
against B. sorokiniana in two additional experiments (Figure 3).
Co-application of these compounds resulted in 68% inhibition of
fungal growth. This is in contrast to a predicted non-interactive

Table 1 | Fungicidal effect of thymol, Quadris, and their combination toward three plant pathogens at day 14 of in vitro testing.

Fungi

Diameter of control
colonies, mm

Substances and concentrations, ppm

Thymol, 10

Quadris, 100

Thymol, 10+ Quadris, 100

Colony
diameter, mm

Growth
inhibition, %

Colony
diameter, mm

Growth
inhibition, %

Colony
diameter, mm

Growth
inhibition, %

B. sorokiniana
P. glomerata
Alternaria sp.

88
80
88

87
70
84

1.1*
12.5
4.5

75
41
71

14.8
48.8
19.3

52
9
52

40.9
88.8
36.4

*Percent growth inhibition not signiﬁcantly different from control.

FIGURE 1 | Photographs of representative Petri dish cultures of
S. nodorum and P. glomerata colonies grown in the presence of
thymol alone (10 ppm), Quadris alone (10 ppm), or

Quadris+ thymol, each at 10 ppm. Fungi were cultured for 16 days.
Control colonies were cultured in media with neither thymol nor
fungicide.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 87 | 3

Dzhavakhiya et al.

Chemosensitization of phytopathogenic fungi

FIGURE 2 | Histograms showing percent growth inhibition of
S. nodorum on PDA-media supplemented with thymol alone, the
fungicide Dividend alone, or with Dividend+ thymol as compared to
controls (0% inhibition). (1) Thymol, 10 ppm alone; (2) Dividend, 1 ppm
alone; (3) Dividend, 1 ppm+ thymol, 10 ppm; (4) Dividend, 10 ppm. Bars
represent SE.

effect of 44% growth inhibition based on the growth inhibition
caused by each of these compounds alone, at these concentra-
tions. A similar trend of enhancement was found with thymol and
Folicur. Folicur alone at a concentration of 0.5 ppm caused low
suppression (29%) of A. alternata development. But Folicur at the
same concentration combined with thymol at 10 ppm, a concen-
tration at which growth inhibition of A. alternata is negligible,
inhibited pathogen growth by approximately 50%. To achieve this
level of growth inhibition by Folicur alone, its concentration would
have to be doubled (1 ppm; Figure 4).

The ability of another putative chemosensitizer, 4-HBA, to
enhance fungitoxicity of Folicur was examined against A. alternata
and a toxigenic fungus F. culmorum. Co-application of 0.5 ppm of
Folicur with 4-HBA at 200 ppm resulted in signiﬁcant improve-
ment of the fungicidal activity toward F. culmorum (Figure 5)
and A. alternata (Table 2). Folicur alone at 0.5 ppm inhibited the
growth of either fungus at approximately 30%. But, Folicur com-
bined with 4-HBA, at a non- or negligible fungicidal level, resulted
in almost doubling antifungal activity against both pathogens
(Table 2).

Chemosensitization potential of 2,3-DHBA was tested for
enhancing the growth-inhibitory effect of Folicur toward A.
alternata grown on Czapek agar. Folicur and this benzaldehyde
achieved relatively low rates of growth inhibition when applied
alone, 10% at 0.5 ppm and 2.5% at 1.0 ppm, respectively. However,

FIGURE 3 | Histograms showing percent growth inhibition of Dividend
and thymol used individually or in combination against B. sorokiniana.
(1) Thymol, 10 ppm alone; (2) Dividend, 1 ppm alone; (3) predicted growth
inhibition based on sums of 1 and 2; (4) co-application of Dividend, 1 ppm
with thymol, 10 ppm; (5) Dividend, 10 ppm. Histograms represent average
percent inhibition of two independent experiments of each treatment done
in triplicate. Bars represent SD.

at these same concentrations, when co-applied, there was signif-
icant increase of growth inhibition (approximately 25%) of this
pathogen, implying there is some type of synergistic interaction
that more than doubles antifungal activity (Figure 6).

The chemosensitizing impact of FCL, containing extracellular
metabolites from liquid cultures of the biocontrol isolate FS-94, on
S. nodorum after 7 days of growth appeared to be additive to treat-
ment by Folicur or Dividend. When FCL was applied at low (2%
v/v) or moderate (10% v/v) concentrations with Folicur, growth
inhibition of S. nodorum after 7 days was almost equal to that
of the arithmetic sum of these substances used alone (Figure 7).
However, after 9 days of growth the results showed that the effect
of FCL on the antifungal activity of Folicur was signiﬁcantly
above additive. The co-application of these substances promoted
maintenance of a higher level of fungicidal activity as the fungus
continued to grow. The growth-inhibitory effect of Folicur alone,
decreased by the 9th day to 49%, while the inhibitory effect of Foli-
cur combined with FCL remained at 69% to the end of observation
period (23 days).

The sensitivity of S. nodorum to Dividend was also enhanced
under the inﬂuence of FCL. In cultures of the fungus with Divi-
dend and FCL, at a concentration 2% v/v, pathogen growth rate
slowed signiﬁcantly from the rate of growth if cultured with
Dividend alone (p < 0.05) starting on the 17th day after inoc-
ulation (Figure 8). This difference increased step-by-step as the
fungus underwent vegetative growth (on 20th day p = 0.003; on
23rd day, p = 0.00001). At the earlier stages of colony growth

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 87 | 4

Dzhavakhiya et al.

Chemosensitization of phytopathogenic fungi

(corresponding to the 14th and 17th days, Figures 8 and 9)
no differences were observed in the inhibitory effects between
the individual application of the fungicide alone and the com-
bined application of fungicide with FCL. As time progressed, the
fungus began to overcome the fungicidal effect of the Dividend
alone dose (Figure 8, line 3), and the difference between colony
area of the control and Dividend-treated fungi began to decrease
(Figure 9). During the same period, however, colony growth on

FIGURE 4 | Histograms showing percent growth inhibition of thymol,
Folicur and their combinations, on A. alternata growth after 10-day
cultivation. (1) Folicur, 0.5 ppm alone; (2) thymol, 10 ppm alone; (3)
predicted growth inhibition based on sum of 1 and 2; (4) Folicur, 0.5 ppm
with thymol, 10 ppm; (5) Folicur, 1.0 ppm. Distinctions of all treatments from
the control, and between Folicur and Folicur+ thymol treatments are
signiﬁcant at p ≤ 0.0001. Bars indicate SE.

Dividend+ FCL combinations reduced much more signiﬁcantly
as compared to the controls. Thus, as time went on, differences
in colony area between control and co-application treatments
increased. On day 20 and 23, these differences were two or three-
fold greater, respectively, than between controls and where the
fungicide was applied alone (Figure 9). Thus, co-application of
the fungicide with FCL resulted in a certain prolongation of the
antifungal effect against S. nodorum and decreased growth rate
of the fungus. Moreover, starting on the 20th day of cultivation,
a noteworthy enhancement of antifungal activity was observed if
Dividend was co-applied with a weakly inhibitory concentration
of FCL (Table 3).

When FCL was added to the culture medium to a ﬁnal con-
centration of 10% v/v and Dividend was at a concentration of
0.01 ppm, growth inhibition of S. nodorum reached 20–30% to
that of controls. In order to achieve this same level of growth inhi-
bition using Dividend alone a ﬁvefold increase (0.05 ppm) of this
fungicide would be required (Figure 10).

DISCUSSION
Crop protection using industrial fungicides is a powerful tool for
effective control of many plant pathogenic fungi. However, exten-
sive use of such fungicides is now recognized, worldwide, to be
associated with a range of environmental risks (De Costa and Bez-
erra, 2011). Restrictive regulations have been applied to the use of
fungicides in order to minimize these risks. Nevertheless, multi-
ple applications of several different fungicides may be required at
times in order to achieve an effective control of fungal pathogens
(e.g., Eckert and Ogawa, 1988). Such multifaceted applications
of fungicides can, in turn, exacerbate xenobiotic perturbations to
the environment. Another disturbing consequence of the com-
mercial use of fungicides for plant protection is development
of resistance by plant pathogenic fungi that damage important
agricultural crops. Such resistance renders any protective effects
relatively short-lived and eventually uneconomical (Steffens et al.,
1996; Brent and Hollomon, 2007). Several different strategies are
being developed to counter, or reduce, the development of resis-
tance in fungi and lower the environmental impact of the use
of fungicides. These include plant breeding for disease resistance
(Russell, 1978; Polak and Bartos, 2002; Niks et al., 2011), the
search for novel low-persistent and highly effective active ingredi-
ents, biopesticides of plant or microbial origin (Bailey et al., 2010;

FIGURE 5 | Ten-day growth of colonies of F. culmorum cultured in the presence of: (A) 4-Hydroxybenzaldehyde (4-HBA), 200 ppm; (B) Folicur, 0.5 ppm;
and (C) Folicur, 0.5 ppm, with 4-HBA, 200 ppm.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 87 | 5

Dzhavakhiya et al.

Chemosensitization of phytopathogenic fungi

Table 2 | Fungicidal effect of 4-HBA, Folicur and their mixture toward F. culmorum and A. alternata at day 10 of in vitro testing.

Fungi

Diameter of control
colonies, mm

Substances and concentrations, ppm

4-HBA, 200

Folicur, 0.5

4-HBA, 200+ Folicur, 0.5

Colony
diameter, mm
89.0± 0.3
84.0± 0.7

Growth
inhibition, %
1.1± 0.4
6.7± 0.8

Colony
diameter, mm
60.8± 1.1
67.0± 0.0

Growth
inhibition, %
32.0± 0.8
28.0± 0.0

Colony
diameter, mm
35.8± 0.9
32.7± 0.0

Growth
inhibition, %
61.0± 1.8
64.0± 0.0

F. culmorum
A. alternata
Differences between Folicur and Folicur+ 4-HBA treatments are signiﬁcant at p≤ 0.002. The differences among all treatments from the control are also signiﬁcant
(p < 0.05).

90.0± 0.0
90.0± 0.0

FIGURE 7 | Enhancement of Folicur growth-inhibitory effect against
S. nodorum by co-application of the fungicide with ﬁltrates of cultural
liquid (FCL) produced by a biocontrol isolate, FS-94, of F. sambucinum
after 7 or 9 days of cultivation. (1) Folicur, alone, 0.25 ppm; (2) FCL, 2
volume percent, alone; (3) Folicur, 0.25 ppm+ FCL, 2 volume percent; (4)
Predicted percent of growth inhibition based on the sum of 1 and 2; (5)
Folicur, 0.5 ppm. Bars represent SE. Percent growth inhibition distinctions
between treatments 1 and 3 are signiﬁcant at p < 0.002 and 0.05 on 7th
and 9th days, respectively. Differences between mean growth inhibitions of
3 and 4 on 9th day are signiﬁcant at p < 0.03.

FIGURE 6 | Histograms showing percent growth inhibition of
A. alternata affected by 2,3-DHBA and Folicur added in Czapek agar
individually or in combinations with each other at 7 days after
application. (1) 2,3-DHBA, 1.0 ppm; (2) Folicur, 0.5 ppm; (3) predicted
growth inhibition based on sum of 1 and 2; (4) Folicur, 0.5 ppm and
2,3-DHBA, 1.0 ppm. Bars represent double SE.

Dubey et al., 2011; Pretorius and van der Watt, 2011; Shcherbakova,
2011), and use of fungicides in combination with biocontrol agents
(Elad, 2003; Buck, 2004; Gilardi et al., 2008; Baus et al., 2011).

Of particular interest in our study is a strategy that searches
for compounds that speciﬁcally target the stress-response systems
of pathogens, and thereby enhances their sensitivity to fungi-
cides. Such a strategy is called chemosensitization. One concept
underlying the selection of putative chemosensitizers consists of
increasing fungitoxic activity by disrupting fungal oxidative stress-
response systems that protect the fungus from reactive oxygen
species (ROS; Kim et al., 2006a, 2007, 2011). This approach has
been demonstrated in vitro successfully by assays that include

fungicides/antibiotics with compounds that disrupt the oxygen
stress-response system, enhancing sensitivity of mycotoxigenic
fungi and human pathogenic fungi of medical importance to anti-
fungal agents (Kim et al., 2006b, 2008; Faria et al., 2011; Kim and
Campbell, 2011). Various natural phenolic compounds and their
derivatives that possess anti- or oxidative activity have been shown
to be effective chemosensitizing agents in above referred reports.
In our current study we used some of the agents previously
reported to be effective against human pathogens to evaluate their
chemosensitizing potential in vitro toward several plant patho-
genic fungi. Such agricultural fungi are often controlled with tri-
azole and/or strobilurin-type fungicides in practice. Our research
was focused on studying the ability of 2,3-DHBA, thymol, and
4-HBA to improve fungicidal action, emphasizing the discovery
of any signiﬁcant enhancement. We tested selected concentra-
tions of both fungicide and test agent which had a sub-fungicidal
impact on the plant pathogens, when applied alone. Preliminary
experiments suggested (data not shown) that B. sorokiniana, S.
nodorum, P. glomerata, F. culmorum, and Alternaria fungi differed
in sensitivity to the fungicides and putative sensitizers used in our

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 87 | 6

Dzhavakhiya et al.

Chemosensitization of phytopathogenic fungi

study. Therefore, the sub-fungicidal concentrations of these sub-
stances applied for individual treatments and in co-applications
differed for each pathogen. When fungicides and chemosensitizers,
2,3-DHBA, thymol, and 4-HBA, were co-applied at higher dosages

FIGURE 8 | Change in colony diameter of S. nodorum by number of
days cultured on PDA or PDA supplemented with Dividend, alone, or
Dividend combined with the ﬁltrate of cultural liquid (FCL) of a
biocontrol Fusarium sambucinum isolate FS-94. (1) Control colonies
grown without the fungicide or FCL. (2) FCL, ﬁnal concentration 2% by
volume; (3) Dividend, 0.01 ppm alone; (4) Dividend, 0.01 ppm+ FCL, 2
volume percent.

FIGURE 9 | Progressive increase in differences (S1–S2) between colony
areas (cm2) of Stagonospora nodorum treated (S2) with Dividend
combined with FCL (1) or Dividend alone (2), compared with area of
control colonies (S1), after 14, 17, 20, and 23 days of culture.
FCL – ﬁltrate of cultural liquid produced by a biocontrol isolate of
F. sambucinum, FS-94 at a ﬁnal concentration of 2 volume percent.
Dividend concentration is 0.01 ppm. Bars represent 2× SE.

than at sub-fungicidal levels, an additive effect was observed (data
not shown). In such cases, any enhancement of antifungal activity
beyond an additive effect between the compounds was masked.
Therefore, we tested the compounds at sub-fungicidal concen-
trations so that the predicted effect based on the arithmetical
sum of growth inhibition of the tested substances did not exceed
50–60%.

Our results with the use of two benzo analogs (4-HBA and
2,3-DBA) as well as a natural phenolic product, thymol, at the
selected sub-fungicidal concentrations showed these substances
provided signiﬁcant improvement of antifungal activity of triazole
and strobilurin-type fungicides toward all tested pathogenic fungi.
Our data coincide with previous ﬁndings (Faria et al., 2011; Kim
and Campbell, 2011) showing that the tested phenolic substances
are promising as chemosensitizers of plant pathogens to indus-
trial fungicides. Also, our observation of the chemosensitizing
impact for taxonomically unrelated plant pathogenic fungi sug-
gests these chemosensitizers possibly attack the oxidative stress-
response systems common to various fungi (Roman et al., 2007)
such as, Mn-SOD (mitochondrial superoxide dismutase) and
MAPK pathway.

We found that FCL arrested radial growth of S. nodorum
colonies, inducing 10–30% inhibition depending on FCL concen-
tration employed. Our experiments showed that FCL is a putative
source of natural chemosensitizing compounds, enhancing and
prolonging the fungicidal effects of Folicur and Dividend. The
results with S. nodorum suggest that metabolites in the cultural
liquid of F. sambucinum are of interest as a new source of natural
sensitizers, at least toward the wheat leaf/glume blotch agent. Fur-
ther research is necessary to examine the scope and the level of
FCL sensitizing activity, as well as the isolation and identiﬁcation
of the component(s) responsible for this activity.

The F. sambucinum isolate FS-94 has been previously shown
to be a biocontrol agent of some plant pathogenic Fusaria
(Shcherbakova et al., 2006, 2008). It is also known to synthe-
size metabolites that induce systemic acquired resistance (SAR)
in potato (Shcherbakova et al., 2006) and tomato, by activat-
ing and priming a salicylic acid (SA)-dependent plant signaling
system (Shcherbakova et al., 2011). Along with its direct anti-
fungal effects on S. nodorum, FCL of FS-94 has no phytotoxicity
(Shcherbakova et al., 2009; Semina et al., 2011) and, as shown
in our current research, can also sensitize this plant pathogen to
commercial fungicides. It very well may be that different compo-
nents of the FCL have different modes of action. Understanding
such details will provide an additional advantage if they are to
be used as chemosensitization tools in the future. Interestingly,

Table 3 | Enhancement of antifungal activity in vitro toward the growth of S. nodorum after co-application of Dividend and ﬁltrate of cultural
liquid (FCL) produced by a biocontrol isolate of F. sambucinum, FS-94.

Day after inoculation

Growth inhibition, % relative to average diameter of control colonies

FCL, 2% v/v

Dividend, 0.01 ppm

Dividend, 0.01+ FCL, 2% v/v

20
23

0.6± 0.03
0.2± 0.01

15± 0.27
8± 0.20

Co-application
24± 0.52
20± 0.20

Arithmetical sum
15.6± 0.30
8.2± 0.21

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 87 | 7

Dzhavakhiya et al.

Chemosensitization of phytopathogenic fungi

is unachievable under natural conditions). They are designed
to delay the development of disease for as long as possible.
Co-application of sensitizing agents with agricultural fungicides
could retard emergence of plant diseases using decreased dosage
rates, while reducing the number of treatments, making fungicide
applications more economically sound.

Another potential advantage of using chemosensitizers in agri-
culture is the opening of new avenues for solving the problem of
emerging fungicide-resistant mutants. Until now, the most com-
mon way to control resistance to fungicides was by increasing
dosages until they are effective. This approach, unfortunately, adds
to the pesticide pressure on the environment. In our experiments
with thymol and Dividend we found that their co-application pro-
duced, in vitro, as strong of a fungal growth inhibition as would
require at least a 10-fold higher concentration of Dividend indi-
vidually against S. nodorum and B. sorokiniana. This ﬁnding shows
the promising possibility of developing effective, ecologically com-
patible, and biodegradable chemosensitizers that could be used in
combinations with fungicides. In addition, the relatively low cost
and availability of chemosensitizers and the diminished overall
cost of chemical treatments (chemosensitizer+ fungicide), would
be very attractive from the agricultural economic viewpoint.

The ﬁrst priority in continuing our investigation on chemosen-
sitization of plant pathogenic fungi to fungicides should be to
examine the tested compounds on enhancing fungicidal activity
in planta, on host plants. Another necessary step is to produce
mutants of our tested pathogens that are resistant to Dividend,
Folicur or Quadris. The effort would then include an attempt
to overcome their elevated resistance using co-applications of
effective sensitizers revealed in this research.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was under project #3745 of the International Science
and Technology Center (ISTC), a collaborative program between
Russian and American scientists, funded by the U. S. Department
of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service.

FIGURE 10 | Colony size of S. nodorum after 7 and 9 days of culture on:
(1) PDA, alone (control); (2) PDA supplemented with FS-94 cultural
liquid ﬁltrate (FCL) to ﬁnal concentration 10% by volume, alone; (3)
PDA supplemented with Dividend, 0.01 ppm, alone; (4) PDA
supplemented with Dividend, 0.01 ppm+ FCL, 10 volume percent, and;
(5) PDA supplemented with Dividend, 0.05 ppm. Bars represent SE.

salicylaldehyde that mimics the action of SA, a key plant sig-
naling molecule which is involved in SAR, targets the cellu-
lar antioxidation system in aﬂatoxigenic fungi, functioning in a
chemosensitization manner (Kim et al., 2010a).

Prolongation of the fungicidal activity with FCL is a new and
previously uninvestigated property. Such fungicidal prolongation
is something that should be veriﬁed for other chemosensitiz-
ers. Discovery of this phenomenon, in our opinion, is of special
importance for agricultural fungicides. In contrast to antifun-
gal drugs applied in medicine, plant protection remedies are
not designed for the total extermination of a pathogen (this

REFERENCES
Bailey, A., Chandler, D., and Grant, W.
P. (2010). Biopesticides: Pest Man-
agement and Regulation. Cambridge:
CABI Publishing.

Baus, O., Reineke, A., and Berkelmann-
Lohnertz, B. (2011). Control of grey
mould by application of gibberellin
acid inhibitor (Regalis®) and man-
agement practices in Vitis vinifera
(cv. Riesling). IOBC/WPRS Bull. 67,
49–53.

Brent, K. Y., and Hollomon, D. W.
(2007). Fungicide Resistance in Crop
Pathogens: How can it be Man-
aged? Brussels: Fungicide Resistance
Action Committee.

J. W.
(2004). Combinations
fungicides with phylloplane
improved Control of
geranium
94,

Phytopathology

cinerea

for

on

Buck,
of
yeasts
Botrytis
seedlings.
196–202.

De Costa, P., and Bezerra, P. (2011).
Fungicides: Chemistry, Environmen-
tal Impact and Health Effects. Haup-
pauge, NY: NOVA Publishes.

Dubey, N. K., Shukla, R., Kumar, A.,
Singh, P., and Prakash, B. (2011).
“Global scenario on application of
natural products in integrated pet
management programmes,” in Nat-
ural Products in Plant Pest Manage-
ment, ed. N. K. Dubey (Preston:
CABI), 1–20.

Eckert, J. W., and Ogawa, J. M. (1988).
The chemical control of Postharvest
diseases: deciduous fruits, berries,
vegetables and root/tuber crops.
Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 26, 433–469.
Elad, Y. (2003). Biological control of
Botrytis cinerea. IOBC/WPRS Bull.
26, 7–8.

Faria, N. C. G, Kim, J. H., Gonçalves,
L. A. P., Martins, M., de, L.,
Chan, K. L., and Campbell, B. C.

(2011). Enhanced activity of anti-
fungal drugs using natural phenolics
against yeast strains of Candida and
Cryptococcus. Lett. Appl. Microbiol.
52, 506–513.

Gilardi, G., Gullino, M. L.,

and
Garibaldi, A. (2008). Effect of fungi-
cides and of biocontrol agents
against powdery mildew of turnip.
Commun. Agric. Appl. Biol. Sci. 73,
21–29.

Kim,

J. H., and Campbell, B. C.
(2011). “Chemosensitization of fun-
gal pathogens
to antimicrobial
agents using phenolic compounds,”
in Prospects and Applications
for
Plant-Associated Microbes, A Labora-
tory Manual, Part B: Fungi., 212–214,
eds A. M. Pirttilä, and S. Sorvari
(Paimio: BioBien Innovations), 328.
Kim, J. H., Campbell, B. C., Mahoney,
N., Chan, K. L., and May, G. S.
(2006a). Targeting
antioxidative

transduction and

signal
stress
response system: control of patho-
genic Aspergillus with phenolics that
inhibit mitochondrial function. J.
Appl. Microbiol. 101, 181–189.

Kim, J. H., Mahoney, N., Chan, K.
L., Molyneux, R. J., and Camp-
bell, B. C. (2006b). Controlling food
contaminating fungi by targeting
their antioxidative stress system with
natural phenolic compounds. Appl.
Microbiol. Cell Physiol. 70, 735–739.
Kim, J. H., Campbell, B. C., Mahoney,
N., Chan, K. L., and Molyneux, R. J.
(2010a). Chemosensitization of aﬂa-
toxigenic fungi to antimycin A and
strobilurin using salicylaldehyde, a
volatile natural compound targeting
cellular antioxidation system. Myco-
pathologia 171, 291–298.

Kim, J. H., Campbell, B. C., Mahoney,
N., Chan, K. L., Molyneux, R.
J., and Xiao, C.-L. (2010b). Use

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 87 | 8

Dzhavakhiya et al.

Chemosensitization of phytopathogenic fungi

of chemosensitization to overcome
ﬂudioxonil-resistance in Penicillium
expansum. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 51,
177–183.

Kim, J. H., Campbell, B. C., Mahoney,
N., Chan, K. L., Molyneux, R. J.,
and May, G. S. (2007). Enhanced
activity of strobilurin and ﬂudiox-
onil by using berberine and phenolic
compounds to target fungal antiox-
idative stress response. Lett. Appl.
Microbiol. 45, 134–141.

Kim, J. H., Mahoney, N., Chan, K. L., and
Campbell, B. C. (2011). Antifungal
activity of redox-active benzaldehy-
des that target cellular antioxida-
tion. Ann. Clin. Microbiol. Antimi-
crob. 10, 23.

Kim, J. H., Mahoney, N., Chan, K. L.,
Molyneux, R. J., May, G. S., and
Campbell, B. C. (2008). Chemosen-
sitization of
fungal pathogens to
antimicrobial agents using benzo
analogs. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 281,
64–72.

Niks, R. E., Parlevliet, J. E., Lindhout,
P., and Bai, Y. (2011). Breeding Crops
with Resistance to Diseases and Pests.
Wageningen: Wageningen Academic
Publishers.

Pinto, E., Pina-Vaz, C., Salgueiro,
L., Goncalves, M.
J., Costa-de-
Oliveira, S., Cavaleiro, C., Palmeira,
A., Rodrigues, A., and Martinez-
(2006). Antifun-
de-Oliveira,
J.
gal activity of
the essential oil
of Thymus pulegioides on Can-
dida, Aspergillus and dermatophyte

species.
1367–1373.

J. Med. Microbiol. 55,

Polak, J., and Bartos, P. (2002). Natural
sources of plant disease resistance
and their importance in the breed-
ing. Czech J. Genet. Plant Breed 38,
146–149.

Pretorius, J. C., and van der Watt,
E. (2011). “Natural products from
plants: commercial prospects
in
terms of antimicrobial, herbici-
dal and bio-stimulatory activities
in an integrated pest management
system,” in Natural Products in Plant
Pest Management, ed. N. K. Dubey
(Preston: CABI), 42–90.

Roman, E., Arana, D. M., Nombela,
C., Alonso-Monge, R., and Pla, J.
(2007). MAP kinase pathways as reg-
ulators of fungal virulence. Trends
Microbiol. 15, 181–190.

Russell, G. E. (1978). Plant Breeding for
Pest and Disease Resistance. London:
CABI Publishing.

Semina, Y. U. V., Shcherbakova, L.
A., and Devyatkina, G. A. (2011).
Anti-Stagonospora nodorum activ-
ity in ﬁltrates of Fusarium sam-
bucinum cultural liquids after grow-
ing the fungus on different nutrient
media. Mycologia Fitopathologia 45,
563–570.

Shcherbakova, L. A. (2011). “Some
natural proteinaceous and polyke-
tide compounds in plant protection
from diseases and their potential in
green consumerisation,” in Natural
Products in Plant Pest Management,

ed. N. K. Dubey (Preston: CABI),
109–133.

Shcherbakova, L. A., Devyatkina, G.
A., Dorofeeva, L. L., and Nazarova,
T. A. (2006). “Inducing the resis-
tance to Fusaria causing wheat
root
rot and tomato wilt with
a nonpathogenic Fusarium sam-
bucinum isolate,” in Proceedings
of All-Russian science-and-practical
conference “Immunity induction as
an important line of
investigation
in plant protection” Vol. 1, ed. B.
Vyazyomy (Moscow: VIZR-VNIIF),
74–77.

Shcherbakova, L. A., Dorofeeva, L. L.,
Devyatkina, G. A., Sokolova, G. D.,
and Fravel, D. R. (2008). Control
of wheat root rots under ﬁeld con-
ditions with compounds produced
by Fusarium sambucinum strain FS-
94. J. Plant Pathol. 90(Suppl. 2),
338–339.

Shcherbakova, L. A., Nazarova, T. A.,
Mikityuk, O. D., and Fravel, D. R.
(2011). Fusarium sambucinum iso-
late FS-94 induces resistance against
Fusarium wilt of tomato via activa-
tion and priming of a salicylic acid-
dependent signaling system. Russ. J.
Plant Physiol. 58, 808–818.

Shcherbakova, L. A., Semina, Y. U.
V., Shumilina, D. V., Fravel, D. R.,
and Dorofeeva, L. L. (2009). “Elic-
itors from a biocontrol Fusarium
sambucinum and Pseudomonas ﬂu-
orescens protect wheat from multi-
ple fungal pathogens,” in 5th Meeting

of
the IOBC Working Group of
“Induced Resistance in Plants against
Insects
and Diseases,” Granada,
42–43.

Steffens, J. J., Pell, E. J., and Tien,
M. (1996). Mechanisms of fungicide
resistance in phytopathogenic fungi.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 7, 348–355.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 19 December 2011; accepted:
21 February 2012; published online: 09
March 2012.
Citation: Dzhavakhiya V, Shcherbakova
L, Semina Y, Zhemchuzhina N and
Campbell B (2012) Chemosensitization
of plant pathogenic fungi to agricultural
fungicides. Front. Microbio. 3:87. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00087
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Fungi and Their Interactions, a specialty
of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Dzhavakhiya,
Shcherbakova, Semina, Zhemchuzhina
and Campbell. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits
non-commercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in other forums, provided
the original authors and source are
credited.

www.frontiersin.org

March 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 87 | 9

