REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 19 December 2011
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00248

Fungal surface and innate immune recognition of
ﬁlamentous fungi

Rodrigo T. Figueiredo1*, Leticia A. M. Carneiro2 and Marcelo T. Bozza2*

1 Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas/Pólo de Xerém, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
2 Instituto de Microbiologia, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

The innate immune system performs speciﬁc detection of molecules from infectious agents
through pattern recognition receptors. This recognition triggers inﬂammatory responses
and activation of microbicidal mechanisms by leukocytes. Infections caused by ﬁlamen-
tous fungi have increased in incidence and represent an important cause of mortality and
morbidity especially in individuals with immunosuppression. This review will discuss the
innate immune recognition of ﬁlamentous fungi molecules and its importance to infection
control and disease.

Keywords: fungi, PRRs, innate immunity, inﬂammation, signaling, macrophages, cytokines

Edited by:
Marcio Rodrigues, Federal University
of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Reviewed by:
Dario S. Zamboni, Universidade de
São Paulo, Brazil
Erin McClelland, The Commonwealth
Medical College, USA
*Correspondence:
Rodrigo T. Figueiredo, Instituto de
Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade
Federal do Rio de Janeiro, CCS Bloco
F 014, Avenida Carlos Chagas Filho,
373 Cidade Universitária, Rio de
Janeiro, RJ, 21941-902, Brazil.
e-mail: rotiﬁ@icb.ufrj.br;
Marcelo T. Bozza, Departamento de
Imunologia, Instituto de
Microbiologia, Universidade Federal
do Rio de Janeiro, CCS Bloco D 036,
Avenida Carlos Chagas Filho, 373
Cidade Universitária, Rio de Janeiro,
RJ, 21941-902 Brazil.
e-mail: mbozza@micro.ufrj.br

INTRODUCTION
Fungal infections are an important cause of morbidity and mor-
tality. Infections caused by ﬁlamentous fungi have increased in
incidence, especially in immunosuppressed individuals (Singh,
2001; Marr et al., 2002; Camilos et al., 2006; Enoch et al., 2006;
Segal and Walsh, 2006). Risk factors are generally associated with
immunosuppression and include therapy with corticoids or mye-
loablative drugs, neutropenia, and solid organ transplants (Marr
et al., 2002; Morgan et al., 2005; Camilos et al., 2006). Sporadic
cases of infection in immunocompetent individuals have also been
described, particularly in situations where traumatic inoculation
occurs, like the use of catheters, surgeries, or wounds (Pasqualotto
and Denning, 2006; Meersseman et al., 2008; Murray et al., 2008).

Abbreviations: ASC, apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase
recruitment domain; BIR, baculovirus inhibitor of apoptosis protein repeat domain;
CARD, caspase activation and recruitment domain; C/EBP, CCAAT/enhancer biding
protein; CLRs, C-type receptors; CRD, carbohydrate recognition domain; DC-SIGN,
dendritic cell-speciﬁc ICAM3 grabbing non-integrin; GMX, glucuronoxyloman-
nans; IL-1, interleukin-1; ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine activation based motifs;
LPS, lipopolysaccharides; LRR, leucine-rich repeat; MAP kinases, mitogen-activated
protein kinases; MDP, muramyl dipeptide; mincle, macrophage-inducible C-type
lectin; MR, mannose receptor; NACHT, Naip, CIITA, H ET-E (plant het product
involved in vegetative incompatibility) and T P-1 (telomerase-associated protein 1);
NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T-cells; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; NLR, Nod-
like receptors; Nod, nucleotide oligomerization domain; PRRs, pattern recognition
receptors; PYD, pyrin; ROS, reactive oxygen species; TLRs, Toll like receptors; TNF-α,
tumor necrosis factor-α.

Pathogenic fungi are variable in their biology, and can also include
commensal microorganisms such as Candida albicans, and oppor-
tunist ﬁlamentous fungi like Aspergillus fumigatus, Scedosporium
spp., and Fusarium spp.

Filamentous fungi are saprophytic and widely distributed in
the environment. These fungi present multiseptated forms, the
hyphae, and forms of dispersion referred to as conidia. Conidia
are extremely small and are responsible for the establishment of
the infection once they reach deeper tissues, such as the lung alveoli
or wounds. In the absence of adequate removal by macrophages
and/or killing mediated by neutrophils, conidia germinate giving
rise to hyphae that promote tissue invasion and injury (Groll and
Walsh, 2001).

The pathogenesis of ﬁlamentous fungi is related to their ubiqui-
tous presence in the environment, their high capacity of dispersion
and small size of the conidia, which contribute to the access of these
structures to host tissues, like the respiratory tract. Filamentous
fungi are able to survive and grow in a wide range of tempera-
tures, varying from 25 to 37˚C or even higher temperatures which,
in association with their low nutritional requirements, permits
host tissue colonization in a context of deﬁciencies in microbicidal
mechanisms of leukocytes and mobilization of the inﬂammatory
response (Groll and Walsh, 2001; Latgé, 2001).

Molecules from infectious agents are recognized by the innate
immune system triggering an inﬂammatory response that is fun-
damental to the initial control of infection. This early response

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 1

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

dictates the activation of antigen speciﬁc lymphocytes, the hall-
mark of the adaptive immune response. Each microorganism is
composed of a peculiar set of molecules and ways to interact
with the host. The innate immune system also recognizes mol-
ecules from damaged host cells and tissues, promoting unique
immune/inﬂammatory responses.

The speciﬁc recognition of conserved microbial molecules from
infectious agents is performed by pattern recognition receptors
(PRRs; Akira et al., 2006; Medzhitov, 2007). Activation of these
receptors triggers intracellular signaling pathways resulting in
the production of cytokines, lipid mediators, and reactive oxy-
gen/nitrogen species. This activation of the immune system is
instrumental for pathogen killing but is also critically involved
in tissue damage (Nathan, 2002).

Toll like receptors (TLRs) and the C-type lectin receptors
(CLRs) are the best deﬁned receptors involved in fungal recog-
nition. They couple pathogen detection to signaling cascades that
promote induction of pro-inﬂammatory mediators, phagocyto-
sis, and induction of adaptive immunity (Van de Veerdonk et al.,
2008).

Toll like receptors form a group of receptors that share homol-
ogy with Drosophila Toll receptor. Toll receptor was initially
demonstrated to be involved in immunity to fungal infections
in Drosophila through sensing of the protein Spätzle that is pro-
duced by proteolysis during the infection caused by A. fumiga-
tus (Lemaitre et al., 1996). Characterization of the Drosophila
Toll receptor opened the way for identiﬁcation of mammalian
homologs designated TLRs which have been implicated in detec-
tion of microbial products and activation of innate immunity to
pathogens (Medzhitov, 2007).

TLR4 detects bacterial lipopolysaccharides (Poltorak et al.,
1998; Hoshino et al., 1999; Qureshi et al., 1999). TLR2
forms heterodimers with TLR1 or TLR6, recognizing diacylated
(TLR2/TLR6) and triacylated bacterial lipoproteins (TLR2/TLR1;
Takeuchi et al., 2000, 2001, 2002), lipoteichoic acid (TLR2/TLR6;
Schwandner et al., 1999; Schröder et al., 2003; Travassos et al.,
2004), lipoarabinomannans (TLR2/TLR1; Means et al., 1999; San-
dor et al., 2003; Tapping and Tobias, 2003), and GPI anchors
of protozoans (Campos et al., 2001; Krishnegowda et al., 2005;
Debierre-Grockiego et al., 2007). TLR5 recognizes bacterial ﬂa-
gellin (Hayashi et al., 2001). TLR3, TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9
are present in endosomes and are involved in recognition of
internalized nucleic acids (Kawai and Akira, 2011). TLR3 senses
double-stranded RNA produced during viral infections (Alex-
opoulou et al., 2001). TLR7/8 is responsible for detection of
single stranded RNA enriched in GU-containing sequences and
nucleotides analogs (Hemmi et al., 2002; Diebold et al., 2004; Heil
et al., 2004; Lund et al., 2004). TLR9 recognizes DNA sequences
containing non-methylated CpG (Hemmi et al., 2000).

C-type lectin receptors are transmembrane proteins involved
in pathogen recognition by means of carbohydrate detection.
This group of receptors includes molecules involved in fungal
recognition such as Dectin-1 (CLEC7A), Dectin-2 (CLEC4n),
dendritic cell-speciﬁc ICAM3 grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN),
Macrophage-inducible C-type lectin (Mincle, CLEC4e), and man-
nose receptor (MR; Willment and Brown, 2008). Dectin-1, Min-
cle, and Dectin-2 recognize fungal products, and signal through

immunoreceptor tyrosine based motifs (ITAM), leading to acti-
vation of transcriptional factors such as NFAT and NF-κB and
induction of cytokines (Kerrigan and Brown, 2010). Furthermore,
some CLRs have been implicated in internalization of pathogens,
such as Dectin-1, DC-SIGN, and MR. Dectin-1 recognizes fun-
gal β-1,3-glucans (Brown and Gordon, 2001; Brown et al., 2003),
Dectin-2 is involved in cellular responses to mannans expressed
on fungal surfaces (Saijo et al., 2010). MR binds to polysaccha-
rides containing mannose and fucose residues and is involved
in recognition of many fungal pathogens (Kerrigan and Brown,
2009). Mincle senses mycobacterial glycolipid, trehalose dimyco-
late, and fungal molecules still uncharacterized, like C. albicans
(Miyake et al., 2010). DC-SIGN is involved in recognition of sev-
eral pathogens and has been implicated in internalization and
cellular infection by microorganisms like Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis, HIV, Dengue virus, and fungal pathogens (van Kooyk and
Geijtenbeek, 2003).

This review will discuss the receptors involved in innate
immune recognition of opportunist ﬁlamentous fungi and the
fungal surface molecules recognized by these receptors.

FUNGAL SURFACES AND MOLECULAR PATTERNS
Fungal pathogens have a thick cell wall that is essential for their
survival by providing protection against environmental stress and
allowing interaction with host cells and tissues. The distinct com-
position of the fungal surface in relation to the membrane of
mammalian cells offers a wide array of molecular patterns that
are important targets for recognition by the immune system and
impact the relationship between fungal pathogens and their hosts
(Latgé, 2010).

Zymosan, a particulate material obtained from the Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae cell wall, has been extensively used as a model
for investigation of the mechanisms of innate immune recognition
of fungal pathogens. Zymosan is composed mainly of polysaccha-
rides that include chitin, mannans, and β-glucans, in addition to
fatty acids and proteins (Di Carlo and Fiore, 1958). Zymosan is
promptly phagocytosed by macrophages and is a potent inducer
of pro-inﬂammatory cytokine release and reactive oxygen species
(ROS) production by macrophages and neutrophils (Murata et al.,
1987; Brown et al., 2003; Gantner et al., 2003).

Candida albicans is a well-studied fungal pathogen and its sur-
face has been characterized in detail. The C. albicans cell wall is
composed of an external coat of mannans and mannoproteins that
covers a deeper layer composed of β-glucans and chitin (Chafﬁn
et al., 1998; Masuoka, 2004). The mannans found in the C. albicans
surface are polymers of mannose linked by α-1,4, α-1,6, and α-1,2
bonds. The C. albicans cell wall also presents β-1,2 oligoman-
nosides joined to α-1,6 linked chains by phosphodiester bonds.
The surface linked proteins are heavily glycosylated with long
chains of mannans that are components of glycoproteins or gly-
colipids present in the surface. Internally, the C. albicans cell wall
is ﬁlled with a tough cross-linked layer of chitin and β-glucan with
glycolipids and glycoproteins anchored by glycosylphosphatidyli-
nositol groups. The core of the internal layer of the C. albicans
cell wall is formed by chains of β-glucans joined through β-1,3
and β-1,6 linkages. Chitin is a polymer of units of N -acetyl-d-
glucosamine linked by β-1,4 bonds that is covalently linked to the

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 2

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

net of β-glucans, thus conferring extensive cross-linking to the
β-glucan chains (Chafﬁn et al., 1998; Masuoka, 2004).

Filamentous fungi like A. fumigatus present a distinct com-
position in their surfaces in comparison with C. albicans. The
cell wall of A. fumigatus has an external coat covered with α-
1,3/α-1,4-glucans and galactomannans (Fontaine et al., 2000). In
contrast with yeasts, A. fumigatus presents peptidogalactoman-
nans containing oligomers of galactofurans linked to units of
α-1,2 mannoses and these polysaccharides are antigens released
during infection (Leitão et al., 2003). Curiously, these mannans
are generally bound to glucans without a peptidic core (Fontaine
et al., 2000). As in yeasts, the A. fumigatus cell wall is consti-
tuted by a rigid insoluble layer of β-1,3-glucans that is branched
by β-1,6 linkages, but in the case of A. fumigatus, β-1,6 glu-
cans are not present and β-1,3/1,4 linear chains are part of the
cell wall (Fontaine et al., 2000). Chitin, galactomannans, and β-
1,3/1,4-glucans are covalently bound to the mesh of β-1,3-glucans
that forms the core of the cell wall (Fontaine et al., 2000). GPI-
anchored glycoproteins and polysaccharides are also present on
the A. fumigatus membrane (Fontaine et al., 2003; Costachel et al.,
2005).

Aspergillus fumigatus resting conidia present a hydrophobic
layer formed by the protein RodA. This layer masks β-glucans and
uncharacterized TLR activators, making resting conidia unable to
induce cytokine release by macrophages. During germination, the
rodlet layer of RodA is degraded and molecules that are recognized
by PRRs in macrophages and dendritic cells are then exposed and
promote cytokine production and expression of co-stimulatory
molecules. Similarly, other environmental non-pathogenic fungi
also express a layer of hydrophobins and their resting conidia
are also unable to induce dendritic cell activation, while chemical
removal of hydrophobins permits dendritic cell activation by the
resting conidia. Thus, the outermost hydrophobic layer of many
mold fungi prevents an undesired inﬂammatory response to rest-
ing conidia in what seems to be an evolutionary interplay between
environmental fungi and mammals. Thus the only morphologi-
cal stages that represent a real threat for host tissue invasion, like
germ tubes, swollen conidia, and hyphae, would be recognized by
the immune system (Aimanianda et al., 2009).

TOLL LIKE RECEPTORS AND RECOGNITION OF PATHOGENIC
FUNGI
TLR2 and TLR4 have been implicated in fungal recognition (Van
de Veerdonk et al., 2008). TLR2/TLR6 heterodimers are responsi-
ble for activation of NF-κB and cytokine induction by zymosan in
macrophages (Underhill et al., 1999; Ozinsky et al., 2000). TLR2
and TLR4 are involved in innate immune recognition of C. albicans
and A. fumigatus (Van de Veerdonk et al., 2008).

Mice with non-functional TLR4 (C3H/HeJ) present an
increased fungal load in the kidneys and deﬁciencies in neu-
trophil recruitment upon C. albicans challenge when compared
to TLR4 responsive mice (C3H/HeN; Netea et al., 2002). TLR4 is
required for the production of neutrophil chemoattractants MIP-
2/CXCL2 and KC/CXCL1 by mouse macrophages stimulated with
heat-killed C. albicans blastoconidia, while TLR2 is required for
TNF-α and IL-1 release by human peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (Netea et al., 2002). Tlr2
mice are more susceptible to

−/−

−/−

−/−

−/−

, and Tlr2

macrophages, but not Tlr2

C. albicans infection showing a reduction in neutrophil mobiliza-
tion during infection. TLR2 is also required for MIP-2/CXCL2
and TNF-α release by murine macrophages in response to C.
albicans yeasts and hyphae (Villamón et al., 2004). Bellocchio
et al. (2004) found that, in a model of gastric colonization by
C. albicans, Tlr4
mice display increased fun-
gal loads. These authors observed a reduced TNF-α release by
−/−
Tlr4
macrophages, stimulated
with C. albicans yeasts or hyphae. On the other hand, these authors
did not observe any increase in the susceptibility of Tlr4
or
Tlr2
mice to systemic C. albicans infection in regards to lethal-
ity and fungal load. Even though TLR2 and TLR4 have been clearly
demonstrated to recognize C. albicans, discrepancies among differ-
ent studies probably reﬂect heterogeneity of experimental settings.
Additionally, the differences in the experimental models of infec-
tion are most likely due to the different routes of infections used
in the study.

−/−

−/−

TLR2 and TLR4 are also involved in A. fumigatus recognition.
TLR2 is required for TNF-α release by macrophages in response to
A. fumigatus resting conidia and hyphae (Mambula et al., 2002).
In contrast, TLR4 deﬁciency does not impact TNF-α induction by
A. fumigatus in macrophages. Similar results were obtained with
HEK cells overexpressing TLR4 and TLR2, in which TLR2 expres-
sion promoted NF-κB activation in response to A. fumigatus, while
TLR4 expression failed to do so (Mambula et al., 2002). Meier
et al. (2003) observed that A. fumigatus induces NF-κB activa-
tion in macrophages and overexpression of either TLR2 or TLR4
in HEK cells leads to NF-κB activation upon stimulation with
A. fumigatus conidia and hyphae (Meier et al., 2003). Further-
more, TLR4 but not TLR2 deﬁciency impaired cytokine release
by murine peritoneal macrophages stimulated with A. fumiga-
tus conidia and hyphae (Meier et al., 2003). Neutrophil recruit-
ment upon A. fumigatus challenge is reduced in C3H/HeJ mice,
and although a residual cytokine release and neutrophil recruit-
ment were still observed, C3H/HeJ/Tlr2
mice show absence
of the cytokine release by macrophages and a greater reduction
in neutrophil mobilization in vivo, implying that both receptors
are involved in A. fumigatus recognition with TLR2 single deﬁ-
ciency being compensated by TLR4 signaling (Meier et al., 2003).
Human polymorphisms in TLR4, TLR1, and TLR6 have been asso-
ciated with susceptibility to A. fumigatus infections in recipients
of hematopoietic transplants, indicating that these receptors are
involved in immunity to A. fumigatus (Kesh et al., 2005; Bochud
et al., 2008). Latter works demonstrated that innate immune recog-
nition of A. fumigatus requires germination of conidia. Resting
conidia are unable to induce cytokine release by macrophages, but
upon germination swollen conidia and germ tubes are recognized
by TLR2 and Dectin-1, thus triggering cytokine release and ROS
production by macrophages (Hohl et al., 2005; Steele et al., 2005;
Gersuk et al., 2006).

−/−

Toll like receptors are also involved in the innate recognition
of Pseudallescheria boydii, an important pathogenic ﬁlamentous
fungus. TLR4 is required for cytokine production by macrophages
in response to the stimulation with P. boydii conidia, while TLR2
seems to be dispensable. In contrast, induction of TNF-α by P.
boydii hyphae is independent of either TLR2 or TLR4 mediated
recognition (Figueiredo et al., 2010).

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 3

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

Recognition of zymosan with subsequent cytokine production
by macrophages requires cooperation between TLR2 and Dectin-1
(Brown et al., 2003; Gantner et al., 2003). The capacity to activate
TLR2 is abolished by hot alkali treatment or oxidation of zymosan,
while Dectin-1 signaling is not impaired (Gantner et al., 2003; Saijo
et al., 2007). Macrophage activation by β-glucans is independent of
TLR signaling, but completely dependent on Dectin-1 triggering
(Rogers et al., 2005; Yoshitomi et al., 2005; Saijo et al., 2007). These
results indicate that different molecules are involved in zymosan
recognition by macrophages, with β-glucans inducing Dectin-1
activation and unknown molecules promoting TLR2 triggering.

Candida albicans phospholipomannans induce NF-κB activa-
tion and TNF-α release in murine macrophages by a mechanism
dependent on TLR2 activation that also requires TLR4 and TLR6
signaling for full-blown activation (Jouault et al., 2003). However,
it is uncertain if other pathogenic fungi express phospholipoman-
nans, in particular ﬁlamentous fungi. A phospholipomannan of
C. albicans was structurally characterized and shown to be com-
posed of β-1,2 oligomannosides linked to a phosphoinositol ring
that, in turn, is linked to a C18/C20 phytosphingosine and a ram-
iﬁed C24/C25/C26 fatty acid (Trinel et al., 2002). However, the
structural requirements involved in TLR activation by phospho-
lipomannans are still unknown and direct interaction with TLR2,
TLR4, or TLR6 was not analyzed.

Glucuronoxylomannans (GXM) are central components of the
capsule present in the fungal pathogens Cryptococcus neoformans
and C. gattii. GXMs consist of polyanionic polysaccharides com-
posed of α-1,3 linked mannans, O-acetylated in some mannosyl
residues with substitutions of β-1,2 glucuronyl and β-1,2/β-1,4
xylosyl units (Rodrigues et al., 2011). GXM is recognized by
TLR4 (Shoham et al., 2001), TLR2/TLR1, and TLR2/TLR6 (Fon-
seca et al., 2010). Activation of TLR2/TLR1 and TLR2/TLR6
is associated with a smaller size of GXM particles (Fonseca
et al., 2010). Interaction of GXM with TLR4, TLR2/TLR1, or
TLR2/TLR6 promotes NF-κB activation (Shoham et al., 2001;
Fonseca et al., 2010), and expression of co-stimulatory molecules
by macrophages (Monari et al., 2005). However, in contrast to
prototypical TLR agonists, GXM does not induce TNF-α pro-
duction or activation of MAP kinases by macrophages (Shoham
et al., 2001; Monari et al., 2005). Nevertheless, other studies have
demonstrated the induction of cytokines by human neutrophils
and monocytes stimulated with GXM (Retini et al., 1996; Vec-
chiarelli et al., 1996; Delﬁno et al., 1997). Curiously, human mono-
cytes, like macrophages, do not produce the pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines TNF-α and IL-1β when stimulated with GXM (Retini
et al., 1996; Shoham et al., 2001; Monari et al., 2005). Although
TLR2 and TLR4 are clearly involved in recognition of GXM
particles, the structural determinants involved are still unchar-
acterized. In fact, GXMs are highly heterogeneous molecules and
it is possible that GXM recognition could trigger activation of
surface receptors other than TLRs that promote immunomodula-
tory effects distinct from those activated by TLR classical ligands.
Furthermore the heterogenicity of GXM composition could con-
tribute to the differences in the induction of cytokines, observed
in different works. The absence of induction of TNF-α by GXMs
in mononuclear phagocytes, in contrast to neutrophils, might
contribute to immune evasion of pathogenic Cryptococcus spp.,

since macrophages carry intracellular Cryptococcus yeasts during
infection.

Mannans isolated from C. albicans and Saccharomyces spp.
are inducers of cytokine release in macrophages through TLR4
recognition (Tada et al., 2002). Interestingly, TLR4 seems to coop-
erate with the MR. TLR4 recognizes O-linked mannans, while
N-linked mannans are recognized by MR (Netea et al., 2006).
TLR4 is also required for macrophage activation induced by P. boy-
dii conidia, and removal of mannans results in a great reduction
in TNF-α production by macrophages, indicating that mannans
play an important role in the innate immune recognition of P.
boydii. Rhamnomannans isolated from P. boydii are inducers of
cytokine production in macrophages through TLR4 activation.
Interestingly, mannans isolated from P. boydii present terminal
non-reducing units of rhamnose and chemical removal of these
units abolish cytokine induction, implying a role for these terminal
residues in recognition of P. boydii derived mannans (Figueiredo
et al., 2010).

P. boydii derived α-glucans induce cytokine production by
macrophages and dendritic cells, by means of recognition medi-
ated by TLR2 and CD14 (Bittencourt et al., 2006). Polysaccha-
rides extracted from the medicinal fungi Ganoderma lucidum
and Cordyceps sinensis are potent immunomodulators and have
antitumoral activity (Hsu et al., 2009). The ability of these poly-
saccharides to induce cytokine production and B cell activation
is dependent on TLR2 and TLR4 activation. Binding assays using
recombinant chimeric TLR4-Fc and TLR2-Fc demonstrated direct
binding to polysaccharides derived from G. lucidum. Further-
more, the binding of TLR4 and TLR2 to these polysaccharides
was inhibited by soluble mannans, indicating that TLR4 and TLR2
competitively bind both mannans and polysaccharides (Hsu et al.,
2009). It remains undeﬁned how TLR4 and TLR2 detect fungal
molecules. Fungal polysaccharides such as mannans, α-glucans,
and GXMs are structurally distinct from the prototypical agonists
of TLR4 and TLR2. It is possible that fungal structures, particularly
complex polysaccharides or fragments of cell wall, could present
uncharacterized glycolipids anchored to their structures in such
a way that these compounds could act as true “agonists” of TLR4
and/or TLR2. To shed light into these questions, sensitive analyt-
ical techniques, including nuclear magnetic resonance and mass
spectrometry, could prove to be useful. In addition, complemen-
tary approaches like genetic models of deﬁciency in the synthesis
of speciﬁc molecules of fungal pathogens and selective inactivation
of investigated molecules (enzymatic treatments, selective chem-
ical reactions), in order to exclude contamination with bacterial
ligands or even the contribution of minor components of fungal
preparations. Direct binding of bacterial lipid A and lipopeptides
have been described for TLR4 and TLR2, respectively. In addi-
tion, crystallographic analysis of lipid A/TLR4/MD2 complex and
lipopeptides to TLR1/TLR2 or TLR6/TLR2 complexes have also
been obtained, indicating physical interaction between these lig-
ands and their receptor complexes (Jin et al., 2007; Kang et al.,
2009; Park et al., 2009). Thus it will be important to establish the
structural basis for TLR4 and TLR2 interaction with fungal mol-
ecules, which would help to understand how these receptors are
able to detect such distinct structures like LPS (Poltorak et al.,
1998; Hoshino et al., 1999; Qureshi et al., 1999) and lipoproteins

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 4

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

(Takeuchi et al., 2000, 2001, 2002), as well as endogenous mam-
malian molecules such as carboxy alkyl pyrroles, hyaluronic acid,
heme, HMGB1, and heparan sulfate (Brunn et al., 2005; Figueiredo
et al., 2007; Taylor et al., 2007b; West et al., 2010; Yang et al., 2010).
Although TLR2 and TLR4 are involved in A. fumigatus recogni-
tion, the molecules involved in activation of these receptors were
not characterized. The A. fumigatus cell wall presents α-glucans
and mannans (Latgé, 2010) and, as it was found for P. boydii,
these molecules could be targets of recognition mediated by TLR2
and TLR4, respectively. Thus, it will be important to perform the
isolation and characterization of highly puriﬁed cell wall compo-
nents of A. fumigatus and other ﬁlamentous fungi, and screening
of such molecules for activation of selective PRRs including TLR4
and TLR2.

CD14 CONTRIBUTES TO TLR RECOGNITION OF FUNGAL
MOLECULES
CD14 was initially characterized as a receptor involved in LPS
binding to cell membrane and LPS-induced cellular responses.
CD14 is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored protein that
lacks an intracellular signaling domain (Wright et al., 1990). CD14
was implied in cellular responses to several microbial molecules,
such as lipoproteins (Schröder et al., 2004) and lipoteichoic acid
(Schröder et al., 2003). Although unable to trigger cellular signal-
ing, CD14 promotes loading of TLR4/MD2 and TLR2 with their
ligands, a mechanism that contributes to detection of these soluble
molecules in small amounts (Wright et al., 1990; Schröder et al.,
2004).

−/−

CD14 is involved in the recognition of ﬁlamentous fungi. CD14
overexpression in human cell lines results in increased NF-κB acti-
vation and TNF-α production in response to A. fumigatus. These
results, however, are in contrast with others showing no difference
in TNF-α production by Cd14
and wild-type macrophages
stimulated with A. fumigatus, indicating that in the case of murine
macrophages CD14 is dispensable for A. fumigatus recognition
(Mambula et al., 2002). Activation of human monocytes by A.
fumigatus hyphae is dependent on recognition mediated by CD14
and TLR4, since blocking these receptors with monoclonal anti-
bodies results in reduction of TNF-α production (Wang et al.,
2001). Recognition of P. boydii conidia requires CD14, as demon-
strated by reduction in TNF-α release by Cd14
macrophages
when compared with wild-type cells (Figueiredo et al., 2010). The
α-glucans isolated from P. boydii also require CD14 for cytokine
induction by murine macrophages (Bittencourt et al., 2006). Man-
nans derived from C. albicans and S. cerevisiae induce macrophage
activation with induction of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines in a
mechanism that is also dependent on CD14 recognition (Tada
et al., 2002). C. neoformans derived GXM induces macrophage and
epithelial cell activation by a mechanism requiring CD14 recog-
nition. Furthermore CD14 is involved in GXM internalization by
macrophages (Barbosa et al., 2007).

−/−

The mechanism by which CD14 promotes leukocyte activa-
tion in response to fungal molecules is still largely unknown. As
observed with bacterial activators of TLR2 and TLR4, CD14 is
probably involved in the transfer of fungal molecules to TLR2
or TLR4. Studies using isolated fungal molecules and measure-
ments of their binding to CD14 and TLR2/TLR4 and cellular

activation would be valuable in deﬁning the role of CD14 in fungal
recognition.

ROLE OF C-TYPE LECTIN RECEPTORS ON FUNGI
RECOGNITION
Dectin-1 is a type II transmembrane protein with an extracel-
lular CLR domain and was identiﬁed by means of a search in a
cDNA library obtained from RAW264.7 cells for genes able to con-
fer β-glucan binding (Brown and Gordon, 2001). Dectin-1 binds
and promotes phagocytosis of particles containing β1,3-glucans
(Brown and Gordon, 2001; Brown et al., 2002). Dectin-1 cou-
ples detection of β-glucans to induction of phagocytosis, since
internalization, but not binding of zymosan, requires a functional
ITAM motif in its intracellular tail (Herre et al., 2004). Dectin-
1 presents an intracellular domain containing an hemi-ITAM
motif that is phosphorylated upon clustering of Dectin-1. The
hemi-ITAM present in the cytoplasmic tail of Dectin-1 recruits
Syk kinase and results in its activation, an upstream event in the
Dectin-1 signaling pathway (Rogers et al., 2005). Activation of
Dectin-1 induces NF-κB and NFAT activation and the production
of cytokines in response to puriﬁed β-glucans, by a signaling path-
way requiring activation of Syk and the adaptor CARD9 (Rogers
et al., 2005; Gross et al., 2006; Goodridge et al., 2007; Hara et al.,
2007). As opposed to TLRs that recognize soluble ligands, Dectin-
1 signaling requires its clustering by aggregates of β-glucans in
order to promote Syk activation and exclusion of tyrosine phos-
phatases CD45 and CD48 (Goodridge et al., 2011). Dectin-1 is
absolutely required for macrophage recognition of β-glucans, since
macrophages obtained from Dectin-1 deﬁcient mice are unable to
produce cytokines in response to β-glucans (Saijo et al., 2007;
Taylor et al., 2007a).

Dectin-1 cooperates with TLR2 in cell activation induced by
zymosan, amplifying NF-κB activation and cytokine production
by macrophages, and inducing generation of ROS (Brown et al.,
2003; Gantner et al., 2003). Zymosan submitted to hot alkali treat-
ment or oxidation with NaClO is unable to induce TLR2 signaling
but it still promotes Dectin-1 activation, indicating that Dectin-1
is able to induce macrophage activation independently of signaling
mediated by TLR2, although cooperation between these receptors
is required for cytokine production (Gantner et al., 2003; Saijo
et al., 2007).

Phagocytosis of C. albicans yeasts requires recognition of β-
glucans by Dectin-1. Interestingly, β-glucans are exposed on the
C. albicans surface during budding of yeasts, while hyphae have
a low expression of β-glucans on the cell surface (Gantner et al.,
2005). Dectin-1 is also involved in innate immune recognition of
A. fumigatus. During germination, exposure of β-glucans on sur-
faces of A. fumigatus conidia promotes recognition mediated by
Dectin-1 (Gersuk et al., 2006; Luther et al., 2007). The pattern of
expression of β-glucans seems to inﬂuence the phagocytosis of A.
fumigatus conidia, since resting conidia show a reduced internal-
ization by macrophages when compared to swollen conidia that
have exposed β-glucans on the surface as a consequence of the
degradation of the hydrophobic layer during germination (Hohl
et al., 2005; Steele et al., 2005; Gersuk et al., 2006). Phagocyto-
sis of A. fumigatus resting conidia obtained from a pksP deﬁcient
strain is increased, in comparison to the wild-type resting conidia.

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 5

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

Resting conidia from pksP mutants are deﬁcient in the synthesis
of melanin and show higher exposure of β-glucans on their sur-
face, thus implying exposure of β-glucans as a regulator of the
phagocytosis of A. fumigatus conidia (Luther et al., 2007).

Dectin-1 activation also triggers generation of ROS upon recog-
nition of fungal pathogens such as C. albicans yeasts, zymosan,
and A. fumigatus germ tubes (Gantner et al., 2003, 2005; Ger-
suk et al., 2006). Thus, Dectin-1 integrates fungal phagocytosis
and production of inﬂammatory mediators through recognition
of β-1,3-glucans exposed on the fungal surface.

−/−

Dectin-1 (also known as CLEC7A) is involved in innate
immune recognition of C. albicans (Gantner et al., 2005; Saijo
et al., 2007; Taylor et al., 2007a), Pneumocystis carinii (Steele et al.,
2003), and A. fumigatus (Hohl et al., 2005; Steele et al., 2005; Ger-
suk et al., 2006). However, discrepant results have been reported
in experimental models of infection with C. albicans that demon-
strated either a higher susceptibility of Clec7a
mice to infection
or no role for Dectin-1 (Saijo et al., 2007; Taylor et al., 2007a). On
the other hand, Dectin-1 is absolutely necessary for the immune
response to A. fumigatus. Clec7a
mice succumb to pulmonary
infection due to increased growth of A. fumigatus hyphae. This
increased susceptibility is associated with an impairment in micro-
bicidal activity and generation of ROS by neutrophils, as well a
reduction in neutrophil recruitment to the lungs. Clec7a
mice
present a reduced production of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines dur-
ing the infection (Werner et al., 2009). It is interesting that A.
fumigatus, an opportunist pathogen, causes lethal infections in
Clec7a
mice in the absence of immunosuppressive treatments,
a phenotype that is not observed in TLR2, TLR4, or MyD88 knock-
out mice, indicating a critical role for Dectin-1 in innate immunity
to A. fumigatus (Dubourdeau et al., 2006; Bretz et al., 2008).

−/−

−/−

−/−

Dectin-2 (also known as CLEC4N) was initially identiﬁed by
the screening of a cDNA library obtained from dendritic cells
(Ariizumi et al., 2000). Dectin-2 recognizes hyphae of C. albi-
cans, Trichophyton rubrum, and Microsporum audouinii (Sato et al.,
2006). Although Dectin-2 lacks intracellular signaling motifs, its
association with FcRγ chain, which contains ITAM motifs, leads to
the activation of Syk kinase and recruitment of CARD9 (Sato et al.,
2006; Saijo et al., 2010). Activation of the Dectin-2 signaling path-
way results in activation of NF-κB thus promoting the induction
of transcription of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines (Bi et al., 2010;
Saijo et al., 2010).

−/−

A soluble recombinant version of Dectin-2 carbohydrate recog-
nition domain (CRD) binds mannans and fungal surfaces by
+2, and blocked by mannose or
a mechanism dependent on Ca
fucose monosaccharides (McGreal et al., 2006). Glycan array
analysis reveals that Dectin-2 presents selectivity to structures
with a high content of mannosyl residues (McGreal et al., 2006).
Clec4n
macrophages have impaired cytokine production and
fail to activate Syk, MAP kinases, and NF-κB in response to C.
albicans α-mannans or cell wall preparations. Clec4n
mice
are susceptible to C. albicans infection presenting higher fungal
loads in kidneys than wild-type mice. Clec4n
macrophages also
show impaired production of cytokines in response to C. albicans
−/−
yeasts or hyphae. Furthermore, Clec4n
mice show a deﬁcient
Th17 polarization whose induction with consequent production
of IL17A is essential to immunity and survival during infection
(Saijo et al., 2010).

−/−

−/−

The role of Dectin-2 in detection of ﬁlamentous fungi has not
been investigated. Since α-mannans constitute the core of polysac-
charides in many surface associated glycoconjugates from ﬁlamen-
tous fungi, Dectin-2 could be a receptor involved in innate immune
recognition of fungi like A. fumigatus and other mold fungi.

−/−

Mincle (also known as CLEC4E) was

identiﬁed as a
downstream gene of C/EBPβ, a member of
the family of
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) of transcription fac-
tors, by screening of a subtraction library in wild-type and
Cebpb
macrophages (Matsumoto et al., 1999). Mincle is a type
II transmembrane receptor of the group of CLRs (Miyake et al.,
2010). Similarly to Dectin-2, Mincle engages signaling by recruit-
ment of FcRγ chain, which leads to NFAT activation (Yamasaki
et al., 2008).

−/−

mice. Clec4e

Soluble recombinant Mincle binds to C. albicans and S. cere-
visiae (Bugarcic et al., 2008; Wells et al., 2008). In experimen-
tal models of C. albicans infection, Clec4e
mice present
+/+
−/−
higher fungal loads in kidneys than Clec4e
macrophages show impaired production of TNF-α in response
to C. albicans yeasts (Wells et al., 2008). Mincle also recognizes
Malassezia spp., a commensal yeast associated with dermatitis and
infections in newborns. Mincle binds to Malassezia spp. and this
involves a domain for recognition of mannoses. In a microarray
for glyconjugates, Mincle was demonstrated to bind to α-mannosyl
residues but not mannans, indicating recognition of terminal α-
mannoses (Yamasaki et al., 2009). Clec4e
macrophages present
impaired production of cytokines in response to M. pachyder-
matis. Furthermore Clec4e
mice show impaired production
of cytokines and leukocyte recruitment during infection by M.
pachydermatis (Yamasaki et al., 2009).

−/−

−/−

The role of Mincle in the response to ﬁlamentous fungi is
unclear. Yamasaki et al. (2009) failed to observe Mincle medi-
ated responses to Aspergillus spp. or Scedosporium apiospermum
when Mincle expressing cells carrying a NFAT reporter system
were stimulated with these fungi (Yamasaki et al., 2009). However,
the use of Mincle overexpression systems could fail to mimic the
responses of cells that naturally express it, like macrophages or
dendritic cells. For example, C. albicans has been demonstrated to
require Mincle for macrophage activation, although in the NFAT
reporter system employed by Yamasaki et al. (2009) C. albicans
strains were not able to induce NFAT activation (Wells et al.,
2008). Fungal molecules responsible for Mincle activation are
still unknown. Although Mincle has been demonstrated to bind
α-mannosyl residues (Yamasaki et al., 2009), it remains to be estab-
lished if α-mannosyl residues expressed on fungal molecules are
the natural ligands of Mincle.

Dendritic cell-speciﬁc ICAM3 grabbing non-integrin is a type
II transmembrane protein that contains a C-type lectin extracel-
lular portion. DC-SIGN was initially characterized as a protein
able to bind to HIV-1 glycoprotein, gp120. Subsequent studies
demonstrated a role for DC-SIGN in interaction of dendritic cells
and macrophages with several pathogens such as M. tuberculosis,
Dengue virus, HIV, and Ebola virus (van Kooyk and Geijtenbeek,
2003).

Dendritic cell-speciﬁc ICAM3 grabbing non-integrin is
involved in C. albicans recognition by mediating C. albicans
binding to dendritic cells. Furthermore, DC-SIGN colocalizes with
C. albicans-containing phagosomes during its internalization by

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 6

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

dendritic cells (Cambi et al., 2003). DC-SIGN mediates binding
and internalization of A. fumigatus conidia in macrophages and
dendritic cells. (Serrano-Gómez et al., 2004). Recognition of C.
albicans and A. fumigatus by DC-SIGN is blocked by soluble man-
nans, suggesting that these are the ligands for DC-SIGN on fungal
surfaces (Cambi et al., 2003; Serrano-Gómez et al., 2004).

The role of DC-SIGN in microbial phagocytosis is uncertain.
It is not clear whether DC-SIGN mediates only pathogen binding
or also signals microbial internalization. Mutations in two adja-
cent leucines in a conserved intracellular motif of DC-SIGN result
in a preserved binding to particles containing DC-SIGN ligands,
although internalization of these particles is impaired, thus indi-
cating a role for DC-SIGN in the activation of phagocytosis (Azad
et al., 2008). However, it remains to be deﬁned whether DC-SIGN
is able to promote ingestion of pathogens in professional phago-
cytes, such as dendritic cells and macrophages, or if it is a receptor
that mediates microbial binding to phagocytes for internalization
mediated by phagocytic receptors.

Chimeric DC-SIGN-Fc protein binds to mannans, α-mannosyl,
and α-fucosyl residues but not to sialylated Lewis carbohydrates
(Lee et al., 2011). Thus, it seems that DC-SIGN is involved in the
recognition of a large spectrum of pathogens, including fungal
pathogens, by means of detection of mannose/fucose contain-
ing glycoconjugates. In contrast to other PRRs, like Dectin-1 and
TLRs, DC-SIGN has been described to inhibit production of pro-
inﬂammatory cytokines, particularly IL-12p70, while promoting
IL-10 production, which has been interpreted as a mechanism
for immune evasion of pathogens that express DC-SIGN ligands
(van Kooyk and Geijtenbeek, 2003). However it remains to be
established if fungal pathogens target DC-SIGN in order to evade
immune responses during infections.

Mannose receptor is a type I transmembrane protein contain-
ing an extracellular cysteine rich domain, a ﬁbronectin type II
repeat, eight C-type lectin domains, and a stalk portion connecting
the extracellular domain to a short intracellular region. MR recog-
nizes mannose, fucose, or N -acetylglucosamine residues present
in glycoconjugates (Ezekowitz et al., 1990; Lee et al., 2011). MR
is a receptor for binding and internalization of several pathogens,
including M. tuberculosis, Leishmania spp., and fungi such as C.
albicans and P. carinii (Kerrigan and Brown, 2009).

Mannose receptor was the ﬁrst phagocytic receptor described
that was able to mediate fungal internalization through recog-
nition of fungal derived molecules, in the absence of opsonins
(Ezekowitz et al., 1990). MR expression confers phagocytic capac-
ity to P. carinii, yeasts and zymosan in non-phagocytic cells, and
the ingestion of these particles is inhibited by soluble mannans
(Ezekowitz et al., 1990). The role of MR in phagocytosis is not
only due to particle binding, but involves signaling by its intracel-
lular portion, since chimeric proteins containing the extracellular
portion of FcγRI and transmembrane and intracellular regions of
MR are able to promote internalization of IgG-opsonized erythro-
cytes, thus indicating that intracellular motifs of MR are able to
couple detection of particles to activation of phagocytic machin-
ery (Kruskal et al., 1992). MR has been described as a receptor
mediating internalization of C. neoformans and P. carinii by den-
dritic cells and macrophages (Ezekowitz et al., 1990; Syme et al.,
2002; Zhang et al., 2005).

Cytokine production by macrophages in response to C. albicans
N-linked mannans is mediated by MR (Netea et al., 2006). Inter-
nalization and activation of dendritic cells by C. albicans requires
recognitions of N-linked mannans, by mechanisms involving
recognition by DC-SIGN and MR (Cambi et al., 2008). C. neofor-
mans mannoproteins promote dendritic cell activation thorough
MR detection (Tachado et al., 2007). MR mediates internaliza-
tion of P. carinii and IL-8/CXCL8 release by alveolar macrophages
in cooperation with TLR2 signaling, during P. carinii recognition
(Tachado et al., 2007). Although MR has been identiﬁed as a recep-
tor involved in the recognition of fungal pathogens, experimental
models of infection do not show increased susceptibility to C. albi-
cans or P. carinii infection in Mrc1
mice
show increased leukocyte recruitment and pulmonary pathology
during infection by P. carinii (Lee et al., 2003; Swain et al., 2003).
C. neoformans infection results in increased mortality and higher
fungal loads in Mrc1
mice (Dan et al., 2008). In summary, MR
seems to be dispensable for immunity to some fungal pathogens,
possibly due to the recognition of mannans by other PRRs, like
Dectin-2 and TLR4 (Netea et al., 2006; Saijo et al., 2010). The role
of MR in recognition of mold fungi is unknown, but since man-
nans are present on the external layer of these fungi, MR must be
involved in immune recognition of these pathogens.

mice. Still, Mrc1

−/−

−/−

−/−

The growing knowledge on CLR biology has made clear the
involvement of these receptors in fungal recognition. The ability
of Dectin-1, Dectin-2, Mincle, DC-SIGN, and MR to recognize car-
bohydrates makes these proteins important sensors for fungi since
these are the major components of fungal surfaces. CLRs integrate
fungal detection to cellular events like phagocytosis, microbicidal
activity, and cytokine induction. In addition, they also cooperate
with other classes of PRRs such as TLRs. Thus, a better under-
standing of the role of CLRs in the recognition of fungal pathogens
should provide an important contribution to the comprehension
of the immunopathogenesis of fungal infections.

ACTIVATION OF CYTOSOLIC NOD-LIKE RECEPTORS BY
FUNGAL INFECTION
Soon after the discovery of the TLRs, it became clear that, despite
their key role in microbial detection, TLRs could not account for
full host protection. The apparent inability of TLRs to sense intra-
cellular pathogens led to the concept that other PRRs could be
involved in cytosolic microbial detection. Bioinformatic analyses
have identiﬁed the existence of more than 20 Nod-like receptors
(NLR) in the human genome. Due to the lack of signal pep-
tides and transmembrane domains, NLRs are thought to localize
in the cytosol, where they would continuously screen this com-
partment for the presence of microbes. A typical NLR protein
displays (i) a C-terminal leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domain that
is possibly involved in recognition of conserved microbial pat-
terns or other ligands; (ii) a centrally located NACHT domain
that mediates self-oligomerization and is essential for activation
of the NLRs, and (iii) a N-terminal effector domain, which is
responsible for protein–protein interaction with adapter mole-
cules that result in signal transduction. Based on the nature of
their N-terminal domain, the NLRs have been divided into sub-
families: the Nods (Nod1 and Nod2) and NLRC4 possess a caspase
recruitment domain (CARD), the NLRPs (NLRP1–14) display a

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 7

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

pyrin domain (PYD), and Naip presents a baculovirus inhibitor of
apoptosis protein repeat domain (BIR). Like the TLRs, the NLRs
sense characteristic microbial products and possibly “danger sig-
nals” but to date only few have known ligands (Carneiro et al.,
2008).

Nod1 and Nod2 have been characterized as bacterial peptido-
glycan sensors. A putative role for Nod2 in response to A. fumigatus
conidia was suggested based on the observations that, in a mouse
model of intranasal inoculation of A. fumigatus conidia, Nod2
protein expression was upregulated in the lungs and that stimu-
lation with muramyl dipeptide (MDP) increased the secretion of
TNF-α induced by A. fumigatus conidia (Zhang et al., 2008). On
the other hand, no role for Nod2 was observed in Candida infec-
tion – neither did the prevalence of Nod2 polymorphisms increase
in Candida infections nor was the pattern of cytokines produced
in response to Candida infection altered in individuals with Nod2
polymorphisms (Van der Graaf et al., 2006).

The NLRs involved in inﬂammasome assembly, on the other
hand, have been implicated in the innate immune response to a
variety of fungi, including C. albicans, A. fumigatus, and S. cere-
visiae. By deﬁnition, inﬂammasomes are multi-protein complexes
comprising the intracellular adaptor protein ASC (apoptosis-
associated speck-like protein containing a CARD, also known as
TMS1) and a “sensor NLR” that function as molecular scaffolds
for the activation of caspase-1. Several inﬂammasomes have been
characterized and each one is named upon the unique NLR pro-
tein that forms the molecular platform (NLRP1 inﬂammasome,
NLRP3 inﬂammasome, and the NLRC4 inﬂammasome; Davis

et al., 2011). In particular, the NLRP3 inﬂammasome has been
proposed to play an important role in antifungal host defense.

It has been shown that large particulate β1,3-glucans, including
curdlan, glucan from baker’s yeast, paramylon, and zymosan, acti-
vate the transcription of pro-IL-1β through a Dectin-1-dependent
pathway in human macrophages (Kankkunen et al., 2010). The
Dectin-1/Syk pathway is essential for β-glucan-induced IL-1β
mRNA expression (Kankkunen et al., 2010). Additionally, β-
glucans activate the NLRP3 inﬂammasome resulting in IL-1β
processing and secretion. Interestingly, β-glucan appears to be
able to provide the double-hit necessary for IL-1β secretion, i.e.,
induce transcription of pro-IL-1β and promote IL-1β processing
and secretion by inducing inﬂammasome formation. This unique
ability seems to be related to its capacity to trigger the Dectin-
1/Syk pathway as well as inducing ROS formation and potassium
efﬂux (Kankkunen et al., 2010).

The ﬁrst reports to demonstrate a role for the inﬂamma-
somes during fungal infection described the stimulation of the
NLRP3 inﬂammasome in the innate immune response to C. albi-
cans. Infection of macrophages and dendritic cells with C. albi-
cans results in activation of the NLRP3 inﬂammasome with the
resultant activation of caspase-1 and processing and secretion of
IL-1β. The known fungal PRRs TLR2 and Dectin-1 regulate IL-1β
gene transcription, whereas the NLRP3 inﬂammasome controls
caspase-1 mediated cleavage of pro-IL-1β. Together, these three
PRRs are essential for defense against dissemination of mucosal
infection and mortality in vivo (Gross et al., 2009; Hise et al.,
2009).

FIGURE 1 |TLR2,TLR4, Dectin-1, and CD14 are involved in innate immune
recognition of A. fumigatus developmental stages. A. fumigatus resting
conidia do not induce cytokine production by macrophages and dendritic
cells, but during the process of germination, swollen conidia, germ tubes, and
hyphae expose β-glucans, agonists of Dectin-1, and uncharacterized ligands
for TLR2, TLR4 which induce signaling pathways that culminate with cytokine

release by innate immune cells. Recognition of P. boydii involves recognition
of α-glucans and rhamnomannans by TLR2 and TLR4, respectively. P. boydii
conidia require CD14 and TLR4 activation for the induction of macrophage
activation, while activation of TLR2 or TLR4 is dispensable for macrophage
recognition by P. boydii hyphae. The role of Dectin-1 in P. boydii recognition is
still unknown.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 8

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

As mentioned above, Syk, operating downstream of the Dectin-
1/CARD9 axis controls transcription of several cytokine genes,
upon fungal recognition, including pro-IL-1β. Interestingly, inhi-
bition of Syk not only results in inhibition of pro-IL-1β tran-
scription, as expected, but also affects the NLRP3 inﬂammasome
activation after cell stimulation with C. albicans. These results
suggest that the ability of C. albicans to induce both pro-IL-1β
transcription and secretion rely on the activity of Syk. Whereas
Syk signaling for pro-IL-1β transcription selectively depends on
CARD9, the activation of the NLRP3 inﬂammasome involves
production of ROS and potassium efﬂux. These two events are
a common theme to many NLRP3 activators but the inhibi-
tion of Syk selectively abrogates inﬂammasome activation by
C. albicans and Dectin-1 and not other known NLRP3 activa-
tors (Gross et al., 2009; Kumar et al., 2009; Kankkunen et al.,
2010).

In addition to its role as a regulator of inﬂammation and innate
immunity, IL-1β also exerts its effects by controlling Th1 and Th17
adaptive responses. A recent study demonstrated a crucial role
of the inﬂammasome components ASC and caspase-1 in regu-
lating antifungal Th1/Th17 protective responses and preventing
increased fungal overgrowth and disseminated candidiasis. The
increased susceptibility of ASC- and caspase-1-deﬁcient mice to
C. albicans infection is in line with the reports mentioned above
reporting increased susceptibility to candidiasis of NLRP3- and
IL-1β-deﬁcient mice (Van de Veerdonk et al., 2011).The relevance
of the NLRP3 inﬂammasome in response to C. albicans infec-
tion is illustrated by experiments showing hyper-susceptibility of
NLRP3-deﬁcient mice. NLRP3-deﬁcient mice show diminished
concentrations of IL-1β in the sera, reduced survival, and higher
fungal burdens in kidney, spleen, liver, and lung following infection
(Gross et al., 2009; Hise et al., 2009;Van de Veerdonk et al., 2011). In
a mucosal model of C. albicans challenge, inﬂammasome-deﬁcient
mice show susceptibility to infection with higher fungal loads and
lethality, demonstrating that NLRP3, ASC, and caspase-1 mediate
C. albicans-induced IL-1β responses and antifungal defense in vivo
(Hise et al., 2009).

Aspergillus fumigatus induces secretion of IL-1β by the human
monocyte/macrophage cell line THP1 (Saïd-Sadler et al., 2010). Of
note, the morphological stage of these organisms seems to be crit-
ical for their ability to induce inﬂammasome activation providing
further evidence for a differential regulation of immune responses
based on the morphological forms of fungi (Netea et al., 2003).
A. fumigatus hyphae, but not conidia, induce inﬂammasome acti-
vation. As described for β-glucans and C. albicans, the ability of
A. fumigatus hyphae to activate the NLRP3 inﬂammasome in a
human monocyte cell line is dependent on potassium efﬂux, ROS
generation, and Syk mediated signaling pathways (Saïd-Sadler
et al., 2010). Thus, NLRs and inﬂammasomes have been shown
to be important modulators of the innate immune response to a
number of medically relevant fungi.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
Innate immune recognition of ﬁlamentous fungi is still poorly
understood. Even in the case of more studied pathogens such as
A. fumigatus, the molecules involved in the triggering of PRRs are
largely unknown. Figure 1 outlines the molecules and receptors

that have been implicated in recognition of the ﬁlamentous fungi
A. fumigatus and P. boydii by macrophages. Table 1 lists the PRRs
that have been described in the recognition of fungal molecules.

Comprehension of innate immune recognition of fungal mole-
cules is relevant to the understanding of the pathogenesis of fungal
infections. Characterization of the fungal molecules responsible
for the activation of PRRs and their roles in fungal recogni-
tion could uncover new possibilities to immunotherapy in fungal
infections, and help establish effectors mechanisms in immuno-
suppressed individuals. Alternatively, these molecules could also
be used as antigens or adjuvants to induce prophylactic immune
responses to fungal pathogens (Xin et al., 2008). On the other
hand, activation of innate immune receptors by fungal mole-
cules could be involved in immunopathogenesis by promoting
increased inﬂammation and tissue injury. Thus modulation of
innate immune receptor activation during fungal infections could

Table 1 | Pattern recognition receptors involved in detection of fungal
molecules.

Receptor

Fungal molecules

Fungal species

TLR4

TLR2/TLR6

TLR2/TLR1
TLR2

MR

DC-SIGN

Dectin-1

Dectin-2
Mincle

CD14

NLRP3
inﬂammasome

O-linked mannans
Mannans
Rhamnomannans
Phospholipomannans
?
Phospholipomannans
Glucuronoxylomannans
Glucuronoxylomannans
α1,4-glucans
?
N-linked mannans
Mannans
Mannoproteins
Galactomannans
Mannans
β1,3-glucans

α-mannans
Polysaccharides containing
α-mannosyl residues?
Mannans
?
α1,4-glucans
β1,3-glucans

C. albicans
Saccharomyces spp.
P. boydii
C. albicans
A. fumigatus
C. albicans
C. neoformans
C. neoformans
P. boydii
A. fumigatus
C. albicans
P. carinii
C. neoformans
A. fumigatus
C. albicans
A. fumigatus
C. albicans
Saccharomyces spp.
C. albicans
C. albicans
Malassezia spp.
Saccharomyces spp.
A. fumigatus
P. boydii
C. albicans
S. cerevisiae
A. fumigatus

The table summarizes PRRs that have been identiﬁed in recognition of fungal mol-
ecules, but in many cases the molecules responsible for activation are unknown.
Activation of the NLRP3 inﬂammasome by β-glucans and C. albicans is dependent
on Dectin-1. In this sense NLRP3 does not recognize fungal molecules directly
but instead it senses intracellular signals generated by activation of PRRs, like
Dectin-1. The question mark indicates that the fungal molecules recognized by
the indicated receptor are unknown.

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 9

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

be useful in order to increase the immune response or in some
cases prevent immunopathology.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Rodrigo T. Figueiredo was supported by grants of Conselho
Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientíﬁco e Tecnológico (CNPq),
and Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa no Estado do Rio de

Janeiro (FAPERJ). Marcelo T. Bozza was supported by grants of
Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientíﬁco e Tecnológico
(CNPq), and Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa no Estado do Rio
de Janeiro (FAPERJ), PRONEX. Letícia A. M. Carneiro was sup-
ported by Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa no Estado do Rio de
Janeiro (FAPERJ) and by the Antonio Luis Vianna Program of the
PR2-UFRJ.

REFERENCES
Aimanianda, V., Bayry,

J., Bozza,
S., Kniemeyer, O., Perruccio, K.,
Elluru, S. R., Clavaud, C., Paris,
S., Brakhage, A. A., Kaveri, S.
V., Romani, L., and Latgé, J. P.
(2009). Surface hydrophobin pre-
vents immune recognition of air-
borne fungal spores. Nature 460,
1117–1121.

Akira, S., Uematsu, S., and Takeuchi,
O. (2006). Pathogen recognition
and innate immunity. Cell 124,
783–801.

Alexopoulou, L., Holt, A. C., Medzhitov,
R., and Flavell, R. A. (2001). Recog-
nition of double-stranded RNA and
activation of NF-kappaB by Toll-like
receptor 3. Nature 413, 732–738.

(2000). Cloning of

Ariizumi, K., Shen, G. L., Shikano, S.,
Ritter, R. III, Zukas, P., Edelbaum,
D., Morita, A., and Takashima,
A.
sec-
ond dendritic cell-associated C-type
lectin (dectin-2) and its alternatively
spliced isoforms. J. Biol. Chem. 275,
11957–11963.

a

Azad, A. K., Torrelles,

J. B., and
Schlesinger, L. S. (2008). Muta-
tion in the DC-SIGN cytoplasmic
triacidic cluster motif markedly
attenuates
for
phagocytosis and endocytosis of
mannose-containing
by
human myeloid cells. J. Leukoc. Biol.
84, 1594–1603.

receptor

activity

ligands

Barbosa, F. M., Fonseca, F. L.,
Figueiredo, R. T., Bozza, M. T.,
Casadevall, A., Nimrichter, L., and
Rodrigues, M. L. (2007). Binding
of glucuronoxylomannan to the
CD14 receptor
in human A549
alveolar cells induces interleukin-8
production. Clin. Vaccine Immunol.
14, 94–98.

Bellocchio, S., Montagnoli, C., Bozza,
S., Gaziano, R., Rossi, G., Mam-
bula, S. S., Vecchi, A., Mantovani, A.,
Levitz, S. M., and Romani, L. (2004).
The contribution of the Toll-like/IL-
1 receptor superfamily to innate
and adaptive immunity to fungal
pathogens in vivo. J. Immunol. 172,
3059–3069.

Bi, L., Gojestani, S., Wu, W., Hsu,
Y. M., Zhu, J., Ariizumi, K., and
Lin, X.
(2010). CARD9 medi-
ates dectin-2-induced IkappaBalpha

kinase ubiquitination leading to
activation of NF-kappaB in response
to stimulation by the hyphal form of
Candida albicans. J. Biol. Chem. 285,
25969–25977.

Bittencourt, V. C., Figueiredo, R. T., da
Silva, R. B., Mourão-Sá, D. S., Fer-
nandez, P. L., Sassaki, G. L., Mul-
loy, B., Bozza, M. T., and Barreto-
Bergter, E. (2006). An alpha-glucan
of Pseudallescheria boydii is involved
in fungal phagocytosis and Toll-like
receptor activation. J. Biol. Chem.
281, 22614–22623.

Bochud, P. Y., Chien,

J. W., Marr,
K. A., Leisenring, W. M., Upton,
A.,
Janer, M., Rodrigues, S. D.,
Li, S., Hansen, J. A., Zhao, L. P.,
Aderem, A., and Boeckh, M. (2008).
Toll-like receptor 4 polymorphisms
and aspergillosis in stem-cell trans-
plantation. N. Engl. J. Med. 359,
1766–1777.

Bretz, C., Gersuk, G., Knoblaugh, S.,
Chaudhary, N., Randolph-Habecker,
J., Hackman, R. C., Staab, J., and
Marr, K. A. (2008). MyD88 signal-
ing contributes to early pulmonary
responses to Aspergillus fumigatus.
Infect. Immun. 76, 952–958.

Brown, G. D., and Gordon, S. (2001). A
new receptor for β-glucans. Nature
413, 36–37.

Brown, G. D., Herre, J., Williams, D. L.,
Willment, J. A., Marshall, A. S., Gor-
don, S. (2003). Dectin-1 mediates
the biological effects of beta-glucans.
J. Exp. Med. 197, 1119–1124.

Brown, G. D., Taylor, P. R., Reid,
D. M., Willment, J. A., Williams,
D. L., Martinez-Pomares, L., Wong,
S. Y., Gordon, S. (2002) Dectin-
1 is a major beta-glucan receptor
on macrophages. J. Exp. Med. 196,
407–412.

Brunn, G. J., Bungum, M. K., Johnson,
G. B., and Platt, J. L. (2005). Condi-
tional signaling by Toll-like receptor
4. FASEB J. 19, 872–874.

Bugarcic, A., Hitchens, K., Beckhouse,
A. G., Wells, C. A., Ashman, R. B.,
and Blanchard, H. (2008). Human
and mouse macrophage-inducible
C-type lectin (mincle) bind Candida
albicans. Glycobiology 18, 679–685.

Cambi, A., Gijzen, K., de Vries, J. M.,
Torensma, R., Joosten, B., Adema,
G. J., Netea, M. G., Kullberg, B.

J., Romani, L., and Figdor, C. G.
(2003). The C-type lectin DC-SIGN
(CD209) is an antigen-uptake recep-
tor for Candida albicans on dendritic
cells. Eur. J. Immunol. 33, 532–538.

Cambi, A., Netea, M. G., Mora-Montes,
H. M., Gow, N. A., Hato, S.
V., Lowman, D. W., Kullberg, B.
J., Torensma, R., Williams, D. L.,
and Figdor, C. G. (2008). Den-
dritic cell interaction with Candida
albicans critically depends on N-
linked mannan. J. Biol. Chem. 283,
20590–20599.

Camilos, G., Luna, M., Lewism, R. E.,
Bodey, G. P., Chemaly, R., Tarrand,
J. J., Safdar, A., Raad, I. I., and
Kontoyiannis, D. P. (2006). Inva-
sive fungal
infections in patients
with hematologic malignancies in
a tertiary care cancer center: an
autopsy study over a 15-year period
(1989-2003). Haematologica
91,
986–989.

Campos, M. A., Almeida, I. C., Takeuchi,
O., Akira, S., Valente, E. P., Procó-
pio, D. O., Travassos, L. R., Smith, J.
A., Golenbock, D. T., and Gazzinelli,
R. T. (2001). Activation of Toll-like
receptor-2 by glycosylphosphatidyli-
nositol anchors from a protozoan
parasite. J. Immunol. 167, 416–423.
Carneiro, L. A., Magalhaes, J. G., Tattoli,
I., Philpott, D. J., and Travassos, L. H.
(2008). Nod-like proteins in inﬂam-
mation and disease. J. Pathol. 214,
136–148.

Chafﬁn, W. L., López-Ribot,

J. L.,
Casanova, M., Gozalbo, D., and
Martínez, J. P. (1998). Cell wall and
secreted proteins of Candida albi-
cans:
identiﬁcation, function, and
expression. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.
62, 130–180.

Costachel, C., Coddeville, B., Latgé,
(2005).

J. P., and Fontaine, T.
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-
anchored fungal polysaccharide in
Aspergillus fumigatus. J. Biol. Chem.
280, 39835–39842.

Dan, J. M., Kelly, R. M., Lee, C. K.,
and Levitz, S. M. (2008). Role of
the mannose receptor in a murine
model of Cryptococcus neoformans
infection. Infec. Immun. 76, 2362–
2367.

Davis, B. K., Wen, H., and Ting,
J. P. (2011). The inﬂammasome

NLRs in immunity, inﬂammation,
and associated diseases. Annu. Rev.
Immunol. 29, 707–735.

Debierre-Grockiego, F., Campos, M. A.,
Azzouz, N., Schmidt, J., Bieker, U.,
Resende, M. G., Mansur, D. S., Wein-
gart, R., Schmidt, R. R., Golenbock,
D. T., Gazzinelli, R. T., and Schwarz,
R. T. J. (2007). Activation of TLR2
and TLR4 by glycosylphosphatidyli-
nositols derived from Toxoplasma
gondii. J. Immunol. 179, 1129–1137.
Delﬁno, D., Cianci, L., Lupis, E.,
Celeste, A., Petrelli, M. L., Curró, F.,
Cusumano, V., and Teti, G. (1997).
Interleukin-6 production by human
monocytes stimulated with Cryp-
tococcus neoformans components.
Infect. Immun. 65, 2454–2456.

Di Carlo, F. J., and Fiore, J. V. (1958). On
the composition of zymosan. Science
127, 756–757.

Diebold, S. S., Kaisho, T., Hemmi, H.,
Akira, S., and Reis e Sousa, C. (2004).
Innate antiviral responses by means
of TLR7-mediated recognition of
single-stranded RNA. Science 303,
1529–1531.

Dubourdeau, M., Athman, R., Balloy, V.,
Huerre, M., Chignard, M., Philpott,
D. J., Latgé, J. P., and Ibrahim-
Granet, O.
(2006). Aspergillus
fumigatus induces innate immune
responses in alveolar macrophages
through the MAPK pathway inde-
pendently of TLR2 and TLR4. J.
Immunol. 177, 3994–4001.

Enoch, D. A., Ludlam, H. A., and Brown,
N. M. (2006). Invasive fungal infec-
tions: a review of epidemiology and
management options. J. Med. Micro-
biol. 55, 809–818.

Ezekowitz, R. A., Sastry, K., Bailly,
P., Warner, A. (1990) Molecular
characterization of
the human
macrophage mannose
receptor:
demonstration of multiple carbo-
hydrate recognition-like domains
and phagocytosis of yeasts in Cos-1
cells. J. Exp. Med. 172, 1785–1794.

Figueiredo, R. T., Fernandez, P. L.,
Dutra, F. F., González, Y., Lopes, L.
C., Bittencourt, V. C., Sassaki, G.
L., Barreto-Bergter, E., and Bozza,
M. T.
(2010). TLR4 recognizes
Pseudallescheria boydii conidia and
puriﬁed rhamnomannans. J. Biol.
Chem. 285, 40714–40723.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 10

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

Figueiredo, R. T., Fernandez, P. L.,
Mourão-Sá, D. S., Porto, B. N.,
Dutra, F. F., Alves, L. S., Oliveira, M.
F., Oliveira, P. L., Graça-Souza, A.
V., and Bozza, M. T. (2007). Char-
acterization of heme as activator of
Toll-like receptor 4. J. Biol. Chem.
282, 20221–20229.

Fonseca, F. L., Nohara, L. L., Cordero, R.
J., Frases, S., Casadevall, A., Almeida,
I. C., Nimrichter, L., and Rodrigues,
M. L. (2010). Immunomodulatory
effects of serotype B glucuronoxy-
lomannan from Cryptococcus gattii
correlate with polysaccharide diam-
eter. Infect. Immun. 78, 3861–3870.
Fontaine, T., Magnin, T., Melhert, A.,
Lamont, D., Latgé, J. P., and Fer-
guson, M. A. (2003). Structures
of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol
membrane anchors from Aspergillus
fumigatus membrane proteins. Gly-
cobiology 13, 169–177.

Fontaine, T., Simenel, C., Dubreucq, G.,
Adam, O., Delepierre, M., Lemoine,
J., Vorgias, C. E., Diaquin, M., and
Latgé, J. P. (2000). Molecular orga-
nization of the alkali-insoluble frac-
tion of Aspergillus fumigatus cell
wall. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 41528.

Gantner, B. N., Simmons, R. M.,
Canavera, S.
J., Akira, S., and
Underhill, D. M. (2003). Collab-
orative induction of inﬂammatory
responses by dectin-1 and Toll-
like receptor 2. J. Exp. Med. 197,
107–117.

Gantner, B. N., Simmons, R. M., and
Underhill, D. M. (2005). Dectin-
1 mediates macrophage recognition
of Candida albicans yeast but not
ﬁlaments. EMBO J. 24, 1277–1286.

Gersuk, G. M., Underhill, D. M., Zhu, L.,
and Marr, K. A. (2006). Dectin-1 and
TLRs permit macrophages to distin-
guish between different Aspergillus
fumigatus cellular states. J. Immunol.
176, 3717–3724.

Goodridge, H. S., Reyes, C. N., Becker,
C. A., Katsumoto, T. R., Ma, J., Wolf,
A. J., Bose, N., Chan, A. S., Magee,
A. S., Danielson, M. E., Weiss, A.,
Vasilakos, J. P., and Underhill, D.
M. (2011). Activation of the innate
immune receptor dectin-1 upon for-
mation of a phagocytic synapse.
Nature 472, 471–475.

Goodridge, H. S., Simmons, R. M., and
Underhill, D. M. (2007). Dectin-
1 stimulation by Candida albicans
yeast or zymosan triggers NFAT acti-
vation in macrophages and dendritic
cells. J. Immunol. 178, 3107–3115.

Groll, A. H., and Walsh, T. J. (2001).
Uncommon opportunistic
fungi:
new nosocomial threats. Clin. Micro-
biol. Infect. 7, 8–24.

Gross, O., Gewies, A., Finger, K.,
Schäfer, M., Sparwasser, T., Peschel,

I., and Ruland,

C., Förster,
J.
(2006). Card9 controls a non-
TLR signalling pathway for innate
anti-fungal immunity. Nature 442,
651–656.

Gross, O., Poeck, H., Bscheider, M.,
Dostert, C., Hannesschläger, N.,
Endres, S., Hartmann, G., Tardivel,
A., Schweighoffer, E., Tybulewicz, V.,
Mocsai, A., Tschopp, J., and Ruland,
J. (2009). Syk kinase signalling cou-
ples to the Nlrp3 inﬂammasome
for anti-fungal host defence. Nature
459, 433–437.

Hara, H., Ishihara, C., Takeuchi, A.,
Imanishi, T., Xue, L., Morris, S. W.,
Inui, M., Takai, T., Shibuya, A., Saijo,
S., Iwakura, Y., Ohno, N., Koseki, H.,
Yoshida, H., Penninger, J. M., and
Saito, T. (2007). The adaptor protein
CARD9 is essential for the activa-
tion of myeloid cells through ITAM-
associated and Toll-like receptors.
Nat. Immunol. 8, 619–629.

Hayashi, F., Smith, K. D., Ozinsky, A.,
Hawn, T. R., Yi, E. C., Goodlett,
D. R., Eng, J. K., Akira, S., Under-
hill, D. M., and Aderem, A. (2001).
The innate immune response to
bacterial ﬂagellin is mediated by
Toll-like receptor 5. Nature 410,
1099–1103.

Heil, F., Hemmi, H., Hochrein, H.,Amp-
enberger, F., Kirschning, C., Akira, S.,
Lipford, G., Wagner, H., and Bauer,
S. (2004). Species-speciﬁc recogni-
tion of single-stranded RNA via Toll-
like receptor 7 and 8. Science 303,
1526–1529.

Hemmi, H., Kaisho, T., Takeuchi, O.,
Sato, S., Sanjo, H., Hoshino, K., Hori-
uchi, T., Tomizawa, H., Takeda, K.,
and Akira, S. (2002). Small anti-viral
compounds activate immune cells
via the TLR7 MyD88-dependent sig-
naling pathway. Nat. Immunol. 3,
196–200.

Hemmi, H., Takeuchi, O., Kawai, T.,
Kaisho, T., Sato, S., Sanjo, H., Mat-
sumoto, M., Hoshino, K., Wagner,
H., Takeda, K., and Akira, S. (2000).
A Toll-like receptor recognizes bac-
terial DNA. Nature 408, 740–745.

Herre, J., Marshall, A. S., Caron, E.,
Edwards, A. D., Williams, D. L.,
Schweighoffer, E., Tybulewicz, V.,
Reis e Sousa, C., Gordon, S., and
Brown, G. D. (2004). Dectin-1 uses
novel mechanisms for yeast phago-
cytosis in macrophages. Blood 104,
4038–4045.

Hise, A. G., Tomalka, J., Ganesan, S.,
Patel, K., Hall, B. A., Brown, G. D.,
and Fitzgerald, K. A. (2009). An
essential role for the NLRP3 inﬂam-
masome in host defense against
the human fungal pathogen Can-
dida albicans. Cell Host Microbe 5,
487–497.

Hohl, T. M., Van Epps, H. L., Rivera,
A., Morgan, L. A., Chen, P. L.,
Feldmesser, M., and Pamer, E.
fumigatus
G.
responses
triggers
beta-glucan
by
display. PLoS Pathog.
e30.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.0010030

(2005). Aspergillus
inﬂammatory

stage-speciﬁc

1,

Hoshino, K., Takeuchi, O., Kawai, T.,
Sanjo, H., Ogawa, T., Takeda, Y.,
Takeda, K., and Akira, S. (1999).
Cutting edge: Toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4)-deﬁcient mice are hypore-
sponsive to lipopolysaccharide: evi-
dence for TLR4 as the Lps gene prod-
uct. J. Immunol. 162, 3749–3752.

Hsu, T. L., Cheng, S. C., Yang, W. B.,
Chin, S. W., Chen, B. H., Huang,
M. T., Hsieh, S. L., and Wong, C.
H. (2009). Proﬁling carbohydrate-
receptor interaction with recombi-
nant innate immunity receptor-Fc
fusion proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 284,
34479–34489.

Jin, M. S., Kim, S. E., Heo, J. Y., Lee, M.
E., Kim, H. M., Paik, S. G., Lee, H.,
and Lee, J. O. (2007). Crystal struc-
ture of the TLR1-TLR2 heterodimer
induced by binding of a tri-acylated
lipopeptide. Cell 130, 1071–1082.

Jouault, T., Ibata-Ombetta, S., Takeuchi,
O., Trinel, P. A., Sacchetti, P., Lefeb-
vre, P., Akira, S., and Poulain, D.
(2003). Candida albicans phospho-
lipomannan is sensed through Toll-
like receptors. J. Infect. Dis. 188,
165–172.

Kang, J. Y., Nan, X., Jin, M. S., Youn,
S. J., Ryu, Y. H., Mah, S., Han, S.
H., Lee, H., Paik, S. G., and Lee, J.
O. (2009). Recognition of lipopep-
tide patterns by Toll-like receptor
2-Toll-like receptor 6 heterodimer.
Immunity 31, 873–884.

Kankkunen, P., Teirilä, L., Rinta-
haka,
J., Alenius, H., Wolff, H.,
and Matikainen, S. (2010). (1,3)-
beta-glucans activate both dectin-
1 and NLRP3 inﬂammasome in
human macrophages. J. Immunol.
184, 6335–6342.

Kawai, T., and Akira, S. (2011). Toll-
like receptors and their crosstalk
with other innate receptors in infec-
tion and immunity. Immunity 34,
637–650.

Kerrigan, A. M., and Brown, G. D.
(2009). C-type lectins and phagocy-
tosis. Immunobiology 214, 562–575.
Kerrigan, A. M., and Brown, G. D.
(2010). Syk-coupled C-type lectin
receptors that mediate cellular acti-
vation via single tyrosine based acti-
vation motifs. Immunol. Rev. 234,
335–352.

Kesh, S., Mensah, N. Y., Peterlongo, P.,
Jaffe, D., Hsu, K., Van Den Brink,
M., O’reilly, R., Pamer, E., Satagopan,
J., and Papanicolaou, G. A. (2005).

TLR1 and TLR6 polymorphisms
are associated with susceptibility to
invasive aspergillosis after allogeneic
stem cell transplantation. Ann. N. Y.
Acad. Sci. 1062, 95–103.

Krishnegowda, G., Hajjar, A. M.,
Zhu, J., Douglass, E. J., Uematsu,
S., Akira, S., Woods, A. S., and
Gowda, D. C. (2005). Induction
of proinﬂammatory responses in
macrophages by the glycosylphos-
phatidylinositols of Plasmodium fal-
ciparum: cell signaling receptors,
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)
structural requirement, and regula-
tion of GPI activity. J. Biol. Chem.
280, 8606–8016.

Kruskal, B. A., Sastry, K., Warner, A. B.,
Mathieu, C. E., and Ezekowitz, R. A.
(1992). Phagocytic chimeric recep-
tors require both transmembrane
and cytoplasmic domains from the
mannose receptor. J. Exp. Med. 176,
1673–1680.

Kumar, H., Kumagai, Y., Tsuchida,
T., Koenig, P. A., Satoh, T., Guo,
Z., Jang, M. H., Saitoh, T., Akira,
S., and Kawai, T. (2009). Involve-
ment of
the NLRP3 inﬂamma-
some in innate and humoral adap-
to fun-
tive immune responses
gal β-glucan.
Immunol. 183,
8061–8067.

J.

Latgé, J. (2001). The pathobiology of
Aspergillus fumigatus. Trends Micro-
biol. 9, 382–389.

Latgé, J. (2010). Tasting the fungal cell

wall. Cell. Microbiol. 12, 863–872.

Lee, R. T., Hsu, T. L., Huang, S. K.,
Hsieh, S. L., Wong, C. H., and Lee,
Y. C. (2011). Survey of immune-
related, mannose/fucose-binding C-
type lectin receptors reveals widely
divergent
sugar-binding speciﬁci-
ties. Glycobiology 21, 512–520.

Lee, S. J., Zheng, N. Y., Clavijo, M., and
Nussenzweig, M. C. (2003). Nor-
mal host defense during systemic
candidiasis in mannose receptor-
deﬁcient mice. Infect. Immun. 71,
437–445.

Leitão, E. A., Bittencourt, V. C.,
Haido, R. M., Valente, A. P.,
Peter-Katalinic, J., Letzel, M., de
Souza, L. M., and Barreto-Bergter,
E.
(2003). Beta-galactofuranose-
containing O-linked oligosaccha-
rides present in the cell wall pep-
tidogalactomannan of Aspergillus
contain immunodom-
fumigatus
inant
epitopes. Glycobiology 13,
681–692.

Lemaitre, B., Nicolas, E., Michaut,
L., Reichhart,
J. M., and Hoff-
mann, J. A. (1996). The dorsoven-
tral regulatory gene cassette spät-
zle/Toll/cactus controls the potent
antifungal response in Drosophila
adults. Cell 86, 973–983.

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 11

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

Lund, J. M., Alexopoulou, L., Sato, A.,
Karow, M., Adams, N. C., Gale,
N. W., Iwasaki, A., and Flavell, R.
A. (2004). Recognition of single-
stranded RNA viruses by Toll-like
receptor 7. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 101, 5598–5603.

Luther, K., Torosantucci, A., Brakhage,
A. A., Heesemann, J., and Ebel, F.
(2007). Phagocytosis of Aspergillus
fumigatus
by murine
macrophages involves recognition
by the dectin-1 beta-glucan recep-
tor and Toll-like receptor 2. Cell.
Microbiol. 9, 368–381.

conidia

Mambula, S. S., Sau, K., Henneke,
P., Golenbock, D. T., and Levitz,
S. M.
(2002). Toll-like receptor
(TLR)
signaling in response to
Aspergillus fumigatus. J. Biol. Chem.
277, 39320–39326.

Marr, K. A., Carter, R. A., Crippa, F.,
Wald, A., and Corey, L. (2002). Epi-
demiology and outcome of mould
infections in hematopoietic stem cell
transplant recipients. Clin. Infect.
Dis. 34, 909–917.

Masuoka, J. (2004). Surface glycans of
Candida albicans and other patho-
genic fungi: physiological roles, clin-
ical uses, and experimental changes.
Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 17, 281–310.

Matsumoto, M., Tanaka, T., Kaisho, T.,
Sanjo, H., Copeland, N. G., Gilbert,
D. J., Jenkins, N. A., and Akira, S.
(1999). A novel LPS-inducible C-
type lectin is a transcriptional tar-
get of NF-IL6 in macrophages. J.
Immunol. 163, 5039–5048.

McGreal, E. P., Rosas, M., Brown, G.
D., Zamze, S., Wong, S. Y., Gordon,
S., Martinez-Pomares, L., and Tay-
lor, P. R. (2006). The carbohydrate-
recognition domain of dectin-2 is
a C-type lectin with speciﬁcity
for high mannose. Glycobiology 16,
422–430.

Means, T. K., Lien, E., Yoshimura,
A., Wang, S., Golenbock, D. T.,
and Fenton, M.
(1999). The
CD14 ligands lipoarabinomannan
and lipopolysaccharide differ
in
their requirement for Toll-like recep-
tors. J. Immunol. 163, 6748–6755.

J.

Medzhitov, R. (2007). Recognition of
microorganisms and activation of
the immune response. Nature 449,
819–826.

Meersseman, W., Lagrou, K., Maertens,
J., Wilmer, A., Hermans, G., Van-
derschueren, S., Spriet, I., Verbeken,
E., and Van Wijngaerden, E. (2008)
Galactomannan in bronchoalveolar
lavage ﬂuid: a tool for diagnosing
aspergillosis in intensive care unit
patients. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care
Med. 177, 27–34.

Meier, A., Kirschning, C. J., Nikolaus,
T., Wagner, H., Heesemann, J., and
Ebel, F. (2003). Toll-like receptor
(TLR) 2 and TLR4 are essential
for Aspergillus-induced activation of
murine macrophages. Cell. Micro-
biol. 5, 561–570.

Miyake, Y., Ishikawa, E., Ishikawa, T.,
and Yamasaki, S. (2010). Self and
nonself recognition through C-type
lectin receptor, mincle. Self Nonself
1, 310–313.

Monari, C., Bistoni, F., Casadevall, A.,
Pericolini, E., Pietrella, D., Kozel,
T. R., and Vecchiarelli, A. (2005).
Glucuronoxylomannan, a micro-
bial compound, regulates expres-
sion of costimulatory molecules
and production of cytokines
in
macrophages.
Infect. Dis. 191,
127–137.

J.

Morgan, J., Wannemuehler, K. A., Marr,
K. A., Hadley, S., Kontoyiannis, D. P.,
Walsh, T. J., Fridkin, S. K., Pappas, P.
G., and Warnock, D. W. (2005) Inci-
dence of invasive aspergillosis fol-
lowing hematopoietic stem cell and
solid organ transplantation: interim
results of a prospective multicenter
surveillance program. Med. Mycol.
43(Suppl. 1), S49–S58.

Murata, T., Sullivan, J. A., Sawyer, D. W.,
and Mandell, G. L. (1987). Inﬂuence
of type and opsonization of ingested
particle on intracellular free calcium
distribution and superoxide produc-
tion by human neutrophils. Infect.
Immun. 55, 1784–1791.

Murray, C. K., Loo, F. L., Hospenthal, D.
R., Cancio, L. C., Jones, J. A., Kim,
S. H., Holcomb, J. B., Wade, C. E.,
and Wolf, S. E. (2008). Incidence of
systemic fungal infection and related
mortality following severe burns.
Burns 34, 1108–1112.

Nathan, C. (2002). Points of control in
inﬂammation. Nature 420, 846–852.
Netea, M. G., Gow, N. A., Munro, C. A.,
Bates, S., Collins, C., Ferwerda, G.,
Hobson, R. P., Bertram, G., Hughes,
H. B., Jansen, T., Jacobs, L., Buur-
man, E. T., Gijzen, K.,Williams, D. L.,
Torensma, R., McKinnon, A., Mac-
Callum, D. M., Odds, F. C., Van der
Meer, J. W., Brown, A. J., and Kull-
berg, B. J. (2006). Immune sensing
of Candida albicans requires coop-
erative recognition of mannans and
glucans by lectin and Toll-like recep-
tors. J. Clin. Invest. 116, 1642–1650.
Netea, M. G.,Van Der Graaf, C. A.,Vonk,
A. G., Verschueren, I., Van Der Meer,
J. W., and Kullberg, B. J. (2002). The
role of Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 and
TLR4 in the host defense against dis-
seminated candidiasis. J. Infect. Dis.
185, 1483–1489.

Netea, M. G., Warris, A., Van der
Meer, J. W., Fenton, M. J., Verver-
Janssen, T. J., Jacobs, L. E., Andresen,
T., Verweij, P. E., and Kullberg,
B. J. (2003). Aspergillus fumigatus
evades immune recognition dur-
ing germination through loss of
Toll-like receptor-4-mediated signal
transduction.
Infect. Dis. 188,
320–326.

J.

Ozinsky, A., Underhill, D. M., Fontenot,
J. D., Hajjar, A. M., Smith, K. D.,
Wilson, C. B., Schroeder, L., and
Aderem, A. (2000). The repertoire
for pattern recognition of pathogens
by the innate immune system is
deﬁned by cooperation between
Toll-like receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 97, 13766–13771.

Park, B. S., Song, D. H., Kim, H.
M., Choi, B. S., Lee, H., and Lee,
J. O. (2009). The structural basis
of lipopolysaccharide recognition by
the TLR4-MD-2 complex. Nature
458, 1191–1195.

Pasqualotto, A. C., and Denning, D.
W. (2006). Post-operative aspergillo-
sis. Clin. Microbiol.
Infect. 12,
1060–1076.

Poltorak, A., He, X., Smirnova,

I.,
Liu, M. Y., Van Huffel, C., Du,
X., Birdwell, D., Alejos, E., Silva,
M., Galanos, C., Freudenberg, M.,
Ricciardi-Castagnoli, P., Layton, B.,
and Beutler, B. (1998). Defective
LPS signaling in C3H/HeJ and
C57BL/10ScCr mice: mutations in
Tlr4 gene. Science 282, 2085–2088.

Qureshi, S. T., Larivière, L., Leveque,
G., Clermont, S., Moore, K. J., Gros,
P., and Malo, D. (1999) Endotoxin-
tolerant mice have mutations in Toll-
like receptor 4 (Tlr4). J. Exp. Med.
189, 615–625.

Retini, C., Vecchiarelli, A., Monari, C.,
Tascini, C., Bistoni, F., and Kozel, T.
R. (1996). Capsular polysaccharide
of Cryptococcus neoformans induces
proinﬂammatory cytokine release by
human neutrophils. Infect. Immun.
64, 2897–2903.

Rodrigues, M. L., Nimrichter, L.,
J., and Casadevall,
Cordero, R.
A.
Fungal
polysaccha-
(2011).
rides: biological activity beyond
the
proper-
ties.
2:171.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2011.00171

usual
Front. Microbiol.

structural

Rogers, N. C., Slack, E. C., Edwards,
A. D., Nolte, M. A., Schulz, O.,
Schweighoffer, E., Williams, D. L.,
Gordon, S., Tybulewicz,V. L., Brown,
G. D., and Reis e Sousa, C. (2005).
Syk-dependent cytokine induction
by dectin-1 reveals a novel pattern
recognition pathway for C type
lectins. Immunity 22, 507–517.

Saïd-Sadler, N., Padilla, E., Langs-
ley, G., and Ojcius, D. M. (2010).
Aspergillus fumigatus stimulates the
NLRP3 inﬂammasome through a
pathway requiring ROS production
and the Syk tyrosine kinase. PLoS
ONE 5, e10008. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0010008

Saijo, S., Fujikado, N., Furuta, T., Chung,
S. H., Kotaki, H., Seki, K., Sudo,
K., Akira, S., Adachi, Y., Ohno, N.,
Kinjo, T., Nakamura, K., Kawakami,
K., and Iwakura, Y. (2007). Dectin-1
is required for host defense against
Pneumocystis carinii but not against
Candida albicans. Nat. Immunol. 8,
39–46.

Saijo, S., Ikeda, S., Yamabe, K., Kakuta,
S., Ishigame, H., Akitsu, A., Fujikado,
N., Kusaka, T., Kubo, S., Chung, S.
H., Komatsu, R., Miura, N., Adachi,
Y., Ohno, N., Shibuya, K.,Yamamoto,
N., Kawakami, K., Yamasaki, S.,
Saito, T., Akira, S., and Iwakura,
Y. (2010). Dectin-2 recognition of
alpha-mannans and induction of
Th17 cell differentiation is essen-
tial for host defense against Candida
albicans. Immunity 32, 681–691.

Sandor, F., Latz, E., Re, F., Mandell, L.,
Repik, G., Golenbock, D. T., Espevik,
T., Kurt-Jones, E. A., and Finberg, R.
W. (2003). Importance of extra- and
intracellular domains of TLR1 and
TLR2 in NFkappa B signaling. J. Cell
Biol. 162, 1099–1110.

Sato, K., Yang, X. L., Yudate, T., Chung,
J. S., Wu, J., Luby-Phelps, K., Kim-
berly, R. P., Underhill, D., Cruz, P. D.
Jr., and Ariizumi, K. (2006). Dectin-
2 is a pattern recognition receptor for
fungi that couples with the Fc recep-
tor gamma chain to induce innate
immune responses. J. Biol. Chem.
281, 38854–38866.

Schröder, N. W., Heine, H., Alexan-
der, C., Manukyan, M., Eckert,
J., Hamann, L., Göbel, U. B.,
and Schumann, R. R.
(2004).
Lipopolysaccharide binding protein
binds to triacylated and diacylated
lipopeptides and mediates innate
immune responses. J. Immunol. 173,
2683–2691.

Schröder, N. W., Morath, S., Alexan-
der, C., Hamann, L., Hartung,
T., Zähringer, U., Göbel, U. B.,
Weber, J. R., and Schumann, R.
R. (2003) Lipoteichoic acid (LTA)
of Streptococcus pneumoniae and
Staphylococcus
activates
immune cells via Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-2,
lipopolysaccharide-
binding protein (LBP), and CD14,
whereas TLR-4 and MD-2 are
not involved. J. Biol. Chem. 278,
15587–15594.

aureus

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 12

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

Schwandner, R., Dziarski, R., Wesche,
H., Rothe, M., and Kirschning,
C.
J. (1999). Peptidoglycan, and
lipoteichoic acid-induced cell acti-
vation is mediated by Toll-like
receptor 2.
J. Biol. Chem. 274,
17406–17409.

Segal, B. H., and Walsh, T. J. (2006).
Current approaches to diagnosis and
treatment of invasive aspergillosis.
Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 173,
707–717.

Serrano-Gómez, D., Domínguez-Soto,
A., Ancochea, J., Jimenez-Heffernan,
J. A., Leal, J. A., and Corbí, A.
L. (2004). Dendritic cell-speciﬁc
intercellular
adhesion molecule
3-grabbing nonintegrin mediates
binding
and internalization of
Aspergillus
conidia by
dendritic cells and macrophages. J.
Immunol. 173, 5635–5643.

fumigatus

Shoham, S., Huang, C., Chen, J. M.,
Golenbock, D. T., and Levitz, S. M.
(2001). Toll-like receptor 4 medi-
ates intracellular signaling without
TNF-alpha release in response to
Cryptococcus neoformans polysac-
charide capsule. J. Immunol. 166,
4620–4626.

Singh, N. (2001). Trends in the epi-
demiology of opportunistic fun-
gal infections: predisposing factors
and the impact of antimicrobial
use practices. Clin. Infect. Dis. 33,
1692–1696.

Steele, C., Marrero, L., Swain, S., Harm-
sen, A. G., Zheng, M., Brown, G. D.,
Gordon, S., Shellito, J. E., and Kolls,
J. K. (2003). Alveolar macrophage-
mediated killing of Pneumocystis
carinii f. spp. muris involves mol-
ecular recognition by the dectin-1
beta-glucan receptor. J. Exp. Med.
198, 1677–1688.

Steele, C., Rapaka, R. R., Metz, A., Pop,
S. M., Williams, D. L., Gordon, S.,
Kolls, J. K., and Brown, G. D. (2005).
The beta-glucan receptor dectin-
1 recognizes
speciﬁc morpholo-
gies of Aspergillus fumigatus. PLoS
Pathog. 1, e42. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.ppat.0010042

Swain, S. D., Lee, S.

(2003). Absence of

J., Nussen-
and Harmsen,
zweig, M. C.,
the
A. G.
receptor
macrophage mannose
in mice does not
increase sus-
ceptibility to Pneumocystis carinii
infection in vivo. Infect. Immun. 71,
6213–6221.

Syme, R. M., Spurrell, J. C., Amankwah,
E. K., Green, F. H., and Mody,
C. H. (2002). Primary dendritic
cells phagocytose Cryptococcus neo-
formans
receptors
for
and Fcgamma

via mannose

receptor

II

presentation to T lymphocytes.
Infect. Immun. 70, 5972–5981.

Tachado, S. D., Zhang, J., Zhu, J., Patel,
N., Cushion, M., and Koziel, H.
(2007). Pneumocystis-mediated IL-
8 release by macrophages requires
coexpression of mannose recep-
tors and TLR2. J. Leukoc. Biol. 81,
205–211.

Sugawara,

Tada, H., Nemoto, E., Shimauchi, H.,
Watanabe, T., Mikami, T., Mat-
sumoto, T., Ohno, N., Tamura, H.,
Shibata, K., Akashi, S., Miyake,
S., Takada, H.
K.,
(2002). Saccharomyces
cerevisiae,
and
albicans-derived
mannan induced production of
tumor necrosis
factor alpha by
human monocytes
in a CD14,
and Toll-like receptor 4-dependent
manner. Microbiol.
Immunol. 46,
503–512.

Candida

Takeuchi, O., Kaufmann, A., Grote, K.,
Kawai, T., Hoshino, K., Morr, M.,
Mühlradt, P. F., and Akira, S. (2000).
Cutting edge: preferentially
the
R-stereoisomer of the mycoplasmal
lipopeptide macrophage-activating
lipopeptide-2
immune
cells through a Toll-like receptor
2-
sig-
naling pathway. J. Immunol. 164,
554–557.

and MyD88-dependent

activates

Takeuchi, O., Kawai, T., Mühlradt, P.
F., Morr, M., Radolf, J. D., Zych-
linsky, A., Takeda, K., and Akira, S.
(2001). Discrimination of bacterial
lipoproteins by Toll-like receptor 6.
Int. Immunol. 13, 933–940.

Takeuchi, O., Sato, S., Horiuchi, T.,
Hoshino, K., Takeda, K., Dong,
Z., Modlin, R. L., and Akira, S.
(2002). Cutting edge: role of Toll-
like receptor 1 in mediating immune
response to microbial lipoproteins. J.
Immunol. 169, 10–14.

Tapping, R.

I., and Tobias, P. S.
(2003). Mycobacterial lipoarabino-
mannan mediates physical interac-
tions between TLR1, and TLR2 to
induce signaling. J. Endotoxin Res. 9,
264–268.

Taylor, P. R., Tsoni, S. V., Willment,
J. A., Dennehy, K. M., Rosas, M.,
Findon, H., Haynes, K., Steele, C.,
Botto, M., Gordon, S., and Brown, G.
D. (2007a). Dectin-1 is required for
beta-glucan recognition and control
of fungal infection. Nat. Immunol. 8,
31–38.

Taylor, K. R., Yamasaki, K., Radek, K. A.,
Di Nardo, A., Goodarzi, H., Golen-
bock, D., Beutler, B., and Gallo, R.
L. (2007b). Recognition of hyaluro-
nan released in sterile injury involves
a unique receptor complex depen-
dent on Toll-like receptor 4, CD44,

and MD-2.
18265–18275.

J. Biol. Chem. 282,

Travassos, L. H., Girardin, S. E., Philpott,
D. J., Blanot, D., Nahori, M. A.,Werts,
C., and Boneca, I. G. (2004). Toll-
like receptor 2-dependent bacterial
sensing does not occur via peptido-
glycan recognition. EMBO Rep. 5,
1000–1006.

Trinel, P. A., Maes, E., Zanetta, J. P.,
Delplace, F., Coddeville, B., Jouault,
T., Strecker, G., and Poulain, D.
(2002). Candida albicans phospho-
lipomannan, a new member of the
fungal mannose inositol phospho-
ceramide family. J. Biol. Chem. 277,
37260–37271.

Underhill, D. M., Ozinsky, A., Haj-
jar, A. M., Stevens, A., Wilson,
C. B., Bassetti, M., and Aderem,
A.
(1999). The Toll-like recep-
tor 2 is recruited to macrophage
phagosomes
discriminates
between pathogens. Nature 401,
811–815.

and

Van de Veerdonk, F. L., Joosten, L. A.,
Shaw, P. J., Smeekens, S. P., Malireddi,
R. K., van der Meer, B. J., Netea, M.
G., and Kanneganti, T. D. (2011).
The inﬂammasome drives protec-
tive Th1 and Th17 cellular responses
in disseminated candidiasis. Eur. J.
Immunol. 41, 2260–2268.

Van de Veerdonk, F. L., Kullberg, B. J.,
van der Meer, J. W., Gow, N. A., and
Netea, M. G. (2008). Host-microbe
interactions: innate pattern recogni-
tion of fungal pathogens. Curr. Opin.
Microbiol. 11, 305–312.

Van der Graaf, C. A., Netea, M. G.,
Franke, B., Girardin, S. E., van der
Meer, J. W., and Kullberg, B. J.
(2006). Nucleotide oligomerization
domain 2 (Nod2) is not involved in
the pattern recognition of Candida
albicans. Clin. Vaccine Immunol. 13,
423–425.

van Kooyk, Y., and Geijtenbeek, T.
B. (2003). DC-SIGN: escape mech-
anism for pathogens. Nat. Rev.
Immunol. 3, 697–709.

Vecchiarelli, A., Retini, C., Monari, C.,
Tascini, C., Bistoni, F., and Kozel, T.
R. (1996). Puriﬁed capsular polysac-
charide of Cryptococcus neoformans
induces interleukin-10 secretion by
human monocytes. Infect. Immun.
64, 2846–2849.

Villamón, E., Gozalbo, D., Roig, P.,
O’Connor, J. E., Fradelizi, D., and
Gil, M. L. (2004). Toll-like receptor-
2 is essential
in murine defenses
against Candida albicans infections.
Microbes Infect. 6, 1–7.

Wang, J. E., Warris, A., Ellingsen, E. A.,
Jørgensen, P. F., Flo, T. H., Espevik, T.,
Solberg, R., Verweij, P. E., and Aasen,

A. O. (2001). Involvement of CD14,
and Toll-like receptors in activation
of human monocytes by Aspergillus
fumigatus hyphae. Infect. Immun. 69,
2402–2406.

Wells, C. A., Salvage-Jones, J. A., Li,
X., Hitchens, K., Butcher, S., Mur-
ray, R. Z., Beckhouse, A. G., Lo,
Y. L., Manzanero, S., Cobbold, C.,
Schroder, K., Ma, B., Orr, S., Stew-
art, L., Lebus, D., Sobieszczuk, P.,
Hume, D. A., Stow, J., Blanchard,
H., and Ashman, R. B. (2008).
The macrophage-inducible C-type
lectin, mincle, is an essential compo-
nent of the innate immune response
to Candida albicans. J. Immunol. 180,
7404–7413.

Werner, J. L., Metz, A. E., Horn, D.,
Schoeb, T. R., Hewitt, M. M.,
Schwiebert, L. M., Faro-Trindade, I.,
Brown, G. D., and Steele, C. (2009).
Requisite
the dectin-1
beta-glucan
pul-
monary defense against Aspergillus
fumigatus.
182,
4938–4946.

Immunol.

receptor

role

for

in

J.

West, X. Z., Malinin, N. L., Merkulova,
A. A., Tischenko, M., Kerr, B. A., Bor-
den, E. C., Podrez, E. A., Salomon,
R. G., and Byzova, T. V. (2010).
Oxidative stress induces angiogen-
esis by activating TLR2 with novel
endogenous ligands. Nature 467,
972–976.

Willment, J. A., and Brown, G. D. (2008).
C-type lectin receptors in antifun-
gal immunity. Trends Microbiol. 16,
27–32.

Wright, S. D., Ramos, R. A., Tobias, P. S.,
Ulevitch, R. J., and Mathison, J. C.
(1990). CD14, a receptor for com-
plexes of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
and LPS binding protein. Science
249, 1431–1433.

Xin, H., Dziadek, S., Bundle, D. R.,
and Cutler, J. E. (2008). Synthetic
glycopeptide vaccines
combining
beta-mannan and peptide epitopes
induce protection against candidia-
sis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
13526–13531.

Yamasaki, S., Ishikawa, E., Sakuma,
M., Hara, H., Ogata, K., and Saito,
T. (2008). Mincle is an ITAM-
coupled activating receptor
that
senses damaged cells. Nat. Immunol.
9, 1179–1188.

Yamasaki, S., Matsumoto, M., Takeuchi,
O., Matsuzawa, T.,
Ishikawa, E.,
Sakuma, M., Tateno, H., Uno, J.,
Hirabayashi, J., Mikami, Y., Takeda,
K., Akira, S., and Saito, T. (2009).
C-type lectin mincle is an activat-
ing receptor for pathogenic fun-
gus, Malassezia. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 106, 1897–1902.

www.frontiersin.org

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 13

Figueiredo et al.

Fungal recognition by innate immune receptors

Yang, H., Hreggvidsdottir, H. S., Palm-
blad, K., Wang, H., Ochani, M.,
Li, J., Lu, B., Chavan, S., Rosas-
Ballina, M., Al-Abed, Y., Akira,
S., Bierhaus, A., Erlandsson-Harris,
H., Andersson, U., and Tracey, K.
J.
(2010). A critical cysteine is
required for HMGB1 binding to
Toll-like receptor 4 and activation
of macrophage cytokine release.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
11942–11947.
H.,

N.,
Kobayashi, K., Brown, G. D.,
Tagami, T., Sakihama, T., Hirota,
K., Tanaka, S., Nomura, T., Miki, I.,

Yoshitomi,

Sakaguchi,

Gordon, S., Akira, S., Nakamura,
T., and Sakaguchi, S. (2005) A role
for fungal {beta}-glucans and their
receptor dectin-1 in the induction of
autoimmune arthritis in genetically
susceptible mice. J. Exp. Med. 201,
949–960.

Zhang, H. J., Qu, J. M., Shao, C. Z.,
Zhang, J., He, L. X., and Yuan,
Z. H. (2008). Aspergillus fumiga-
tus conidia upregulates NOD2 pro-
tein expression both in vitro and
in vivo. Acta Pharmacol. Sin. 29,
1202–1208.

Zhang, J., Zhu, J., Bu, X., Cushion,
M., Kinane, T. B., Avraham, H., and

Koziel, H. (2005). Cdc42 and RhoB
activation are required for mannose
receptor-mediated phagocytosis by
human alveolar macrophages. Mol.
Biol. Cell 16, 824–834.

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships
that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 15 September 2011; accepted:
23 November 2011; published online: 19
December 2011.

Citation: Figueiredo RT, Carneiro LAM
and Bozza MT (2011) Fungal surface and
innate immune recognition of ﬁlamen-
tous fungi. Front. Microbio. 2:248. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2011.00248
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Fungi and Their Interactions, a specialty
of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2011 Figueiredo, Carneiro
and Bozza. This
is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Fungi and Their Interactions

December 2011 | Volume 2 | Article 248 | 14

