REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 21 February 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00061

Trace metal requirements for microbial enzymes involved
in the production and consumption of methane and
nitrous oxide

Jennifer B. Glass* and Victoria J. Orphan

Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA

Edited by:
Martha Gledhill, University of
Southampton, UK
Reviewed by:
Aubrey L. Zerkle, Newcastle
University, UK
Lisa Y. Stein, University of Alberta,
Canada
*Correspondence:
Jennifer B. Glass, Division of
Geological and Planetary Sciences,
California Institute of Technology,
1200 E. California Blvd., MC 170-25,
Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.
e-mail: jglass@caltech.edu

Fluxes of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere are heavily inﬂuenced by microbiological
activity. Microbial enzymes involved in the production and consumption of greenhouse
gases often contain metal cofactors. While extensive research has examined the inﬂu-
ence of Fe bioavailability on microbial CO2 cycling, fewer studies have explored metal
requirements for microbial production and consumption of the second- and third-most
abundant greenhouse gases, methane (CH4), and nitrous oxide (N2O). Here we review
the current state of biochemical, physiological, and environmental research on transition
metal requirements for microbial CH4 and N2O cycling. Methanogenic archaea require large
amounts of Fe, Ni, and Co (and some Mo/W and Zn). Low bioavailability of Fe, Ni, and Co
limits methanogenesis in pure and mixed cultures and environmental studies. Anaerobic
methane oxidation by anaerobic methanotrophic archaea (ANME) likely occurs via reverse
methanogenesis since ANME possess most of the enzymes in the methanogenic path-
way. Aerobic CH4 oxidation uses Cu or Fe for the ﬁrst step depending on Cu availability, and
additional Fe, Cu, and Mo for later steps. N2O production via classical anaerobic denitriﬁca-
tion is primarily Fe-based, whereas aerobic pathways (nitriﬁer denitriﬁcation and archaeal
ammonia oxidation) require Cu in addition to, or possibly in place of, Fe. Genes encoding
the Cu-containing N2O reductase, the only known enzyme capable of microbial N2O con-
version to N2, have only been found in classical denitriﬁers. Accumulation of N2O due to
low Cu has been observed in pure cultures and a lake ecosystem, but not in marine sys-
tems. Future research is needed on metalloenzymes involved in the production of N2O by
enrichment cultures of ammonia oxidizing archaea, biological mechanisms for scavenging
scarce metals, and possible links between metal bioavailability and greenhouse gas ﬂuxes
in anaerobic environments where metals may be limiting due to sulﬁde-metal scavenging.

Keywords: methane, nitrous oxide, microbes, metals, enzymes

INTRODUCTION
With increasing concern about the future impacts of global cli-
mate change, a detailed understanding of the sources and sinks
of greenhouse gases is essential to mitigating their environmental
impact. Although CO2 is the most abundant greenhouse gas, many
other climatically important gases exist (Montzka et al., 2011).
The second- and third-most abundant naturally produced green-
house gases are methane (currently ∼1.8 ppm; Heimann, 2011)
and nitrous oxide (currently ∼322 ppb; Montzka et al., 2011) and
are ∼25× and 300× more efﬁcient at absorbing infrared radiation
than CO2, respectively. Furthermore, CH4 is oxidized to CO2 in
the atmosphere, contributing to rising CO2 levels. N2O has a very
long residence time in the atmosphere (120 years) and reacts with
atomic O to form nitric oxide (NO), which is involved in ozone
destruction (Montzka et al., 2011).

Both humans and microbes play important, and often inter-
woven, roles in the production of CH4 and N2O. Humans
have bred and expanded the habitats of ruminants that contain
methanogenic archaea in their guts, cultivated rice paddies, and

built wastewater and sewage treatment plants where methanogens
proliferate. Humans have also extensively applied inorganic N
as fertilizer to agricultural soils, leading to increased microbial
N2O emissions in soils, wetlands, and coastal hypoxic zones
(Schlesinger, 2009). Understanding the controls and regulation of
microbial greenhouse gas emissions is therefore fundamental to
quantifying and managing both natural and anthropogenic ﬂuxes
of these gases.

This review will focus on two potent greenhouse gases, CH4
and N2O, both of which are produced as natural by-products of
microbial energy-generating metabolisms. CH4 is the ﬁnal prod-
uct of the anaerobic degradation of organic matter, whereas N2O
formation results from incomplete conversion of nitrate or nitrite
to N2. At the heart of the pathways that generate these gases are
enzymes that catalyze redox reactions. Many of these enzymes
contain transition metals as cofactors for electron transport or
as catalytic centers at active sites. Important transition metals in
the pathway of CH4 production (methanogenesis) and anaerobic
methane oxidation include Fe, Ni, Co, Mo/W, and Zn, whereas

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 1

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

aerobic (and intra-aerobic) methanotrophy and N2O production
require Fe-, Cu-, and Mo-containing proteins. Only one protein,
the Cu-rich nitrous oxidase reductase, is known to reduce N2O to
N2. Physiological studies of pure cultures have shown that opti-
mal metal concentrations for microbial metabolism are orders of
magnitude higher than in situ concentrations in most aquatic envi-
ronments. These ﬁndings lead to the question: are some microbes
perennially metal-limited in nature? If so, does metal availability
exert inﬂuence on the ﬂux of greenhouse gases? If not, what mech-
anisms do microbes use in natural environments to acquire trace
metals?

Previous environmental studies of metal requirements for
microbes have largely focused on those microbes directly involved
in CO2 cycling, principally phytoplankton that consume CO2 dur-
ing photosynthesis. Driving these studies was the “Fe hypothesis”
by John Martin positing that CO2-consuming marine phyto-
plankton could be fertilized by Fe (Martin and Fitzwater, 1988).
Far less attention has been aimed at metal requirements for
microbes involved in the cycling of non-CO2 greenhouse gases,
although many of these organisms also live in ecosystems with
very low metal bioavailability. A notable exception is the enor-
mous wealth of literature generated by the wastewater scientiﬁc
community about metal (particularly Fe, Ni, and Co) controls on
methanogenesis in anaerobic digesters (see Demirel and Scherer,
2011).

The purpose of this article is to review the current state of
literature on the metalloenzymes and trace metal physiology of
organisms involved in CH4 and N2O processing. In each section,
we discuss environmental studies if they exist and compare metal
concentrations for optimal growth of pure cultures to measured
values of trace metals in natural environments. In the ﬁnal sections
of the article, we compare the metal requirements of microbes
involved in the CH4 and N2O cycles and discuss future research
directions. Readers are referred to previous reviews (Rogers and
Whitman, 1991; Conrad, 1996) for other aspects of microbial
controls on greenhouse gas cycling.

METHANOGENESIS
Methanogenesis is the microbial process whereby CO2, acetate, or
methyl-compounds are converted to methane in order to generate
ATP through the build-up of a sodium ion or proton gradient. All
methanogens are in the Euryarchaeota phylum (Whitman et al.,
2006) and account for 75–80% of the annual global production of
CH4 (IPCC, 2007). Approximately two-thirds of biologically pro-
duced CH4 is generated by aceticlastic methanogens that oxidize
the carbonyl group of acetate to CO2 and reduce the methyl group
to CH4 (Rogers and Whitman, 1991; Ferry, 2010b). The remain-
ing one-third of biogenic methane is produced by reduction of
CO2 with electrons from H2 or formate and the conversion of
methyl groups from compounds such as methanol, methylamines,
and dimethylsulﬁde. Therefore, methanogenesis is divided into
three pathways: hydrogenotrophic (i.e., CO2 reduction), aceticlas-
tic (acetate disproportionation), and methylotrophic (C1 utiliza-
tion). The three pathways differ in the enzymes used to generate
methyl-tetrahydro(methano/sarcina)pterin (CH3-H4(M/S)PT),
the intermediate common to all pathways, but converge in the
last two steps used to generate CH4 (Ferry, 2010b).

In the ﬁrst section we review the metal inventory of metal-
loenzymes in each of the three pathways. This is not intended
as a deﬁnitive review as many of these enzymes are still under-
studied and more complete reviews of methanogenic enzymes
are available (Thauer, 1998; Thauer et al., 2008, 2010). Instead,
our goal is to estimate the transition metal stoichiometry of the
three methanogenic pathways, illustrated in Figure 1. In the next
section we discuss physiological studies of the metal requirements
for methanogenesis and relate these ﬁndings back to the metal
content of each pathway. Pure culture, anaerobic digester, and
environmental studies are reviewed. Lastly, a summary of pre-
vious studies examining metal requirements for methanogenesis
is provided, and topics warranting further research are discussed.
This general format is also used in the sections on methanotrophy
(see Methanotrophy) and nitrous oxide cycling (see Nitrous Oxide
Production and Consumption).

METALLOENZYMES IN METHANOGENESIS
Methanogenesis is one of the most metal-rich enzymatic pathways
in biology (Zerkle et al., 2005). Depending on the pathway, exact
metal requirements may differ, but the general trends remain the
same: Fe is the most abundant metal, followed by Ni and Co, and
smaller amounts of Mo (and/or W) and Zn. Fe is primarily present
as Fe–S clusters used for electron transport and/or catalysis. Ni is
either bound to Fe–S clusters or in the center of a porphyrin unique
to methanogens, cofactor F430. Co(balt) is present in cobamides
involved in methyl group transfer. Zn occurs as a single structural
atom in several enzymes. Mo or W is bound to a pterin cofactor
to form “molybdopterin” or “tungstopterin,” which catalyze two-
electron redox reactions. Other alkali metals and metalloids, such
as Na and Se, are essential for methanogenesis, but the discussion
here is limited to the transition metals. So far, no Cu-dependent
methanogenesis enzymes have been identiﬁed, which is striking
given the huge importance of Cu in aerobic methanotrophy (see
the Section “Aerobic Methanotrophy”). It is plausible that scarce
Cu in anaerobic early-earth marine ecosystems selected for use
of other metals (i.e., Fe, Ni, and Co) in primitive methanogens
whereas Cu was more bioavailable to aerobic methanotrophs after
the rise of atmospheric oxygen (Dupont et al., 2006, 2010; David
and Alm, 2010).

Most methanogen orders – Class I (Methanobacteriales,
Methanococcales, and Methanopyrales) and Class II (Metha-
nomicrobiales) – obtain energy by reducing CO2 to CH4 using
electrons from H2 or in some cases formate (Anderson et al.,
2009). These methanogens do not contain cytochrome proteins,
in which Fe is bound to heme. Only one order of methanogens, the
Methanosarcinales (Class III), contain cytochromes and are capa-
ble of metabolizing a wider range of substrates for methanogen-
esis, including methanol, methylamines, methyl sulﬁdes, acetate,
and/or CO2 with H2. Members of the Methanosarcinales play a
key ecological role because the aceticlastic pathway is estimated to
account for two-thirds of biologically sourced methane (Rogers
and Whitman, 1991).

The Fe requirement for methanogenesis is vast: almost every
metalloenzyme involved in the pathway contains multiple Fe2S2,
Fe3S4, or Fe4S4 clusters. The ﬁrst enzyme in the CO2 reduction
pathway, formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase (abbreviated Fmd

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 2

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

FIGURE 1 | Metal content of metalloenzymes in the three pathways
of methanogenesis: H2/CO2 (black arrows), aceticlastic (green
arrows), and methylotrophic (blue arrows). Each circle represents one
metal atom. Parentheses show varying metal content of a given enzyme.
Question marks mean that enzyme may not be present in all
methanogens (6×[Fe4S4] and 10×[Fe4S4]polyferredoxins are encoded in
the eha operon and a 14×[Fe4S4]polyferredoxin is encoded in the ehb
operon). Abbreviations: CA, carbonic anhydrase; Cdh, carbon monoxide
dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA synthase; Ech/Eha/Ehb/Mbh,

energy-converting hydrogenase; Fd, ferredoxin; Fmd/Fwd, Mo/W
formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase; Frh, F420-reducing hydrogenase; Hdr,
heterodisulﬁde reductase; Hmd, Ni-free Fe hydrogenase; Mcr, methyl
coenzyme M reductase; Mta, methanol-coenzyme M methyltransferase;
Mtr, CH3-H4M(S)PT-coenzyme M methyltransferase; Vh(o/t)/Mvh, Ni–Fe
hydrogenase. For simplicity, only metalloenzymes are labeled. See the
Section “Metalloenzymes in Methanogenesis” for more details,
abbreviations for intermediates and enzyme substitutions that occur in
speciﬁc conditions and species.

for the Mo form and Fwd for the W form) can bind up to nine Fe4S4
clusters: one cluster in the Mo/W-pterin binding subunit and up

to eight additional clusters in polyferredoxin (Vorholt et al., 1996;
Figure 1). It is likely that Fwd can bind additional Fe4S4 clusters

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 3

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

(Ferry, 1999). Ferredoxins that transfer electrons from H2 to other
methanogenesis enzymes require additional Fe in the form of two
Fe4S4 clusters (Daas et al., 1994).

All hydrogenases involved in methanogenesis are Ni–Fe
enzymes that oxidize H2 and reduce ferredoxin, coenzyme F420,
and other electron carriers (Thauer et al., 2010). The four different
types of Ni–Fe hydrogenases involved in methanogenesis all con-
tain abundant Fe. The energy-converting membrane-associated
hydrogenase [abbreviated Ech, Eha, Ehb, or Mbh depending on
the class of methanogen (Anderson et al., 2009)] contains three
Fe4S4 clusters and a Ni–Fe active site (Thauer et al., 2010), and can
contain additional polyferredoxin subunits with 6, 10, or 14 Fe4S4
clusters (Tersteegen and Hedderich, 1999; Figure 1).

Another Ni–Fe hydrogenase is used to reduce coenzyme F420.
Coenzyme F420, a ﬂavin derivative that plays a critical role in two
intermediate electron-transfer steps in methanogenesis, is reduced
with H2 by the cytoplasmic hydrogenase Frh (Alex et al., 1990).
The Frh enzyme complex contains a Ni–Fe active site and four
Fe4S4 clusters (Figure 1), and forms large aggregates, multiplying
its metal requirements approximately eightfold (Fox et al., 1987).
Under conditions of Ni limitation, some methanogens without
cytochromes substitute Frh for a Ni-free Fe hydrogenase (Hmd)
to decrease Ni requirements (Afting et al., 1998). The Ni-free Fe
hydrogenase has a signiﬁcantly lower Fe requirement, using only
two Fe atoms per complex (Zirngibl et al., 1992; Shima et al.,
2008; Thauer et al., 2010). When formate is used as an electron
source instead of H2, Frh is replaced by formate dehydrogenase
(Fdh), which contains one Mo/W-pterin cofactor, two Zn atoms
and between 21 and 24 Fe atoms (Schauer and Ferry, 1986).
essential

for
methanogenesis. All methanogens utilize the energy-conserving
CH3-H4M(S)PT-coenzyme M methyltransferase (Mtr) to trans-
fer the methyl group from CH3-H4M(S)PT to HS-CoM. The Mtr
enzyme complex contains two cobamide cofactors (with one Co
each) and eight Fe atoms (Gartner et al., 1993). A wide range
of other Co(balt)-containing methyltransferases are required for
methyl coenzyme M formation in methylotrophic methanogens,
some of which contain additional metals (Thauer, 1998). For
instance, the methanol-coenzyme M methyltransferase enzyme
(Mta) expressed by methanol-utilizing methanogens contains one
Zn in addition to one cobalamin Co (Hagemeier et al., 2006).

Co(balt)-containing methyltransferases

are

Heterodisulﬁde reductase (Hdr) is an Fe–S and Zn-containing
enzyme that catalyzes the reduction of heterodisulﬁde (CoM-
S-S-CoB) to form HS-CoM and HS-CoB in the second-to-last
step in methanogenesis. In methanogens without cytochromes,
Hdr has three subunits (HdrABC) whereas methanogens with
cytochromes have a two-subunit protein (HdrDE; Hedderich et al.,
2005; Thauer et al., 2008). HdrABC contains seven Fe4S4 clus-
ters and one structural Zn atom (Hamann et al., 2007) and
forms a tight complex with the Ni–Fe hydrogenase Mvh, which
contains one Ni–Fe active site, one Fe2S2 cluster, two Fe4S4 clus-
ters, one Fe3S4 cluster, and polyferredoxin with 12 Fe4S4 clusters
(Reeve et al., 1989; Figure 1). In Methanosarcinales, HdrDE is
reduced by methanophenazine, a lipid-soluble electron, and pro-
ton carrier with very low redox potential. HdrDE contains three
Fe4S4 clusters, one heme b cofactor, and one structural Zn atom
(Heiden et al., 1994; Künkel et al., 1997; Simianu et al., 1998).

Methanophenazine is in turn reduced by the Ni–Fe hydrogenase
Vht/Vho, which contains one Ni–Fe center, two b-type hemes, one
Fe3S4 cluster, and two Fe4S4 clusters (Deppenmeier et al., 1992;
Thauer et al., 2010). In the marine strain Methanosarcina acetivo-
rans, Vht/Vho is replaced by Rnf, which contains six Fe4S4 clusters
and no Ni, and uses reduced ferredoxin instead of H2 (Li et al.,
2006; Ferry, 2010a).

Methyl coenzyme M reductase (Mcr), common to all
methanogenic pathways, catalyzes the ﬁnal step in methanogen-
esis: the reduction of CH3-S-CoM to CH4 and the formation of
CoM–CoB heterodisulﬁde with electrons derived from HS-CoB.
The crystal structure of Mcr has been solved and contains two
coenzyme F430 Ni tetrapyrroles (Ermler et al., 1997). Previous
studies have shown that the F430 content of cells is dependent on
cellular Ni content (Diekert et al., 1980, 1981; Lin et al., 1989).
Methanogens actively transport Ni and Co using ATP-dependent
uptake systems in order to fulﬁll enzymatic requirements (Jarrell
and Sprott, 1982; Baudet et al., 1988; Rodionov et al., 2006; Zhang
et al., 2009).

When grown on acetate, methanogens use two metalloenzymes
for the conversion of the methyl group from acetate to CH3-
H4SPT, which differ from those used in CO2 reduction and methy-
lotrophic pathways. The most metal-rich aceticlastic enzyme is
CO dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA synthase (Cdh), which cleaves the
methyl group off of acetyl-CoA and transfers it to CH3-H4SPT.
The Cdh complex contains one Fe4S4 cluster bridged to an Ni–Ni
site (Funk et al., 2004), four Fe4S4 clusters and a NiFe4S4 cluster
(Gong et al., 2008), and reduces a 2×[Fe4S4]ferredoxin (Terlesky
and Ferry, 1988; Ferry, 2010b). The CO2 by-product of Cdh is
converted to bicarbonate by an Fe-containing carbonic anhydrase
(CA) instead of the Zn-form, which is commonly in CAs from
other species (Macauley et al., 2009). Overall, the metal content of
enzymes involved in aceticlastic methanogenesis is similar to the
H2/CO2 pathway (Figure 1). The Fe and Mo/W requirements are
likely lower in the aceticlastic pathway because the Fe-rich poly-
ferredoxins involved in the CO2 reduction route are not present,
nor is Fmd/Fwd.

PHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES OF TRACE METAL REQUIREMENTS FOR
METHANOGENESIS
Previous physiological studies of metals as micronutrients for
methanogenesis have been compromised by signiﬁcant metal
contamination in growth vessels and sampling equipment. The
requirements for gas-tight material to maintain anaerobic con-
ditions has favored the use of glass culturing bottles with butyl
rubber stoppers and stainless steel needles for sampling, both of
which are notoriously dirty with respect to metals. In fact, Ni
requirements for methanogens were overlooked in early studies
due to the high Ni content (∼10%) of stainless steel syringe nee-
dles. Dissolution of Ni in stainless steel needles by H2S in the
media supplied ample Ni for growth of methanogens on media
not supplemented with Ni salts (S. Zinder, personal comm, 2011;
Diekert et al., 1981; Whitman et al., 1982). The need for anaerobic
conditions excludes the use of acid-washed plastics, which have
extremely low metal contamination and are commonly used for
trace metal limitation experiments with aerobes, but are perme-
able to O2 diffusion. To address these concerns, researchers have

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 4

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

acid-washed glassware with sulfuric acid, treated butyl rubber
stoppers, and polypropylene pipet tips with NaHCO3/EDTA and
covered cannula needles with Teﬂon tubing (Whitman et al., 1982;
Sowers and Ferry, 1985). Such methods were used in some, though
not all, of the studies reviewed in the Section “Pure Cultures.” To
our knowledge, Teﬂon-lined glass bottles have not been used to
minimize metal contamination in previous anaerobic studies, but
may be a good option for future research.

The experiments discussed in Section “Mixed Cultures and
Anaerobic Bioreactors” on mixed cultures and anaerobic biore-
actors were conducted, for the most part, not in deﬁned media
but rather in sludge or wastewater treatment efﬂuent. Studies of
metal requirements for pure cultures and anaerobic digesters typi-
cally report only total added metal, although these reactors usually
have higher background metal contents than pure cultures. How-
ever, the ubiquitous presence of sulﬁde, carbonate, and phosphate
in methanogenic cultures leads to metal precipitation, so dis-
solved metal concentrations generally decline throughout exper-
iments (Callander and Barford, 1983a,b). Indeed, precipitation–
dissolution kinetics of metal sulﬁdes may play a key role in
bioavailability of metals in anaerobic digesters (Gonzalez-Gil et al.,
1999; Jansen et al., 2007). However, increased rates of methano-
genesis after addition of a particular metal are clear evidence
of environmental (albeit human-contributed) metal limitation as
compared to axenic cultures.

Pure cultures
Based on the metal content of the enzymes involved in methano-
genesis, one would predict that methanogens require very high

concentrations of Fe, relatively high levels of Ni and Co, trace
Zn and Mo/W, and negligible amounts of Cu and Mn. This
prediction does not take into account complications if enzymes
have differing K m values for their respective substrates, which
could result in shifts in enzyme ratios, nor does it consider metal
requirements for metabolic pathways besides methanogenesis.
Nevertheless, it roughly agrees with the cellular metal contents
of 11 previously analyzed methanogens, which contained 700–
2800 ppm Fe, 17–180 ppm Ni, 23–1810 ppm Zn, 10–120 ppm Co,
10–70 ppm Mo, <10–160 ppm Cu, and 2–27 ppm Mn, in terms of
dry weight (Diekert et al., 1981; Whitman et al., 1982; Scherer
et al., 1983). These data suggest that the metal requirements
for methanogenesis have a strong inﬂuence on whole cell metal
contents.

Early studies on Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum
(renamed Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus) grown on
H2 and CO2 showed that low concentrations of Fe, Ni, Co, and Mo
in growth media could limit growth (Taylor and Pirt, 1977; Schön-
heit et al., 1979). For the formation of 1 g of biomass (dry weight),
10 μmol of Fe, 150 nmol of Ni, 20 nmol of Co, and 20 nmol of
Mo were required, a stoichiometry of 500 Fe: 7.5 Ni: 1 Co: 1 Mo
(Schönheit et al., 1979). Optimal growth was observed at 300–
500 μM Fe (Patel et al., 1978) and 1 μM Ni, while addition of Cu,
Zn, and Mn to the media did not stimulate growth (Schönheit et al.,
1979; Table 1). Interestingly, optimal growth of another H2/CO2-
utilizing methanogen, Methanococcus voltae, occurred at much
lower Fe and Ni concentrations (10 and 0.2 μM, respectively),
despite the more rigorous cleaning protocols used in this study
(Whitman et al., 1982).

Table 1 | Optimal dissolved metal concentrations (calculated from total amounts of salt added) in deﬁned growth media for pure methanogenic
cultures grown on H2/CO2, formate, acetate, methanol, or trimethylamine.

Metal

Substrate

Concentration (μM)

Species

Fe

H2/CO2

300–500

H2/CO2
Acetate
Methanol
Trimethylamine
H2/CO2
H2/CO2
Acetate
Methanol
Trimethylamine
Acetate
Methanol
Trimethylamine
Acetate
+)
Methanol (with NH4
Methanol (N2-ﬁxing)
H2/CO2
Formate

>15
100
50
5
1
0.2
2
0.1
0.25
2
1
0.1
2
0.5
5
1
0.5

Ni

Co

Mo

W

Methanospirillum hungatei,
Methanobacterium bryantii strain MOH
Methanococcus voltae
Methanothrix soehngenii VNBF1
Methanosarcina barkeri
Methanococcoides methylutens
Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum2
Methanococcus voltae
Methanothrix soehngenii VNBF1
Methanosarcina barkeri
Methanococcoides methylutens
Methanothrix soehngenii VNBF1
Methanosarcina barkeri
Methanococcoides methylutens
Methanothrix soehngenii VNBF1
Methanosarcina barkeri
Methanosarcina barkeri
Methanocorpusculum parvum
Methanocorpusculum parvum

Reference

Patel et al. (1978)

Whitman et al. (1982)
Fathepure (1987)
Lin et al. (1990)
Sowers and Ferry (1985)
Schönheit et al. (1979)
Whitman et al. (1982)
Fathepure (1987)
Scherer and Sahm (1981)
Sowers and Ferry (1985)
Fathepure (1987)
Scherer and Sahm (1981)
Sowers and Ferry (1985)
Fathepure (1987)
Scherer and Sahm (1981), Scherer (1988)
Scherer (1988)
Zellner and Winter (1987)
Zellner and Winter (1987)

1Renamed Methanosaeta concilii; 2Renamed Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus.
Adapted from Takashima and Speece (1990).

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 5

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

How do metal requirements change when methanogens are
grown on substrates other than H2/CO2? Optimal growth of
Methanothrix soehngenii VNBF (renamed Methanosaeta concilii)
grown on acetate was observed at 100 μM Fe, 2 μM Ni, 2 μM
Co, and 2 μM Mo (Fathepure, 1987; Table 1). Optimal growth of
methanol-utilizing Methanosarcina barkeri was observed at lower
concentrations: 50 μM Fe, 0.1 μM Ni, 1 μM Co and 0.5 μM Mo,
and addition of Cu and Mn had no effect on growth (Scherer and
Sahm, 1981; Lin et al., 1990). Optimal growth of trimethylamine-
grown Methanococcoides methylutens was lower still: 5 μM Fe,
0.25 μM Ni, and 0.1 μM Co, with no stimulation by addition of
Mo, Zn, Mn, W, and Cu (Sowers and Ferry, 1985). These studies
suggest that metal requirements are higher on acetate than methyl-
compounds, although the opposite – particularly for Co – has been
found in mixed culture anaerobic digester studies (see the Section
“Mixed Cultures and Anaerobic Bioreactors”).

In some methanogens, W-containing formylmethanofuran
dehydrogenases (Fwd) and W-containing formate dehydrogenases
(W-Fdh) are expressed in place of Mo-containing forms of the
enzymes. W was ﬁrst shown to stimulate growth of Methanococcus
vannielii on formate (Jones and Stadtman, 1977). A subsequent
study revealed that optimal growth on H2/CO2 required more W
(1 μM) than growth on formate (0.5 μM) and that more W was
incorporated into cells during growth on H2/CO2 than on formate
(Zellner and Winter, 1987), suggesting that Fwd has a higher W
requirement than W-Fdh.

In addition to metal cofactors in enzymes directly involved in
methanogenesis, additional metals are required for other meta-
bolic pathways in methanogens, such as nitrogen ﬁxation. In
a study of metal requirements for two strains of M. barkeri,
Scherer (1988) found that optimal Mo media concentrations for

diazotrophic growth were 10× greater (5 μM Mo) than NH4-
based growth (0.5 μM Mo). One of the two strains (strain 227)
could grow just as well with vanadium (V) instead of Mo in
the media, suggesting that it contained a V-nitrogenase (Scherer,
1988) as later conﬁrmed by Chien et al. (2000). However, dif-
fering results have been published regarding the extent to which
V stimulates nitrogen ﬁxation in this strain (Lobo and Zinder,
1988). Other methanogens, such as Methanococcus maripaludis,
lack the V-nitrogenase and have an absolute requirement for Mo
for diazotrophy (Kessler et al., 1997).

Mixed cultures and anaerobic bioreactors
The potential of metals to increase the efﬁciency of methanogen-
esis in industrial settings has led to a steady stream of studies on
metal requirements for optimal functioning of anaerobic waste
(sewage, agricultural, and food-processing) treatment bioreactors
since the late 1970s (Demirel and Scherer, 2011). The produc-
tion of methane from small organic molecules such as acetate and
methanol in waste treatment reactors is a beneﬁcial by-product
because it can be captured and used as a renewable fuel source.

Several studies suggest that the addition of Fe, Ni, and Co
can increase the rate of aceticlastic methanogenesis in anaerobic
digesters. An early study of aceticlastic methanogenesis in mixed
cultures originally obtained from sewage sludge and maintained
in a deﬁned medium showed that the optimal soluble Fe concen-
trations for methanogenesis were 0.2–2 mM (lower than the total

5–10 mM FeCl2 added due to precipitation as ferrous carbonate),
whereas background soluble Fe was ∼25 μM (Hoban and van
den Berg, 1979). The authors suggested that mixed methanogenic
cultures might have higher Fe requirements than pure cultures.
Addition of Ni and Co stimulated aceticlastic methanogenesis
and increased the thickness of bioﬁlms in anaerobic food waste
digesters (Murray and van den Berg, 1981), municipal sludge
digesters (Speece et al., 1983), and synthetic wastewaters (Kida
et al., 2001). Addition of Mo (50 nM) had a smaller effect (Murray
and van den Berg, 1981). In another study, individual addition
of Fe, Ni, Co, Mn, Zn, Mo, and Cu to a wastewater treatment
sludge did not produce any signiﬁcant increase in the conversion
of acetate to methane (Florencio et al., 1993). It is possible that
the sludge in the latter study contained sufﬁcient metal carry-over
that these metals were not limiting for aceticlastic methanogen-
esis. Metal speciation almost certainly inﬂuences bioavailability
in these bioreactors, where up to 95% of dissolved Ni and Co
is present in strongly bound forms (Jansen et al., 2005). It is cur-
rently unknown whether methanogens can directly take up soluble
metal-sulﬁde complexes or metal-organic complexes (Jansen et al.,
2007). Additionally, temperature may exert inﬂuence on the trace
metal requirements; higher trace metal requirements have been
found for thermophilic than mesophilic mixed reactors, despite
smaller biomass yield (Takashima et al., 2011).

Limitation of methanogenesis by low Co(balt) bioavailability
has been identiﬁed in numerous studies of anaerobic mixed cul-
tures grown on methanol. A study of methylotrophic methanogens
in wastewater treatment sludge showed a pronounced increase
in methanogenic activity when Co was added, and a signiﬁcant
decline when it was absent from the media (Florencio et al., 1993).
Follow-up studies have conﬁrmed the high Co(balt) requirements
for methanol-grown anaerobic bioreactors (Zandvoort et al.,
2006). The same trend was observed for Ni, although to a lesser
extent, but minimal effect was found for other metals (Fe, Zn, Mo,
Cu, and Zn). Optimal Ni and Co concentrations for methano-
genesis was ∼2 μM (Florencio et al., 1993, 1994; Zandvoort et al.,
2002). The increased need for Co for methanol-based growth vs.
other substrates is likely due to additional Co(balt)-containing
methyltransferases required for growth on methyl-compounds.
This concurs with previous ﬁndings that the highest amount of
corrinoids are produced in methanogens grown on methanol com-
pared to other substrates, with about 3× as much corrinoids in
methanol-grown cell vs. acetate-grown cells (Krzycki and Zeikus,
1980) and that cobalamin production increases with media Co
concentration up to ∼50 μM (Lin et al., 1989).

Environmental studies
Very few studies have investigated the effects of metal additions
on natural methanogenic ecosystems. To our knowledge, the only
published experiment was performed in ﬁve North American
peatlands (Basiliko and Yavitt, 2001). Ambient dissolved metal
concentrations in mineral-poor peatlands were low (2–20 nM Ni,
30 nM Co, and <2 μM Fe) due to the high metal-binding capac-
ity of peat. In mineral-rich peatlands, concentrations were 40–
60 nM Ni, 2–5 μM Co, and 20–30 μM Fe. The authors found that
combined addition of Fe (12 μM), Ni (12 μM), and Co (6 μM)
to mineral-poor surface samples resulted in an enhancement of

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 6

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

CH4 production, whereas no effect or inhibition was observed at
mineral-rich peatlands. The effect of individual metals was not
tested. No effect was observed for CO2 production in mineral-
poor peatlands, suggesting that heterotrophic microbes are not as
metal-limited as methanogens. Addition of the chelator citrate, but
not EDTA, led to increased CH4 production in the peat with the
lowest metal concentrations, suggesting either that methanogens
can take up metal–citrate complexes or that they can compete with
citrate for metal-binding.

Other anoxic ecosystems have similar trace metal concentra-
tions to peat bogs, suggesting that metal limitation of methano-
genesis may be widespread in natural environments. The con-
centration range of Ni, Co, and Mo in ﬁve representative anoxic
waters was consistently below the optima for growth of pure cul-
tures (Tables 1 and 2). Optimal methanogenic growth occurs at
0.2–2 μM Ni and in natural anoxic waters Ni ranges from 0.002
to 0.07 μM. Optimal media concentrations of Co are 0.1–2 μM
and in natural environments Co is generally <0.02 μM. Optimal
Mo concentrations are 0.5–5 μM; ambient Mo is 0.01–0.2 μMin
anoxic environments. Zn is also generally very low (<0.04 μM)
in anoxic waters, and may contribute to trace metal limitation of
methanogenesis, although pure culture studies are not available
to determine optimal Zn concentrations. The opposite is true for
W: few data are available on in situ W concentrations, but in most
ecosystems W is below the growth optima of 0.5–1 μM. Optimal
Fe concentrations are present in anoxic sediment pore waters (such
as the Santa Monica Basin) where Fe reaches 200 μM, but other
anoxic waters have signiﬁcantly lower Fe (Table 2). Therefore, it is
quite reasonable to expect that bioavailability of trace metals may
be important limiting growth factors in natural methanogenic
environments.

SUMMARY AND AREAS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
Based on the metal content of enzymes in methanogenesis, one
would predict (1) roughly equal Fe, Ni, and Zn requirements
for CO2 reduction, aceticlastic, and methylotrophic pathways;
(2) higher Mo/W requirements for CO2 reduction and methy-
lotrophic pathways than aceticlastic methanogenesis; and (3)
higher Co(balt) requirement for the methylotrophic pathway than
CO2 reduction and aceticlastic pathways. Previous studies are
difﬁcult to compare because few of them simultaneously vary
methanogenic pathways using the same experimental conditions

and/or organism. Every laboratory likely had different levels of
trace metal contamination and metal-sulﬁde precipitation, and
thus the given optimal metal concentrations are all estimates to
varying degrees. Nonetheless, a few trends are clear: (1) Fe con-
centrations required for optimal growth in media are much higher
−4 M range); (2) optimal
than all other metals (in the 10
−6 M
Ni, Co, Mo, and W concentrations are in the 10
−5 M) are needed for
range, and higher Mo concentrations (10
diazotrophic growth; (3) addition of Cu and Mn is not needed
for growth. Few studies have investigated Zn requirements for
methanogenesis, although Zn is present in at least two enzymes in
the pathway.

−7 to 10

−5 to 10

Studies of anaerobic digesters and peatlands suggest that Fe,
Ni, and Co – and possibly other metals – may limit methanogen-
esis in the natural ecosystems. The high Co(balt) requirement for
methylotrophic methanogenesis in anaerobic digesters is of par-
ticular interest. To our knowledge, only one study has looked into
the possibility of metal limitation of methanogenesis in a natural
setting (Basiliko and Yavitt, 2001). More environmental studies
are essential to better understand the nature of metal bioavailabil-
ity and/or limitation in the ecosystems that contribute 75–80%
of the world’s annual CH4 sources, but preliminary comparison
of optimal concentrations for growth of pure cultures and in situ
levels shows that trace metal (particularly Ni and Co) limitation
of methanogenesis may be widespread in anoxic settings.

METHANOTROPHY
Methanotrophy is the microbial process whereby CH4 is oxidized
as an energy and carbon source. Aerobic methanotrophy is esti-
mated to consume ∼35% (0.6 Gt) of the total global CH4 produced
per year, whereas anaerobic methanotrophy is estimated to con-
sume ∼18% (0.3 Gt; Thauer, 2011). Aerobic methanotrophy is
performed by certain bacteria that combine molecular oxygen
with CH4 to produce methanol (CH3OH). Methanol is then
oxidized to formaldehyde (CH2O), which is incorporated into
organic compounds using either the serine or ribulose monophos-
phate pathway (Semrau et al., 2010). Sulfate-dependent anaerobic
methane oxidation (AOM) occurs primarily in anoxic marine sed-
iments and is performed by archaea that have not been isolated
in pure culture, but are most closely related to Methanosarcinales
and Methanomicrobiales. These archaea are believed to oxidize
methane anaerobically through a reverse methanogenesis pathway

Table 2 | Compiled dissolved trace metal concentrations in representative anoxic waters.

Sample site

Peat bog waters

Fe

Ni

Co

Cu

Zn

Mo

Reference

0.4–40

0.002–0.07

0.002–4

0.02–2

Santa Monica basin sediment pore
waters (>5 cm depth)
Black Sea sulﬁdic water column
(>200 m)
Framvaren Fjord water column (>20 m)

100–200

0.01

0.01–0.02

<0.005

0.2

0.01–0.3

0.01

<0.004

<0.002 <0.004

<0.01

0.03–2

<0.07

0.001–0.01 <0.001

0.002–0.01 <0.04

Baltic Sea water column (>150 m)

0.1–2

0.01

<0.002

<0.007

0.01–0.04

All concentrations are in units of micromolar (μM).

Basiliko and Yavitt (2001), Bragazza
(2006)
Shaw et al. (1990)

Haraldsson and Westerlund (1988),
Emerson and Huested (1991)
Haraldsson and Westerlund (1988),
Emerson and Huested (1991)
Kremling (1983)

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 7

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

(Scheller et al., 2010; Thauer, 2011). Thus, phylogenetically unre-
lated aerobic and anaerobic methanotrophs accomplish the same
task using very different enzymes (Chistoserdova et al., 2005) and
are therefore predicted to have different metal requirements. Cu
requirements for aerobic methanotrophy have been the subject of
a great deal of research, whereas metal requirements for AOM are
just beginning to be explored, but are expected to be similar to
metal requirements for methanogenesis.

AEROBIC METHANOTROPHY
Aerobic methanotrophs (abbreviated “MOB” for “methane-
oxidizing bacteria”) are commonly found at oxic/anoxic interfaces
of environments where CH4 is produced. Methanotroph genera,
beginning with “Methylo-,” are found in the Gammaproteobacte-
ria and Alphaproteobacteria (Hanson and Hanson, 1996; Semrau
et al., 2010). Recently, MOB have also been discovered in the Ver-
rucomicrobia (Op den Camp et al., 2009). Furthermore, the newly
discovered freshwater phylum NC10 bacterium Methylomirabilis
oxyfera performs intra-aerobic methane oxidation using pMMO
and internally produced O2 from NO (Ettwig et al., 2010; Wu et al.,
2011). In addition to being important in greenhouse gas process-
ing, some MOB play important roles in pollutant degradation and
bioremediation (Semrau, 2011).

Metalloenzymes in aerobic methanotrophy
Classical aerobic methanotrophy. The metal requirements for
MOB are largely regulated by copper (Cu) availability. When Cu
is abundant, MOB express a membrane-bound Cu (and possibly
Fe and Zn)-containing enzyme (particulate methane monooxy-
genase, pMMO) that catalyzes the ﬁrst step of CH4 oxidation.
When Cu is lacking, some MOB can synthesize a soluble pro-
tein for methane oxidation that contains Fe instead of Cu (soluble
methane monooxygenase, sMMO). Subsequent enzymatic steps in
aerobic methanotrophy rely primarily on Fe, with lesser amounts
of Ca, Mo, and possibly Zn (Figure 2). Below is a general overview
of the metal content of enzymes in methanotrophy. For a more
extensive discussion of the biochemistry of aerobic methanotro-
phy, the reader is referred to other reviews (Hanson and Hanson,
1996; Hakemian and Rosenzweig, 2007; Trotsenko and Murrell,
2008; Semrau et al., 2010; Chistoserdova, 2011).

The ﬁrst step of aerobic methanotrophy, the oxidation of CH4
to CH3OH, is catalyzed by methane monooxygenase (MMO). All
aerobic methanotrophs (with the exception of facultative methan-
otrophic species in the genus Methylocella) are capable of express-
ing pMMO (Hanson and Hanson, 1996). The metal content of
pMMO has been a matter of debate for many years, namely
regarding whether the active site coordinates Fe or Cu for func-
tion (Bollinger, 2010). Crystal structures and experiments have
provided strong evidence that the active site is a two Cu cen-
ter in the pMMO-B subunit (Lieberman and Rosenzweig, 2005;
Balasubramanian and Rosenzweig, 2007; Hakemian et al., 2008;
Balasubramanian et al., 2010). An additional mono-nuclear Cu
atom is present in one of crystal structures (from Methylococcus
capsulatus Bath) but not in Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b and
is not required for CH4 oxidation (Balasubramanian et al., 2010).
Crystal structures predict coordination of another metal ion (Zn in
M. capsulatus Bath and Cu in M. trichosporium OB3b), positioned

between the pMMO-B and pMMO-C subunits (Lieberman and
Rosenzweig, 2005; Hakemian et al., 2008). Since pMMO is a het-
erotrimer, it therefore contains nine Cu atoms (and possibly three
Zn atoms; Figure 2). Recent Mössbauer evidence suggests that Fe
could also be present in pMMO, as supported by previous protein
preparations that contained Fe (Martinho et al., 2007; Semrau
et al., 2010). The electron donor to pMMO is a cytochrome bc1
complex, containing three heme groups and one Fe2S2 cluster
(Zahn and DiSpirito, 1996).

Several strains of aerobic methanotrophs are also capable of
expressing a cytoplasmic soluble MMO (sMMO), which con-
tains a dimeric hydroxylase with two Fe ions in a di-Fe active
site cluster and an additional Fe2S2 cluster in a reductase sub-
unit (Lipscomb, 1994; Merkx et al., 2001). Expression of partic-
ulate vs. soluble MMO is regulated by Cu availability (Murrell
et al., 2000). Work with pure cultures has shown that a “Cu
switch” occurs at 0.85–1 μmol/g dry weight: at lower Cu:biomass
ratios, sMMO is expressed, and at higher Cu:biomass ratios,
pMMO is expressed (Stanley et al., 1983; Hanson and Hanson,
1996; Nielsen et al., 1997). In contrast to pMMO, the elec-
tron donor to sMMO is NADH (Lipscomb, 1994; Merkx et al.,
2001).

After CH4 is oxidized to CH3OH by either pMMO or sMMO,
the periplasmic pyrroloquinoline quinone-dependent enzyme
methanol dehydrogenase (abbreviated MDH or Mxa) oxidizes
CH3OH to formaldehyde (CHOH) using two cytochrome c pro-
teins (c L and c H) as electron acceptors (Hanson and Hanson,
1996). These cytochromes are then oxidized by cytochrome aa3,
containing two hemes and two Cu atoms (Figure 2). MDH/Mxa
does not contain any transition metal cofactors, but does pos-
sess 2 mol of Ca per mole of tetramer. Approximately 50% of the
CHOH produced by MDH/Mxa is assimilated into biomass, and
the other half is further oxidized to formate (CHOOH) and then
to CO2 to generate reducing equivalents (Hanson and Hanson,
1996; Trotsenko and Murrell, 2008; Chistoserdova, 2011). This
step is mediated by either a membrane-bound cytochrome-linked
formaldehyde dehydrogenase (DL-FalDH) when cells are grown
+
under high Cu conditions or a soluble NAD(P)
-linked enzyme
(N-FalDH) when cells are grown under low Cu conditions (Zahn
et al., 2001). Neither protein contains metal cofactors, but DL-
FalDH does require cytochrome bc1 as an electron acceptor (Zahn
et al., 2001). The ﬁnal step in aerobic methane oxidation is formate
+
oxidation to CO2, catalyzed by NAD
–formate dehydrogenase
(Fdh). The only characterized Fdh protein in MOB (from M.
trichosporium OB3b) contains four FexSx clusters and one molyb-
dopterin cofactor (Jollie and Lipscomb, 1991; Figure 2). Multiple
Fdh enzymes are present in M. capsulatus Bath genome (Ward
et al., 2004) and it is possible that one or more of them contains
W in place of Mo, similar to Fdh proteins from methylotrophs
(Laukel et al., 2003).

Intra-aerobic methane oxidation coupled to denitriﬁcation.
The genome of the denitrifying bacterium M. oxyfera, coupled
to proteomic, transcriptomic, and stable isotope labeling exper-
iments, have revealed that this organism also contains pMMO
but uses a different pathway for methane oxidation than other
MOB. Instead of obtaining O2 from the environment, M. oxyfera

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 8

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

FIGURE 2 | Metal content of the enzymes involved in aerobic
methanotrophy at high or low Cu, and intra-aerobic methane
oxidation coupled with denitriﬁcation. Each circle represents one
metal atom. Abbreviations: Cyt, cytochrome; DL-FalDH, dye-linked
formaldehyde dehydrogenase; FDH, formate dehydrogenase; MDH,
methanol dehydrogenase; pMMO, Cu-particulate methane
monooxygenase; sMMO, soluble methane monooxygenase; NirS,

Fe–nitrite reductase; NOD, NO dismutase (putative enzyme). Putative
intra-aerobic methane oxidation coupled with denitriﬁcation pathway is
adapted from Wu et al. (2011). For simplicity, only metalloenzymes are
labeled. Question marks mean that the metal content of the enzyme
is not well known, and for the case of NOD, that the enzyme is
unknown. See the Section “Metalloenzymes in Aerobic
Methanotrophy” for more details.

−
2

generates its own supply of O2 internally from NO. Therefore,
this metabolism has been called intra-aerobic methane oxida-
tion coupled to denitriﬁcation (Ettwig et al., 2010; Wu et al.,
2011). In the proposed pathway, an Fe-based cytochrome cd1
nitrite reductase [cd1NIR or NirS; see the Section “Nitrate/Nitrite
Reduction to N2O/N2 Pathway (Denitriﬁcation)”], likely con-
taining four Fe atoms (Fülöp et al., 1995), is used to reduce
NO
to NO (Ettwig et al., 2010; Wu et al., 2011). In con-
trast to classical denitriﬁcation, where NO is reduced to N2O
and then N2, M. oxyfera disproportionates two molecules of
NO to O2 and N2 (Figure 2). The NO dismutase enzyme
that performs this reaction is currently unknown. The O2 gen-
erated by this uncharacterized NO dismutase is then used to
oxidize CH4 to CH3OH using pMMO, followed by oxidation
of CH3OH to CH2O by MDH/Mxa (see the Section “Classical

Aerobic Methanotrophy”; Ettwig et al., 2010; Wu et al., 2011).
Instead of using FalDH for oxidation of CH2O to CHOOH,
M. oxyfera contains several genes encoding enzymes responsi-
ble for tetrahydromethanopterin (H4MPT)-dependent C1 transfer
reactions (Ettwig et al., 2010; Wu et al., 2011). The enzymes
involved in these reactions are not known to contain metals
(Vorholt, 2002). In the last step, CHOOH is oxidized to CO2
by formate dehydrogenase [Fdh; see the Section “Nitrate/Nitrite
Reduction to N2O/N2 Pathway (Denitriﬁcation)”]. Carbon assim-
ilation in M. oxyfera likely proceeds via CO2 ﬁxation with the
Calvin–Benson–Bassham cycle instead of the serine and ribu-
lose monophosphate (RuMP) pathways used by other MOB
(Ettwig et al., 2010; Wu et al., 2011). This pathway remains to
be conﬁrmed biochemically, but likely requires abundant Cu for
pMMO.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 9

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

Physiological studies of metal requirements for aerobic
methanotrophy
Pure cultures. Studies of the physiological importance of metals
for MOB have focused largely on Cu. Addition of Cu to the growth
media in strains encoding both the particulate and the soluble
forms of MMO fundamentally changes methanotroph physiology
by triggering the “Cu switch,” turning on the expression of pMMO
(Stanley et al., 1983; Choi et al., 2003). Further increases in Cu
concentration can lead to up to 55-fold higher pMMO expres-
sion, with optimal pMMO activity occurring at 60 μM Cu forM.
capsulatus Bath (Choi et al., 2003; Semrau et al., 2010). Cellu-
lar Cu contents in laboratory cultures of aerobic methanotrophs
amended with high Cu in the growth media can be extremely high,
up to ∼250 nmol Cu/mg protein (Choi et al., 2003).

In order to maintain Cu homeostasis and protect against
the potentially toxic effects of high levels of Cu, some aerobic
methanotrophs express the Cu-chelating “chalkophore” molecule
methanobactin (Kim et al., 2004; Balasubramanian and Rosen-
zweig, 2008). Methanobactin is a 1217-Da molecule that binds
one atom of Cu(I) with high afﬁnity (Kim et al., 2004; Choi
et al., 2006) and accumulates in the growth media when Cu is
<0.7 μM (DiSpirito et al., 1998). Cu-loaded methanobactin is
actively transported into methanotrophic cells when Cu concen-
trations rise between 0.7 and 1 μM (Semrau et al., 2010; Balasub-
ramanian et al., 2011). Furthermore, it has recently been shown
that M. capsulatus Bath contains numerous proteins on its surface
that respond to changing Cu concentrations in growth medium,
including abundant Fe-containing cytochrome c peroxidases and
multi-heme c-type cytochromes (Karlsen et al., 2011). It is per-
haps interesting to note that abundant extracellular iron is evident
on other methanotrophs in the genera Crenothrix and Clonothrix
(Kolk, 1938; Vigliotta et al., 2007), although separate pathways and
functional roles may be at play in these cases.

Low Cu minerals were dissolved more quickly by methanobactin
than high Cu minerals (Kulczycki et al., 2007). Similarly, increas-
ing concentrations of surface sites on minerals lead to decreased
Cu bioavailability to M. trichosporium OB3b in common soil min-
erals (Morton et al., 2000). Therefore, particulate Cu content and
sediment or soil mineral geochemistry may display a more robust
correlation with methanotrophic activity than dissolved Cu levels
in aquatic systems or pore waters (Knapp et al., 2007; Fru, 2011),
although this remains to be tested in natural systems.

ANAEROBIC METHANOTROPHY
The process of anaerobic methane oxidation (AOM) has been
known for over 30 years based on geochemical data (Martens and
Berner, 1977), but the identity of the microorganisms carrying
out this metabolism remained elusive until the early 2000s due
to the extreme difﬁculty of culturing AOM microbes. Combined
molecular and stable isotope studies revealed that archaeal groups
(anaerobic methanotrophic archaea, abbreviated “ANME”) were
responsible for AOM activity in CH4 seep sediments through
syntrophic associations with sulfate-reducing bacteria (Hinrichs
et al., 1999; Boetius et al., 2000; Orphan et al., 2001, 2002).
Described ANME lineages currently belong to three distinct phy-
logenetic groups, with members of the ANME-1 forming a novel
clade between the Methanomicrobiales and Methanosarcinales
orders, and groups ANME-2 and ANME-3 belonging to the
Methanosarcinales. Together, these methanotrophic lineages are
believed to be responsible for the oxidation of ∼80% of the
methane naturally seeping upward from marine sediments, or
∼7–25% of total global methane (Reeburgh, 2007). Although
ANME have not been cultured, metagenomic, and environmen-
tal proteomic studies have provided insight into their metabolic
strategies for AOM (Hallam et al., 2003, 2004; Krüger et al., 2003;
Meyerdiercks et al., 2005; Pernthaler et al., 2008).

Environmental studies. Environmental studies on Cu availability
to MOB are lacking, which is striking considering that Cu has been
known to be involved in methanotrophy for many years. Knapp
et al. (2007) suggest that the reason that correlations between envi-
ronmental dissolved Cu (which in oxic settings is <1 μM; Table 3)
and methanotrophic activity have not been noted is because some
MOB can access mineral- and organic-bound Cu using small Cu-
binding peptides, most notably methanobactin. In the absence
of dissolved Cu, M. trichosporium OB3b acquired sufﬁcient Cu
from Cu-containing minerals to express pMMO, but only when
methanobactin was present (Knapp et al., 2007). CH4 oxidation
rates were highest at ∼100 ppm mineral Cu (Kulczycki et al., 2011).

Metalloenzymes in anaerobic methanotrophy
Evidence is accumulating that ANME anaerobically oxidize
methane by running the methanogenesis pathway in reverse
(Scheller et al., 2010), as was predicted based on the close phyloge-
netic relationship of ANME to methanogens in the orders Metha-
nomicrobiales and Methanosarcinales (Knittel and Boetius, 2009).
The discovery of gene homologs to mcrA in ANME provided the
ﬁrst clues that these microbes were using reverse methanogene-
sis to oxidize CH4 (Hallam et al., 2003). High concentrations of
the Ni-containing cofactor F430 and a slightly modiﬁed variant of
F430 (Mayr et al., 2008) were found in microbial mats performing
AOM in the Black Sea (Krüger et al., 2003), adding further support

Table 3 | Compiled dissolved trace metal concentrations in representative oxic waters.

Sample site

Fe

Ni

Co

Cu

Zn

Seawater

<0.001

0.002–0.01

<0.001

<0.001–0.005

<0.001–0.009

Mo

0.1

Soil pore water
Oxic lake water

1–20
0.01–10

<0.001–0.03

0.1–0.5
0.01–0.8

0.1–2
0.02–0.6

0.004–0.3

Reference

Bruland (1980), Collier (1985),
Johnson et al. (1997)
Kinniburgh and Miles (1983)
Wetzel (2001)

All concentrations are in units of micromolar (μM).

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 10

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

for the model. Immunolocalization and biochemical studies have
provided clear evidence that Mcr catalyzes the ﬁrst step of AOM in
ANME (Heller et al., 2008; Scheller et al., 2010) and metagenomic
studies of ANME communities identiﬁed the presence of genes
encoding almost all of the other methanogenic enzymes with the
exception of the Ni–Fe hydrogenases Eha/Ehb and two of the three
subunits of the Ni–Fe hydrogenase Mvh (Hallam et al., 2004; Mey-
erdiercks et al., 2005; Thauer, 2011). Therefore, it is reasonable to
predict that metal requirements for the enzymes involved in AOM
are similar to those used for methanogenesis, involving high lev-
els of Fe, Ni, Co, and additional Mo/W and Zn (see the Section
“Metalloenzymes in Methanogenesis”), but possibly with slightly
lower Fe and Ni requirements due to the absence of two of the
Ni–Fe hydrogenases involved in methanogenesis. The ﬁnding that
ANME can also ﬁx N2 (Dekas et al., 2009) suggests that they may
have additional Fe and Mo/V requirements. ANME occur in anoxic
and sulﬁdic environments where Ni, Co, Mo, and possibly Fe likely

occur at levels lower than their growth optima (Table 2), assuming
that their metal requirements are similar to those of methanogens.
For a full review of the biochemistry of AOM, readers are referred
to Thauer and Shima (2008).

SUMMARY
Extensive research has been focused on the importance of Cu
for particulate methane monooxygenase, resulting in a detailed
understanding of physiological and biochemical aspects of Cu
in pure cultures of MOB. However, few studies have attempted
to relate Cu bioavailability, particularly in mineral form, to rates
of aerobic CH4 oxidation in the environment. Furthermore, few
studies have investigated additional metal requirements, particu-
larly Fe, but also small amounts of Mo and Zn, for aerobic and
intra-aerobic methanotrophy, although clearly Fe in particular
is important for these metabolisms (Figure 2) and cell surface
Cu acquisition mechanisms (Karlsen et al., 2011). In contrast to

FIGURE 3 | Metal content of three pathways of N2O production:
classical denitriﬁcation, bacterial nitriﬁer denitriﬁcation, and archaeal
ammonia oxidation. Each circle represents one metal atom. Parentheses
show varying metal content of a given enzyme. Abbreviations: AMO,
ammonia monooxygenase; HAO, hydroxylamine oxidoreductase; Nar,
dissimilatory nitrate reductase; NirS, Fe–nitrite reductase; NirS, Cu–nitrite
reductase; cNOR, nitric oxide reductase; Nos, nitrous oxide reductase;

NXOR, nitroxyl oxidoreductase (putative enzyme). Putative archaeal
ammonia oxidation pathway is adapted from Walker et al. (2010). For
simplicity, only metalloenzymes are labeled. Question marks depict
unknown or unconﬁrmed enzymes. Enzymes colored a solid purple
indicate that an unknown amount of Cu is present. See the Section
“Metalloenzymes Involved in the Production and Consumption of Nitrous
Oxide” for more details.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 11

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

aerobic methanotrophy, essentially nothing is known about the
metal requirements for AOM besides the need for large amounts
of Ni in cofactor F430 (Krüger et al., 2003). Presumably, metal
requirements for reverse methanogenesis by ANME are similar to
those of the canonical seven-step methanogenic pathway, but this
hypothesis remains to be tested.

NITROUS OXIDE PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION
A diverse range of organisms using several different pathways
are known to produce N2O. Whereas CH4 production is only
known to occur within the archaea, N2O production is more
widespread. Pathways for biological N2O production include dis-
similatory nitrate/nitrite reduction (e.g., denitriﬁcation), nitriﬁer
denitriﬁcation (Wrage et al., 2001), hydroxylamine oxidation, and
NOx detoxiﬁcation (also known as the “nitrosative stress” path-
way; Stein, 2011). N2O is also produced by MOB (Sutka et al.,
2006; Campbell et al., 2011) and enrichment cultures of ammonia
oxidizing archaea (AOA; Jung et al., 2011; Santoro et al., 2011). Bac-
terial denitriﬁcation and nitriﬁer denitriﬁcation together account
for ∼70% of the global N2O ﬂux (IPCC, 2007), although recent
data suggest that AOA may also be an important source of N2O
in marine and terrestrial systems (Jung et al., 2011; Santoro et al.,
2011). For an in-depth review of the methods used to identify
N2O-producing bacteria by their key enzymes, readers are referred
to Stein (2011).

Metalloenzymes involved in N2O production primarily con-
tain Fe and/or Cu, with additional Mo needed for the dis-
similatory nitrate reduction pathway to N2O and/or N2 and
possibly additional Zn in nitriﬁer denitriﬁcation. A schematic
of the metal content of proteins involved in N2O production
and consumption is shown in Figure 3. Below we review bio-
chemical and physiological studies of the metal requirements
for N2O production through the standard and nitriﬁer den-
itriﬁcation pathways, and touch on new discoveries of met-
alloenzymes putatively involved in archaeal ammonia oxida-
tion. Metalloenzymes involved in the nitrosative stress path-
way are mentioned brieﬂy, but are outside the scope of this
review.

−
3

→ NO
−
2

METALLOENZYMES INVOLVED IN THE PRODUCTION AND
CONSUMPTION OF NITROUS OXIDE
Nitrate/nitrite reduction to N2O/N2 pathway (denitriﬁcation)
Nitrous oxide is a gaseous intermediate in the process of deni-
triﬁcation, the anaerobic microbial respiratory process whereby
→ NO →
−
NO
3 is reduced to N2 in the sequence: NO
N2O → N2. The process is leaky and therefore N2O is almost
always found in trace abundances in environments where den-
−
itriﬁcation occurs (Rogers and Whitman, 1991). Since NO
3 is
−
typically present at higher abundances than NO
2 in natural envi-
ronments, denitriﬁcation typically starts with dissimilatory nitrate
reduction. The most well-studied dissimilatory nitrate reductase
is the membrane-bound NarGHI complex, which contains two b-
type cytochromes (each binding one Fe atom), one Fe3S4 cluster,
four Fe4S4 clusters, and a molybdopterin (Mo) active site (Bertero
et al., 2003; Jormakka et al., 2004; Figure 3). It is possible for dis-
similatory nitrate reduction to occur with Fe or V in place of Mo,

although such alternative nitrate reductases have so far only been
found in metal-reducing bacteria (Antipov et al., 1998, 2005).

The next step in denitriﬁcation, nitrite reduction to nitric oxide
(NO), is catalyzed by either a cytochrome cd1 (four Fe)-containing
nitrite reductase (abbreviated cd1NIR or NirS; Fülöp et al., 1995)
or a Cu-containing nitrite reductase (abbreviated CuNIR or NirK)
that possesses either 6 or 24 Cu atoms depending on its subunit
content (Godden et al., 1991; Nojiri et al., 2007; Figure 3).

NO reduction to N2O occurs almost instantaneously after
its formation due to the toxicity of NO. In denitrifying bacte-
ria, NO reductases (NORs) are members of the heme/copper
cytochrome oxidase enzyme superfamily that substitute Fe in place
of Cu at their active site (Hendriks et al., 2000). Other enzymes
in this family cannot efﬁciently reduce NO, suggesting that the
replacement of Cu with Fe is important for the enzyme mecha-
nism. The most common type of NOR in denitrifying bacteria
is NorBC (or cNOR), a cytochrome bc complex that contains
Fe in the form of two hemes and one non-heme Fe and uses
cytochrome c as an electron donor (Hendriks et al., 2000; Zumft,
2005; Figure 3). The nitrosative stress pathway uses a different NO
reductase called qNOR, which contains only the NorB subunit
and accepts electrons from quinols (Hendriks et al., 2000; Zumft,
2005). Two additional Fe-containing NOR enzymes, the ﬂavohe-
moglobin Hmp and the ﬂavorubredoxin NorVW, are important
for relieving nitrosative stress under anoxic conditions by NO
reduction to N2O (Poole and Hughes, 2000; Gardner et al., 2003).
Fungal NORs are members of the cytochrome P-460 family and
also contain only Fe (Hendriks et al., 2000).

After its production, N2O can either escape to the atmosphere
or be further reduced to N2 by nitrous oxide reductase (Nos).
Nos is a Cu-rich enzyme, binding 12 atoms of Cu per homodimer
(Brown et al., 2000; Figure 3). Low pH and/or trace amounts of O2
tend to increase the ratio of N2O:N2 released because Nos is inhib-
ited at low pH and is more sensitive to O2 than other reductases
in denitriﬁcation (Knowles, 1982).

−
2

→ NO

Bacterial ammonia oxidation to N2O (nitriﬁer denitriﬁcation and
hydroxylamine oxidation)
Autotrophic ammonia oxidizing Bacteria (AOB; Shaw et al., 2006)
and MOB (Yoshinari, 1985; Ren et al., 2000) are capable of aero-
bic production of N2O during the process of ammonia oxidation
(NH3 → NH2OH → NO
). N2O is produced from
two offshoots of the nitriﬁcation pathway: nitriﬁer denitriﬁcation
(Ritchie and Nicholas, 1972; Poth and Focht, 1985; Wrage et al.,
2001; Shaw et al., 2006) and hydroxylamine oxidation (Cantera
−
and Stein, 2007b; Stein, 2011). In nitriﬁer denitriﬁcation, NO
2 is
reduced to NO, and then N2O or N2, instead of being oxidized
−
to NO
3 . In hydroxylamine oxidation, NH2OH is oxidized to NO,
which is then reduced to N2O. Little is known about the controls
on N2O:N2 ratios for both of these processes.

−
3

In the ﬁrst step of nitriﬁer denitriﬁcation and hydroxy-
lamine oxidation, ammonia (NH3) is oxidized to hydroxylamine
(NH2OH), catalyzed by the enzyme ammonia monooxygenase
(AMO). Although the crystal structure of AMO has not been
solved, AMO shares high similarity to pMMO of aerobic methan-
otrophs (Holmes et al., 1995; Arp and Stein, 2003 and references
therein), suggesting that it also contains three Cu atoms per

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 12

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

monomer and possibly additional Zn and Fe (see the Section
“Metalloenzymes in Aerobic Methanotrophy”; Figure 3). A Cu
requirement for AMO is supported by experiments showing that
Cu addition activates AMO (Ensign et al., 1993).

The next step of nitriﬁer denitriﬁcation, NH2OH oxidation
−
to NO
2 , is catalyzed by the enzyme hydroxylamine oxidoreduc-
tase (HAO), which contains 24 Fe atoms in c-type cytochromes
(Igarashi et al., 1997; Figure 3). Orthologs of
the copper-
containing NirK enzymes are typically used for the reduction
−
of NO
2 to NO (Casciotti and Ward, 2001; Cantera and Stein,
2007a,b). NO, a toxic intermediate, is then reduced to N2O
by an unknown enzyme, likely either NorBC (Beaumont et al.,
2004; Casciotti and Ward, 2005), the tetraheme cytochrome c554
(Upadhyay et al., 2006), or NorS (Stein, 2011). In hydroxy-
lamine oxidation, NH2OH is oxidized by HAO to NO instead
−
2 (Figure 3). Reduction of NO to N2O is then catalyzed
of NO
by cytochrome c554 or NorS as with nitriﬁer denitriﬁcation (Stein,
2011).

Although N2 has been shown to be produced by the nitri-
ﬁer denitriﬁcation pathway (Poth, 1986), nos genes have not
been found in the genomes of bacterial nitriﬁers (Stein et al.,
2007) so it
is unclear how N2 is formed during nitriﬁer
denitriﬁcation.

Archaeal ammonia oxidation
Archaeal nitriﬁcation was ﬁrst reported in 2005 (Könneke et al.,
2005) and archaeal enrichment cultures have recently been shown
to produce N2O (Jung et al., 2011; Santoro et al., 2011). For a review
of AOA, see Hatzenpichler (in preparation). The genomes of AOA
Cenarchaeum symbiosum and Nitrosopumilus maritimus suggest
that AOA have higher Cu requirements than AOB (Hallam et al.,
2006; Walker et al., 2010). C. symbiosum and N. maritimus contain
amo genes with conserved motifs that bind the metal centers in
M. capsulatus Bath, suggesting that archaeal AMO also contains
abundant Cu (Hallam et al., 2006; Walker et al., 2010). Both AOA
genomes lack genes to encode a bacterial-type HAO complex. AOA
may use a Cu-based electron-transfer system instead of the Fe-
based system used by AOB, as implied by the abundance of genes
encoding copper-containing proteins, including numerous multi-
copper oxidases and small Cu-binding plastocyanin-like domains
(Hallam et al., 2006; Walker et al., 2010). The N. maritimus genome
contains nirK genes (Walker et al., 2010) and AOA nirK homologs
have been found to be widespread in environmental samples (Bar-
tossek et al., 2010). Walker et al. (2010) propose a model for the
AOA nitriﬁcation pathway whereby the products of AMO (either
NH2OH, or alternatively the highly reactive intermediate nitroxyl,
HNO) are oxidized to nitrous acid (HNO2) by a Cu-containing
protein, either a Cu-HAO or a multi-copper oxidase acting as a
nitroxyl oxidoreductase (NXOR; Figure 3). Following these reac-
−
tions, NO
2 is reduced to NO by NirK, with plastocyanin acting as
an electron donor. Future studies are needed to test whether pure
cultures of AOA can produce N2O or whether an N intermediate
such as NO is produced by AOA and reduced to N2O by bacterial
partners. If AOA can indeed produce N2O as supported by iso-
topic studies (Santoro et al., 2011), future biochemical studies are
required to determine what pathway is used, and whether they can
consume it.

PHYSIOLOGICAL STUDIES
As reviewed in the Section “Metalloenzymes Involved in the Pro-
duction and Consumption of Nitrous Oxide,” the metal content of
enzymes involved in N2O production and consumption is com-
posed primarily of Fe and Cu (Figure 3). The inﬂuence of Cu on
N2O processing by denitrifying bacteria has been the subject of
a number of pure culture and environmental investigations. The
inﬂuence of Fe availability on growth of AOB and denitriﬁers is
less studied, and very little is known about the importance of Fe
for N2O processing in these microbes. Research is also lacking on
the inﬂuence of Fe and Cu availability on N2O processing during
nitriﬁer denitriﬁcation and in AOA enrichment cultures. These
pathways are of particular interest due to the likelihood of high
Cu requirements for their ﬁrst step (AMO), whereas N2O can be
produced (but not consumed) without Cu by denitriﬁers.

Pure cultures
The importance of Cu for the consumption of N2O by denitrify-
ing bacteria has been clearly demonstrated by laboratory studies
(Iwasaki and Terai, 1982; Matsubara et al., 1982; Granger and
Ward, 2003; Twining et al., 2007). These studies showed that
N2O accumulates when denitrifying bacteria are grown without
added Cu, whereas complete denitriﬁcation to N2 occurs when
Cu is present above a certain threshold. In early studies with
Pseudomonas perfectomarinus and two Alcaligenes strains, back-
ground Cu contamination in growth medium was not quantiﬁed
and high levels of Cu were added in the replete condition (1–6 μM;
Iwasaki and Terai, 1982; Matsubara et al., 1982). In follow-up
studies with Paracoccus denitriﬁcans and Pseudomonas denitriﬁ-
cans, trace metal-clean growth protocols were utilized and total
dissolved Cu background contamination was measured to be 0.3–
0.5 nM (Granger and Ward, 2003; Twining et al., 2007). At less
than 1 nM total dissolved Cu, N2O accumulated; above 1 nM, it
was consumed (Granger and Ward, 2003; Twining et al., 2007).
Enzyme activity of nitrous oxide reductase (Nos) was below the
detection limit in denitriﬁers grown at 0.3 nM total dissolved Cu,
suggesting that the reason for build-up of N2O was Cu limitation
of Nos (Granger and Ward, 2003). Supplementation of 10 nM Cu
to Cu-limited cultures caused increased growth rate and complete
consumption of N2O (Granger and Ward, 2003). These labora-
tory studies led to the hypothesis that low Cu concentrations in
natural aquatic ecosystems may promote N2O accumulation (see
the Section “Environmental Studies”).

Metal requirements for AOB have not been studied as exten-
sively as those for denitriﬁers, but preliminary studies support a
high importance of Fe for nitriﬁcation. An early study of nitrify-
ing bacterial cultures showed that addition of Fe alone produced
−
a 56% increase in NO
2 production whereas addition of Cu alone
produced a 17% increase (Lees and Meiklejohn, 1948). The few
subsequent studies of metal requirements for AOB have focused
on Fe requirements (Meiklejohn, 1953; Wei et al., 2006). Both
AMO and HAO activity were reduced in Nitrosomonas europaea
cultures grown at 0.2 vs. 10 μM Fe (Wei et al., 2006). Lowered
HAO activity is expected due to the high heme content of HAO in
AOB cells (Whittaker et al., 2000). AMO activity dependence on
Fe suggests that Fe is a component of AMO or that Fe is present
in the electron donor to AMO. The Fe content of AMO is difﬁcult

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 13

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

to assess due to the lack of in vitro protein preparations. It is also
possible that AOB scavenge/co-opt Fe-loaded siderophores pro-
duced by other bacteria; if supplied with exogenous siderophores,
N. europaea expresses genes for siderophore transporters and fer-
ric transporters when Fe is limiting (Wei et al., 2006; Stein et al.,
2007). Lastly, the fact that AOB cells are bright red in color further
supports the major requirement for Fe in their metabolism.

Environmental studies
Several recent ﬁeld studies have suggested that Cu limitation
prohibits N2O consumption. Cu addition stimulated N2O con-
sumption in Linsley Pond, a temperate lake ecosystem with 3 nM
Cu (Twining et al., 2007). Similarly, the ratio of N2O/N2 decreased
as water-extractable Cu concentration increased in freshwater sed-
iments (Jacinthe and Tedesco, 2009). While scarce Cu can limit
−1 sediment) in pol-
denitriﬁcation, excess Cu (above 100 mg kg
luted ecosystems can inhibit the pathway (Sakadevan et al., 1999;
Magalhães et al., 2011). On the other hand, denitriﬁcation in three
major marine oxygen minimum zones does not appear to be Cu-
limited: addition of Cu had minimal effect on denitriﬁcation rates
in seawater incubations with background Cu concentrations of
1–3 nM (Ward et al., 2008). Therefore, it is likely that marine den-
itriﬁers have evolved mechanisms to satisfy their Cu requirements
by taking up Cu that is strongly bound to natural ligands, which
can bind 99% of the total Cu in temperate lakes (Twining et al.,
2007) and in the ocean (Moffett and Dupont, 2007).

Metal bioavailability varies considerably between freshwater
and seawater oxic environments. In general, dissolved Fe and Cu
are present at much lower concentrations in seawater than in lakes
and soil pore waters (Table 3). Therefore, N2O production by
marine ammonia oxidizers may be Fe or Cu-limited and/or they
may have evolved strategies to scavenge these metals.

SUMMARY
In contrast to CH4, N2O can be produced by diverse microorgan-
isms via numerous pathways containing varying amounts of Fe
and Cu, small amounts of Mo and possibly Zn. To date, only one
enzyme has been found to convert N2O to N2: the Cu-containing
Nos enzyme found in denitriﬁers. The absence of nos genes from
the genomes of AOA and AOB (Hallam et al., 2006; Stein et al.,
2007; Walker et al., 2010) suggests either that N2O is their ﬁnal
gaseous product or that they have alternative nitrous oxide reduc-
tases. The ability of some AOB to produce N2 (Poth, 1986) lends
support to the presence of alternative reductases. A search for
such alternative enzymes deserves attention, as ammonia oxidiz-
ers are important players in the global N2O budget. Research on
the biochemistry of N2O production in AOA enrichment cultures
is essential to understand the exciting ﬁndings of recent studies
suggesting that large amounts of Cu may be involved in AOA
metabolism.

COMPARISONS, CONCLUSION, AND FUTURE RESEARCH
Trace metals present in microbial enzymes involved in CH4 and
N2O cycling include Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Mo, and W. While Fe-
containing enzymes are present in almost all pathways we reviewed
(with the possible exception of archaeal ammonia oxidation),
other metals differ by metabolism. For instance, Ni, Co, and W are

present in methanogenic enzymes, but not in enzymes involved
in aerobic methanotrophy and N2O cycling. In contrast, Cu is
not used in methanogenesis, but is very important for aerobic
methanotrophy and N2O cycling. Small amounts of Mo and Zn
are common in most pathways. If ongoing biochemical studies
conﬁrm that anaerobic methanotrophs use the reverse methano-
genesis pathway to oxidize methane, they likely require the same
suite of metals as methanogens: Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, and Mo/W.

How do metal requirements for CH4 and N2O cycling compare
with other ecologically important microbes? The metal stoichiom-
etry of 15 marine eukaryotic phytoplankton showed an average
trace metal stoichiometry of Fe1Mn0.53Zn0.08Cu0.05Co0.03Mo0.005
(Ho et al., 2003; Barton et al., 2007). High Mn requirements
are likely reﬂective of the oxygen-generating Mn-containing pho-
tosystem II complex. The elemental stoichiometry of CH4 and
N2O processing microbes is not nearly as well-constrained as
that of eukaryotic phytoplankton, but preliminary studies of
methanogens suggest that, after Fe, Ni is an extremely impor-
tant metal for methanogenesis and anaerobic methanotrophy.
Very little is known about the metal stoichiometry of aerobic
and intra-aerobic methanotrophs and N2O-producing microbes,
although it is predicted that their Cu content is much higher than
both methanogens and phytoplankton, especially in the case of
archaeal ammonia oxidizers. Metallomics – the comprehensive
analysis of the entirety of metal-containing species within a cell
(Szpunar, 2005) – may reveal still more unexpected metals or nat-
ural products excreted by microbes to alter metal bioavailability.
For example, a recent metallomics study of the hyperthermophilic
sulfur-reducing Archeon, Pyrococcus furiosus, revealed 158 unas-
signed metalloprotein peaks, 75 of which contained metals that
the organism was not known to assimilate, such as Pb and U
(Cvetkovic et al., 2010). Furthermore, it is likely that the metal
requirements for each of the pathways reviewed here are ampliﬁed
by additional metalloenzymes involved in complex metal cofactor
biosynthesis, such is the case for hydrogenases and nitrogenases
(Rubio and Ludden, 2008; Shepard et al., 2011).

More studies are needed to address gaps in our knowledge of
microbial trace metal physiology. Ideally these studies will make
use of well-deﬁned media and trace metal-clean conditions, such
as Teﬂon-lined glass bottles for anaerobic studies. Understudied
topics include Zn requirements for methanogenesis, trace metal
content of ANME enzymes (other than the well-studied Mcr),
the inﬂuence of Cu on N2O production by archaeal enrichment
cultures, the biochemistry of Cu-enzymes in archaeal ammo-
nia oxidizers, and strategies for metal-binding ligand production
(i.e., methanobactin) in greenhouse gas cycling microbes. The
search for alternative N2O-consuming enzymes in ammonia oxi-
dizers deserves particular attention, as suggested by the ability of
some bacterial nitriﬁers lacking the Cu-containing nitrous oxide
reductase enzyme to convert N2O to N2.

In order to better connect the ﬁndings from biochemical and
physiological studies of pure cultures with the larger picture of
global greenhouse gas cycling and environmental metal bioavail-
ability, more in situ studies are necessary. Preliminary studies
suggest that rates of methanogenesis in peatlands may be con-
trolled by Fe, Ni, and Co availability, since addition of all three
metals stimulated methanogenesis in mineral-poor peats. It is

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 14

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

currently unknown whether one metal was the primary limit-
ing growth element or whether multiple metals were co-limiting
(Saito et al., 2008). If co-limitation was occurring, the addition of
all three elements would result in higher rates of methanogenesis
than any metal added solely. On the other hand, other systems and
pathways may be dominantly regulated by the bioavailability of
only one scarce metal; this seems to be the case for Co(balt) lim-
itation of methylotrophic methanogenesis in anaerobic digesters,
Cu limitation of N2O consumption by freshwater denitrifying bac-
teria and possibly Cu limitation of ammonia oxidizing archaea as
suggested by numerous genes encoding Cu-containing proteins in
AOA genomes.

Lastly, relationships between metal bioavailability and ﬂuxes of
greenhouse gases remain largely unexplored, particularly in anaer-
obic ecosystems. High sulﬁde environments likely pose particular
challenges for microbial metal acquisition due to abiotic sulﬁde
scavenging and precipitation of metal sulﬁdes. Of the bioessen-
tial metals involved in greenhouse gas cycling, Mo, Fe, and Cu
are most susceptible to sulﬁde scavenging, followed by Co, Ni,
and Zn (Morse and Luther, 1999). Microbial metal limitation
due to sulﬁde drawdown may have driven major evolutionary
episodes and geochemical transitions in Earth history (Anbar and

Knoll, 2002; Scott et al., 2008; Dupont et al., 2010). Several such
scenarios have been proposed for metal limitation of microbial
greenhouse gas cycling: a decline in seawater Ni due to cool-
ing of the Earth’s mantle in the late Archean may have limited
methanogenesis and contributed to the Great Oxidation Event
2.4 billion years ago (Konhauser et al., 2009) while low Cu due
to sulﬁde scavenging in the Proterozoic ocean could have led to
global warming through the build-up of N2O (Buick, 2007). The
question of how metal bioavailability inﬂuences greenhouse gas
cycling in ancient and modern ecosystems is just beginning to be
investigated.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge funding from the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA) Astrobiology Postdoctoral Fel-
lowship (to Jennifer B. Glass), the NASA Astrobiology Institute
(NNA04CC06A), and the U.S. Department of Energy’s Ofﬁce of
Biological and Environmental Research Early Career Award (to
Victoria J. Orphan). Thanks to Roland Hatzenpichler, Patricia
Tavormina, Shawn McGlynn, Anne Dekas, Joshua Steele, Hiroyuki
Imachi, Lisa Stein and Aubrey Zerkle for helpful comments on
drafts of this manuscript.

REFERENCES
Afting, C., Hochheimer, A., and Thauer,
R. (1998). Function of H2-forming
methylenetetrahydromethanopterin
dehydrogenase from Methanobac-
terium thermoautotrophicum in
coenzyme F420 reduction with H2.
Arch. Microbiol. 169, 206–210.

Alex, L. A., Reeve,

J. N., Orme-
Johnson, W. H., and Walsh, C. T.
(1990). Cloning, sequence deter-
mination, and expression of
the
genes encoding the subunits of
the nickel-containing 8-hydroxy-5-
deazaﬂavin reducing hydrogenase
from Methanobacterium thermoau-
totrophicum delta H. Biochemistry
29, 7237–7244.

Anbar, A. D., and Knoll, A. H. (2002).
Proterozoic ocean chemistry and
evolution: a bioinorganic bridge?
Science 297, 1137–1142.

Anderson, I., Ulrich, L. E., Lupa, B.,
Susanti, D., Porat, I., Hooper, S.
D., Lykidis, A., Sieprawska-Lupa,
M., Dharmarajan, L., Goltsman, E.,
Lapidus, A., Saunders, E., Han, C.,
Land, M., Lucas, S., Mukhopadhyay,
B., Whitman, W. B., Woese, C., Bris-
tow, J., and Kyrpides, N. (2009).
Genomic characterization of Metha-
nomicrobiales reveals three classes of
methanogens. PLoS ONE 4, e5797.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0005797

Antipov, A. N., Lyalikova, N. N., Khi-
jniak, T. V., and L’vov, N. P. (1998).
Molybdenum-free nitrate reductases
from vanadate-reducing bacteria.
FEBS Lett. 441, 257–260.

Antipov, A. N., Morozkina, E. V.,
I.,

Sorokin, D. Y., Golubeva, L.

Zvyagilskaya, R. A., and L’vov,
N. P. (2005). Characterization of
molybdenum-free nitrate reductase
from haloalkalophilic bacterium
Halomonas sp strain AGJ 1-3. Bio-
chemistry 70, 799–803.

Arp, D. J., and Stein, L. Y. (2003).
Metabolism of inorganic N com-
pounds by ammonia-oxidizing bac-
teria. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol.
38, 471–495.

Balasubramanian, R., Kenney, G. E., and
Rosenzweig,A. C. (2011). Dual path-
ways for copper uptake by methan-
otrophic bacteria. J. Biol. Chem. 286,
37313–37319.

Balasubramanian, R.,

and Rosen-
zweig, A. C. (2007). Structural and
mechanistic insights into methane
oxidation by particulate methane
monooxygenase. Acc. Chem. Res. 40,
573–580.

Balasubramanian, R.,

and Rosen-
zweig, A. C.
(2008). Copper
methanobactin: a molecule whose
time has come. Curr. Opin. Chem.
Biol. 12, 245–249.

Balasubramanian, R., Smith, S. M.,
Rawat, S., Yatsunyk, L. A., Stemm-
ler, T. L., and Rosenzweig, A. C.
(2010). Oxidation of methane by a
biological dicopper centre. Nature
465, 115–119.

Barton, L. L., Goulhen, F., Bruschi, M.,
Woodards, N. A., Plunkett, R. M.,
and Rietmeijer, F. J. M. (2007). The
bacterial metallome: composition
and stability with speciﬁc reference
to the anaerobic bacterium Desul-
fovibrio desulfuricans. Biometals 20,
291–302.

Bartossek, R., Nicol, G. W., Lanzen, A.,
Klenk, H. P., and Schleper, C. (2010).
Homologues of nitrite reductases in
ammonia-oxidizing archaea: diver-
sity and genomic context. Environ.
Microbiol. 12, 1075–1088.

Basiliko, N., and Yavitt, J. B. (2001).
Inﬂuence of Ni, Co, Fe, and Na
additions on methane production
in Sphagnum-dominated Northern
American peatlands. Biogeochem-
istry 52, 133–153.

Baudet, C., Sprott, G. D., and Patel, G.
B. (1988). Adsorption and uptake of
nickel in Methanothrix concilii. Arch.
Microbiol. 150, 338–342.

Beaumont, H.

and Van Spanning, R.

J. E., Van Schooten,
I., Westerhoff, H.
B., Lens, S.
V.,
J.
M. (2004). Nitrosomonas europaea
expresses a nitric oxide reductase
during nitriﬁcation. J. Bacteriol. 186,
4417–4421.

Bertero, M. G., Rothery, R. A., Palak, M.,
Hou, C., Lim, D., Blasco, F., Weiner,
J. H., and Strynadka, N. C. J. (2003).
Insights into the respiratory electron
transfer pathway from the structure
of nitrate reductase A. Nat. Struct.
Biol. 10, 681–687.

Boetius, A., Ravenschlag, K., Schu-
bert, C. J., Rickert, D., Widdel, F.,
Gieseke, A., Amann, R., Jørgensen,
B. B., Witte, U., and Pfannkuche, O.
(2000). A marine microbial consor-
tium apparently mediating anaero-
bic oxidation of methane. Nature
407, 623–626.

Bollinger, J. M. (2010). Biochemistry:
getting the metal right. Nature 465,
40–41.

Bragazza, L.

(2006). Heavy metals
in bog waters: an alternative way
to assess atmospheric precipitation
quality? Glob. Planet. Change 53,
290–298.

Brown, K., Tegoni, M., Prudencio, M.,
Pereira, A. S., Besson, S., Moura, J. J.,
Moura, I., and Cambillau, C. (2000).
A novel type of catalytic copper clus-
ter in nitrous oxide reductase. Nat.
Struct. Biol. 7, 191–195.

Bruland, K. W. (1980). Oceanographic
distributions of
cadmium, zinc,
nickel, and copper in the North
Paciﬁc. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 47,
176–198.

Buick, R. (2007). Did the Protero-
zoic Canﬁeld Ocean cause a laugh-
ing gas greenhouse? Geobiology 5,
97–100.

Callander, I., and Barford, J. (1983a).
Precipitation, chelation, and the
availability of metals as nutri-
ents
I.
Methodology. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 25,
1947–1957.

in anaerobic digestion.

Callander, I., and Barford, J. (1983b).
Precipitation, chelation, and the
availability of metals as nutri-
ents
II.
Applications. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 25,
1959–1972.

in anaerobic digestion.

(2011). Model of

Campbell, M. A., Nyerges, G.,
Kozlowski,
J. A., Poret-Peterson,
A. T., Stein, L. Y., and Klotz, M.
G.
the mol-
for hydroxylamine
ecular basis
oxidation
oxide
production
in methanotrophic
bacteria. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 322,
82–89.

nitrous

and

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 15

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

Cantera, J. J. L., and Stein, L. Y. (2007a).
Molecular diversity of nitrite reduc-
tase genes (nirK) in nitrifying bacte-
ria. Environ. Microbiol. 9, 765–776.

Cantera,

J.

J. L., and Stein, L. Y.
(2007b). Role of nitrite reductase in
the ammonia-oxidizing pathway of
Nitrosomonas europaea. Arch. Micro-
biol. 188, 349–354.

Casciotti, K. L., and Ward, B. B. (2001).
Dissimilatory
reductase
genes from autotrophic ammonia-
oxidizing bacteria. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 67, 2213–2221.

nitrite

Casciotti, K. L., and Ward, B. B. (2005).
Phylogenetic analysis of nitric oxide
reductase gene homologues from
aerobic ammonia oxidizing bacteria.
FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 52, 197–205.
Chien, Y. T., Auerbuch, V., Brabban,
A. D., and Zinder, S. H. (2000).
Analysis of genes encoding an alter-
native nitrogenase in the archaeon
Methanosarcina barkeri 227. J. Bac-
teriol. 182, 3247–3253.

Chistoserdova, L. (2011). Modularity
of methylotrophy, revisited. Environ.
Microbiol. 13, 2603–2622.

Chistoserdova, L., Vorholt, J. A., and
Lidstrom, M. E. (2005). A genomic
view of methane oxidation by aero-
bic bacteria and anaerobic archaea.
Genome Biol. 6, 208–213.

Choi, D. W., Corbin, J., Do, Y. S.,
Semrau, J. D., Antholine, W. E.,
Hargrove, M. S., Pohl, N. L., Boyd, E.
S., Geesey, G., Hartsel, S. C., Shafe,
P. H., McEllistrem, M. T., Kisting,
C. J., Campbell, D., Rao, V., de la
Mora, A. M., and Dispirito, A. A.
(2006). Spectral, kinetic, and ther-
modynamic properties of Cu(I) and
Cu(II) binding by methanobactin
trichospo-
from Methylosinus
rium OB3b.
45,
1442–1453.

Biochemistry

Choi, D.-W., Kunz, R. C., Boyd, E. S.,
Semrau, J. D., Antholine, W. E., Han,
J.-I., Zahn, J. A., Boyd, J. M., De La
Mora, A. M., and DiSpirito, A. A.
(2003). The membrane-associated
methane monooxygenase (pMMO)
and pMMO-NADH: quinone oxi-
doreductase complex from Methylo-
coccus capsulatus Bath. J. Bacteriol.
185, 5755–5764.

Collier, R. W. (1985). Molybdenum in
the northeast Paciﬁc Ocean. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 30, 1351–1354.

Conrad, R. (1996). Soil microorganisms
as controllers of atmospheric trace
gases (H2, CO, CH4, OCS, N2O, and
NO). Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 60,
609–640.

Cvetkovic,A., Menon,A. L., Thorgersen,
M. P., Scott, J. W., Poole Ii, F. L., Jen-
ney, F. E. Jr., Lancaster, W. A., Praiss-
man, J. L., Shanmukh, S., Vaccaro, B.

J., Trauger, S. A., Kalisiak, E., Apon,
J. V., Siuzdak, G., Yannone, S. M.,
Tainer, J. A., and Adams, M. W. W.
(2010). Microbial metalloproteomes
are largely uncharacterized. Nature
466, 779–782.

Daas, P. J. H., Hagen, W. R., Keltjens, J.
T., and Vogels, G. D. (1994). Char-
acterization and determination of
the redox properties of the 2[4Fe-
4S] ferredoxin from Methanosarcina
barkeri strain MS. FEBS Lett. 356,
342–344.

David, L. A., and Alm, E. J. (2010). Rapid
evolutionary innovation during an
Archaean genetic expansion. Nature
469, 93–96.

Dekas, A., Poretsky, R. S., and Orphan,
V. J. (2009). Deep-sea archaea ﬁx
and share nitrogen in methane-
consuming microbial consortia. Sci-
ence 326, 422–426.

Demirel, B., and Scherer, P. (2011).
Trace element requirements of agri-
cultural biogas digesters during bio-
logical conversion of renewable bio-
mass to methane. Biomass Bioenergy
35, 992–998.

Deppenmeier, U., Blaut, M., Schmidt,
B., and Gottschalk, G.
(1992).
Puriﬁcation and properties of a F420-
nonreactive,
membrane-bound
hydrogenase from Methanosarcina
strain Gö1. Arch. Microbiol. 157,
505–511.

Diekert, G., Konheiser, U., Piechulla, K.,
and Thauer, R. K. (1981). Nickel
requirement and factor F430 con-
tent of methanogenic bacteria. J.
Bacteriol. 148, 459–464.

Diekert, G., Weber, B., and Thauer, R.
K. (1980). Nickel dependence of
factor F430 content in Methanobac-
terium thermoautotrophicum. Arch.
Microbiol. 127, 273–277.

DiSpirito, A. A., Zahn, J. A., Gra-
ham, D. W., Kim, H. J., Larive, C.
K., Derrick, T. S., Cox, C. D., and
Taylor, A. (1998). Copper-binding
compounds from Methylosinus tri-
chosporium OB3b. J. Bacteriol. 180,
3606–3613.

Dupont, C. L., Butcher, A., Ruben, R. E.,
Bourne, P. E., and Caetano-Anollés,
G. (2010). History of biological
metal utilization inferred through
phylogenomic analysis of protein
structures. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 107, 10567–10572.

Dupont, C. L., Yang, S., Palenik, B.,
and Bourne, P. E. (2006). Modern
proteomes contain putative imprints
of ancient shifts in trace metal
geochemistry. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 103, 17822.

Emerson, S. R., and Huested, S. S.
(1991). Ocean anoxia and the con-
centrations of molybdenum and

vanadium in seawater. Mar. Chem.
34, 177–196.

Ensign, S. A., Hyman, M. R., and Arp,
D. J. (1993). In vitro activation
of ammonia monooxygenase from
Nitrosomonas europaea by copper. J.
Bacteriol. 175, 1971–1980.

Ermler, U., Grabarse, W., Shima, S.,
Goubeaud, M., and Thauer, R. K.
(1997). Crystal structure of methyl-
coenzyme M reductase:
the key
enzyme of biological methane for-
mation. Science 278, 1457–1462.

Ettwig, K. F., Butler, M. K., Le Paslier, D.,
Pelletier, E., Mangenot, S., Kuypers,
M. M. M., Schreiber, F., Dutilh, B. E.,
Zedelius, J., De Beer, D., Gloerich, J.,
Wessels, H. J., van Alen, T., Luesken,
F., Wu, M. L., van de Pas-Schoonen,
K. T., Op den Camp, H. J., Janssen-
Megens, E. M., Francoijs, K. J., Stun-
nenberg, H., Weissenbach, J., Jetten,
M. S., and Strous M. (2010). Nitrite-
driven anaerobic methane oxidation
by oxygenic bacteria. Nature 464,
543–548.

Fathepure, B. Z.

(1987). Factors
affecting the methanogenic activ-
ity of Methanothrix
soehngenii
VNBF. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 53,
2978–2982.
J. G.

(1999). Enzymology
carbon metabolism in
FEMS

pathways.

of one
methanogenic
Microbiol. Rev. 23, 13–38.

Ferry,

Ferry, J. G. (2010a). The chemical biol-
ogy of methanogenesis. Planet. Space
Sci. 58, 1775–1783.

Ferry, J. G. (2010b). How to make a liv-
ing by exhaling methane. Annu. Rev.
Microbiol. 64, 453–473.

Florencio, L., Field, J. A., and Lettinga,
G. (1994). Importance of cobalt
for individual trophic groups in an
anaerobic methanol-degrading con-
sortium. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
60, 227–234.

Florencio, L., Jenicek, P., Field, J. A.,
and Lettinga, G. (1993). Effect of
cobalt on the anaerobic degradation
of methanol. J. Ferment. Bioeng. 75,
368–374.

Fox, J. A., Livingston, D. J., Orme-
Johnson, W. H., and Walsh, C.
T. (1987). 8-Hydroxy-5-deazaﬂavin-
reducing hydrogenase from Metha-
nobacterium thermoautotrophicum:
1. Puriﬁcation and characterization.
Biochemistry 26, 4219–4227.

Fru, E. C. (2011). Copper biogeo-
chemistry: a cornerstone in aero-
bic methanotrophic bacterial ecol-
ogy and activity? Geomicrobiol. J. 28,
601–614.

Fülöp, V., Moir, J. W. B., Ferguson, S. J.,
and Hajdu, J. (1995). The anatomy
of a bifunctional enzyme: structural
basis for reduction of oxygen to

water and synthesis of nitric oxide by
cytochrome cd1. Cell 81, 369–377.

Funk, T., Gu, W., Friedrich, S., Wang,
H., Gencic, S., Grahame, D. A.,
and Cramer, S. P. (2004). Chem-
ically distinct Ni sites in the A-
cluster in subunit of
the acetyl-
CoA decarbonylase/synthase com-
plex from Methanosarcina ther-
mophila: Ni L-edge absorption and
X-ray magnetic circular dichroism
analyses. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126,
88–95.

Gardner, A. M., Gessner, C. R., and
Gardner, P. R. (2003). Regulation of
the nitric oxide reduction operon
(norRVW) in Escherichia coli. J. Biol.
Chem. 278, 10081–10086.

Gartner, P., Ecker, A., Fischer, R.,
Linder, D., Fuchs, G., and Thauer,
R. K.
(1993). Puriﬁcation and
properties of N5 methyltetrahy-
dromethanopterin:
coenzyme M
methyltransferase
from Metha-
nobacterium thermoautotrophicum.
Eur. J. Biochem. 213, 537–545.

Godden, J. W., Turley, S., Teller, D. C.,
Adman, E. T., Liu, M. Y., Payne,
W. J., and Legall, J. (1991). The 2.3
angstrom X-ray structure of nitrite
reductase from Achromobacter cyclo-
clastes. Science 253, 438–442.

Gong, W., Hao, B., Wei, Z., Fer-
guson, D. J., Tallant, T., Krzycki,
J. A., and Chan, M. K. (2008).
Structure of the 2 2 Ni-dependent
CO dehydrogenase component of
the Methanosarcina barkeri acetyl-
CoA decarbonylase/synthase com-
plex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
9558–9563.

Gonzalez-Gil, G., Kleerebezem, R., and
Lettinga, G. (1999). Effects of nickel
and cobalt on kinetics of methanol
conversion by methanogenic sludge
as assessed by on-line CH4 moni-
toring. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65,
1789–1793.

Granger, J., and Ward, B. B. (2003).
Accumulation of nitrogen oxides in
copper-limited cultures of denitrify-
ing bacteria. Limnol. Oceanogr. 48,
313–318.

Hagemeier, C. H., Kruer, M., Thauer,
R. K., Warkentin, E., and Ermler, U.
(2006). Insight into the mechanism
of biological methanol activation
based on the crystal structure of the
methanol-cobalamin methyltrans-
ferase complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 103, 18917–18922.

Hakemian, A. S., Kondapalli, K. C.,
Telser, J., Hoffman, B. M., Stemm-
ler, T. L., and Rosenzweig, A. C.
(2008). The metal centers of partic-
ulate methane monooxygenase from
Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b.
Biochemistry 47, 6793–6801.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 16

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

Hakemian, A. S., and Rosenzweig,
A. C. (2007). The biochemistry
of methane oxidation. Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 76, 223–241.

Hallam, S.

J., Girguis, P. R., Pre-
ston, C. M., Richardson, P. M.,
and Delong, E. F. (2003). Identiﬁca-
tion of methyl coenzyme M reduc-
tase A (mcrA) genes associated with
methane-oxidizing archaea. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 69, 5483–5491.

Hallam, S. J., Mincer, T. J., Schleper,
C., Preston, C. M., Roberts, K.,
Richardson, P. M., and DeLong, E. F.
(2006). Pathways of carbon assimi-
lation and ammonia oxidation sug-
gested by environmental genomic
analyses of marine Crenarchaeota.
PLoS Biol. 4, e95. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pbio.0040095

Hallam, S. J., Putman, N., Preston,
C. M., Detter, J. C., Rokhsar, D.,
Richardson, P. M., and DeLong, E.
F. (2004). Reverse methanogenesis:
testing the hypothesis with envi-
ronmental genomics. Science 305,
1457–1462.

Hamann, N., Mander, G. J., Shokes, J.
E., Scott, R. A., Bennati, M., and
Hedderich, R. (2007). A cysteine-
rich CCG domain contains a novel
[4Fe-4S] cluster binding motif as
deduced from studies with subunit
B of heterodisulﬁde reductase from
Methanothermobacter marburgensis.
Biochemistry 46, 12875–12885.

Hanson, R. S., and Hanson, T. E. (1996).
Methanotrophic bacteria. Microbiol.
Rev. 60, 439–471.

Haraldsson, C., and Westerlund, S.
(1988). Trace metals in the water
columns of
the Black Sea and
Framvaren Fjord. Mar. Chem. 23,
417–424.

Hedderich, R., Hamann, N.,

and
Bennati, M. (2005). Heterodisul-
ﬁde reductase from methanogenic
archaea: a new catalytic role for an
iron-sulfur cluster. Biol. Chem. 386,
961–970.

Heiden, S., Hedderich, R., Setzke, E., and
Thauer, R. K. (1994). Puriﬁcation of
a two subunit cytochrome b contain-
ing heterodisulﬁde reductase from
methanol grown Methanosarcina
barkeri. Eur.
221,
855–861.

J. Biochem.

Heimann, M. (2011). Atmospheric sci-
ence: enigma of the recent methane
budget. Nature 476, 157–158.

Heller, C., Hoppert, M., and Reitner, J.
(2008). Immunological localization
of coenzyme M reductase in anaer-
obic methane-oxidizing archaea of
ANME 1 and ANME 2 type. Geomi-
crobiol. J. 25, 149–156.

Hendriks, J., Oubrie, A., Castresana, J.,
Urbani, A., Gemeinhardt, S., and

Saraste, M. (2000). Nitric oxide
reductases in bacteria. Biochim. Bio-
phys. Acta 1459, 266–273.

Hinrichs, K.-U., Hayes, J. M., Sylva,
S. P., Brewer, P. G., and DeLong,
E. F. (1999). Methane-consuming
archaebacteria in marine sediments.
Nature 398, 802–805.

Ho, T. Y., Quigg, A., Finkel, Z. V., Mil-
ligan, A. J., Wyman, K., Falkowski,
P. G., and Morel, F. M. M. (2003).
The elemental composition of some
marine phytoplankton. J. Phycol. 39,
1145–1159.

Hoban, D., and van den Berg, L.
(1979). Effect of iron on conver-
sion of acetic acid to methane dur-
ing methanogenic fermentations. J.
Appl. Microbiol. 47, 153–159.

Holmes, A.

J., Costello, A., Lid-
strom, M. E., and Murrell,
J.
C. (1995). Evidence that partici-
pate methane monooxygenase and
ammonia monooxygenase may be
evolutionarily related. FEMS Micro-
biol. Lett. 132, 203–208.

Igarashi, N., Moriyama, H., Fujiwara, T.,
Fukumori,Y., and Tanaka, N. (1997).
The 2.8 A structure of hydroxy-
lamine oxidoreductase from a nitri-
fying chemoautotrophic bacterium,
Nitrosomonas europaea. Nat. Struc.
Biol. 4, 276–284.

IPCC. (2007). The Physical Science Basis:
Contribution of Working Group I to
the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

Iwasaki, H., and Terai, H. (1982). N2
and N2O produced during growth
of denitrifying bacteria in copper-
depleted and -supplemented media.
J. Gen. Appl. Microbiol. 28, 189–193.
Jacinthe, P. A., and Tedesco, L. P. (2009).
Impact of elevated copper on the
rate and gaseous products of deni-
triﬁcation in freshwater sediments.
J. Environ. Qual. 38, 1183–1192.

Jansen, S., Gonzalez-Gil, G., and van
Leeuwen, H. P. (2007). The impact of
Co and Ni speciation on methano-
genesis in sulﬁdic media – biouptake
versus metal dissolution. Enzyme
Microb. Technol. 40, 823–830.

Jansen, S., Steffen, F., Threels, W. F., and
van Leeuwen, H. P. (2005). Specia-
tion of Co (II) and Ni (II) in anaer-
obic bioreactors measured by com-
petitive ligand exchange-adsorptive
stripping voltammetry. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 39, 9493–9499.

Jarrell, K., and Sprott, G.

(1982).
Nickel
in Methanobac-
terium bryantii. J. Bacteriol. 151,
1195–1203.

transport

Johnson, K. S., Gordon, R. M., and
Coale, K. H. (1997). What controls

dissolved iron concentrations
in
the world ocean? Mar. Chem. 57,
137–161.

dehydrogenase

Jollie, D., and Lipscomb, J. D. (1991).
Formate
from
Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b.
Puriﬁcation
spectroscopic
characterization of the cofactors. J.
Biol. Chem. 266, 21853–21863.

and

Jones, J., and Stadtman, T. C. (1977).
Methanococcus vannielii: culture and
effects of selenium and tungsten on
growth. J. Bacteriol. 130, 1404–1406.
Jormakka, M., Richardson, D., Byrne,
B., and Iwata, S. (2004). Architecture
of NarGH reveals a structural clas-
siﬁcation of Mo-bisMGD enzymes.
Structure 12, 95–104.

Jung, M.-Y., Park, S.-J., Min, D., Kim,
J.-S., Rijpstra, W. I. C., Sinninghe
Damsté, J. S., Kim, G.-J., Mad-
sen, E. L., and Rhee, S.-K. (2011).
Enrichment and characterization of
an autotrophic ammonia-oxidizing
archaeon of mesophilic crenarchaeal
group I. 1a from an agricultural
soil. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77,
8635–8647.

Karlsen, O. A., Larsen, O., and Jensen,
H. B. (2011). The copper responding
surfaceome of Methylococccus cap-
sulatus Bath. FEMS Microbiol. Lett.
323, 97–104.

Kessler, P. S., Mclarnan, J., and Leigh,
J. A. (1997). Nitrogenase phylogeny
and the molybdenum dependence
of nitrogen ﬁxation in Methanococ-
cus maripaludis. J. Bacteriol. 179,
541–543.

Kida, K., Shigematsu, T., Kijima, J.,
Numaguchi, M., Mochinaga, Y.,
Abe, N., and Morimura, S. (2001).
Inﬂuence of Ni2+
on
methanogenic
and the
amounts of coenzymes involved in
methanogenesis. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 91,
590–595.

and Co2+

activity

Kim, H. J., Graham, D. W., DiSpir-
ito, A. A., Alterman, M. A.,
Galeva, N., Larive, C. K., Asun-
skis, D., and Sherwood, P. M.
A.
a
copper-acquisition compound from
methane-oxidizing bacteria. Science
305, 1612–1615.

(2004). Methanobactin,

Kinniburgh, D. G., and Miles, D. L.
(1983). Extraction and chemical
analysis of interstitial water from
soils and rocks. Environ. Sci. Technol.
17, 362–368.

Knapp, C. W., Fowle, D. A., Kulczy-
cki, E., Roberts, J. A., and Graham,
D. W. (2007). Methane monooxy-
genase gene expression mediated
by methanobactin in the pres-
ence of mineral copper sources.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104,
12040–12045.

Knittel, K., and Boetius, A. (2009).
Anaerobic oxidation of methane:
progress with an unknown process.
Annu. Rev. Microbiol.63, 311–334.

Kolk, L. A.

Knowles, R. (1982). Denitriﬁcation.
Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 46, 43–70.
(1938). A comparison
iron organ-
of
isms, Clonothrix fusca Roze and
Crenothrix polyspora Cohn. Am. J.
Bot. 25, 11–17.

the ﬁlamentous

Konhauser, K. O., Pecoits, E., Lalonde, S.
V., Papineau, D., Nisbet, E. G., Bar-
ley, M. E., Arndt, N. T., Zahnle, K.,
and Kamber, B. S. (2009). Oceanic
nickel depletion and a methanogen
famine before the Great Oxidation
Event. Nature 458, 750–753.

Könneke, M., Bernhard, A. E., De La
Torre, J. R., Walker, C. B., Waterbury,
J. B., and Stahl, D. A. (2005). Iso-
lation of an autotrophic ammonia-
oxidizing marine archaeon. Nature
437, 543–546.

Kremling, K. (1983). The behavior of
Zn, Cd, Cu, Ni, Co, Fe, and Mn in
anoxic Baltic waters. Mar. Chem. 13,
87–108.

Krüger, M., Meyerdierks, A., Glöckner,
F. O., Amann, R., Widdel, F., Kube,
M., Reinhardt, R., Kahnt, R., Böcher,
R., Thauer, R. K., and Shima, S.
(2003). A conspicuous nickel pro-
tein in microbial mats that oxidize
methane anaerobically. Nature 426,
878–881.

Krzycki,

J.

J., and Zeikus,

(1980).
Quantiﬁcation of
in
methanogenic bacteria. Curr. Micro-
biol. 3, 243–245.

corrinoids

Kulczycki, E., Fowle, D. A., Kenward,
P. A., Leslie, K., Graham, D. W.,
and Roberts, J. A. (2011). Stim-
ulation of methanotroph activity
by Cu-substituted borosilicate glass.
Geomicrobiol. J. 28, 1–10.

Kulczycki, E., Fowle, D. A., Knapp, C.,
Graham, D. W., and Roberts, J. A.
(2007). Methanobactin-promoted
dissolution of Cu-substituted boro-
silicate glass. Geobiology 5, 251–263.
Künkel, A., Vaupel, M., Heim, S.,
Thauer, R. K., and Hedderich,
R. (1997). Heterodisulﬁde reduc-
tase from methanol grown cells
of Methanosarcina barkeri is not a
ﬂavoenzyme. Eur. J. Biochem. 244,
226–234.

Laukel, M., Chistoserdova, L., Lidstrom,
M. E., and Vorholt, J. A. (2003). The
tungsten-containing formate dehy-
drogenase from Methylobacterium
extorquens AM1: puriﬁcation and
properties. Eur.
J. Biochem. 270,
325–333.

Lees, H., and Meiklejohn, J. (1948).
Trace elements and nitriﬁcation.
Nature 161, 398–399.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 17

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

Li, Q., Li, L., Rejtar, T., Lessner, D.
J., Karger, B. L., and Ferry, J. G.
(2006). Electron transport in the
pathway of acetate conversion to
methane in the marine archaeon
Methanosarcina acetivorans. J. Bac-
teriol. 188, 702–710.

Lieberman, R. L., and Rosenzweig,
A. C. (2005). Crystal structure of
a membrane-bound metalloenzyme
that catalyses the biological oxi-
dation of methane. Nature 434,
177–182.

Lin, D., Kakizono, T., Nishio, N.,
and Nagai, S. (1990). Enhanced
cytochrome formation and stimu-
lated methanogenesis rate by the
increased ferrous
concentrations
in Methanosarcina barkeri culture.
FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 68, 89–92.

Lin, D. G., Nishio, N., Mazumder, T.
K., and Nagai, S. (1989). Inﬂu-
ence of Co2+
and Fe2+
on the production of tetrapyrroles
by Methanosarcina barkeri. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 30, 196–200.

, Ni2+

Lipscomb, J. D. (1994). Biochemistry
of the soluble methane monooxy-
genase. Annu. Rev. Microbiol.48,
371–399.

Lobo, A. L.,

and Zinder, S. H.
(1988). Diazotrophy and nitroge-
nase activity in the archaebacterium
Methanosarcina barkeri 227. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 54, 1656–1661.

Macauley, S. R., Zimmerman, S. A.,
Apolinario, E. E., Evilia, C., Hou,
Y.-M., Ferry, J. G., and Sowers, K.
R. (2009). The archetype gamma-
class carbonic anhydrase (Cam) con-
tains iron when synthesized in vivo.
Biochemistry 48, 817–819.

Magalhães, C. M., Machado, A., Matos,
P., and Bordalo, A. A. (2011). Impact
of copper on the diversity, abun-
dance and transcription of nitrite
and nitrous oxide reductase genes in
an urban European estuary. FEMS
Microbiol. Ecol. 77, 274–284.

Martens, C. S., and Berner, R. A. (1977).
Interstitial water chemistry of anoxic
Long Island Sound sediments. 1.
Dissolved gases. Limnol. Oceanogr.
22, 10–25.

Martin, J. H., and Fitzwater, S. E. (1988).
Iron deﬁciency limits phytoplank-
ton growth in the north-east Paciﬁc
subarctic. Nature 331, 341–343.

Martinho, M., Choi, D. W., DiSpirito,
A. A., Antholine, W. E., Semrau, J.
D., and Münck, E. (2007). Möss-
bauer studies of
the membrane-
associated methane monooxygenase
from Methylococcus capsulatus Bath:
evidence for a diiron center. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 129, 15783–15785.

Matsubara, T., Frunzke, K., and Zumft,
W. (1982). Modulation by copper of

the products of nitrite respiration
in Pseudomonas perfectomarinus. J.
Bacteriol. 149, 816–823.

Mayr, S., Latkoczy, C., Krüger, M., Gün-
ther, D., Shima, S., Thauer, R. K.,
Widdel, F., and Jaun, B. (2008).
Structure of an F430 variant from
archaea associated with anaerobic
oxidation of methane. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 130, 10758–10767.

Meiklejohn, J. (1953). Iron and the nitri-
fying bacteria. J. Gen. Microbiol. 8,
58–65.

Merkx, M., Kopp, D. A., Sazinsky, M. H.,
Blazyk, J. L., Müller, J., and Lippard,
S. J. (2001). Dioxygen activation and
methane hydroxylation by soluble
methane monooxygenase: a tale of
two irons and three proteins. Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 40, 2782–2807.
Meyerdiercks, A., Kube, M., Lombardot,
T., Knittel, K., Bauer, M., Glöckner,
F. O., Reinhardt, R., and Amann, R.
(2005). Insights into the genomes
of archaea mediating the anaero-
bic oxidation of methane. Environ.
Microbiol. 7, 1937–1951.

Moffett, J. W., and Dupont, C. (2007).
Cu complexation by organic ligands
in the sub-arctic NW Paciﬁc and
Bering Sea. Deep Sea Res. Part I
Oceanogr. Res. Pap. 54, 586–595.

Montzka, S., Dlugokencky, E., and But-
ler, J. (2011). Non-CO2 greenhouse
gases and climate change. Nature
476, 43–50.

Morse, J. W., and Luther, G. W. (1999).
Chemical inﬂuences on trace metal-
sulﬁde interactions in anoxic sed-
iments. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta
63, 3373–3378.

Morton, J. D., Hayes, K. F., and Sem-
rau, J. D. (2000). Bioavailability of
chelated and soil-adsorbed copper to
Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 34, 4917–4922.
Murray, W. D., and van den Berg,
L. (1981). Effects of nickel, cobalt,
and molybdenum on performance
of methanogenic ﬁxed-ﬁlm reac-
tors. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 42,
502–505.

Murrell, J. C., McDonald, I. R., and
Gilbert, B. (2000). Regulation of
expression of methane monooxyge-
nases by copper ions. Trends Micro-
biol. 8, 221–225.

Nielsen, A. K., Gerdes, K., and Mur-
rell, J. C. (1997). Copper-dependent
reciprocal transcriptional regulation
of methane monooxygenase genes
in Methylococcus
and
Methylosinus
trichosporium. Mol.
Microbiol. 25, 399–409.

capsulatus

Nojiri, M., Xie, Y., Inoue, T., Mat-
sumura, H., Kataoka, K., Deligeer,
Yamaguchi, K., Kai, Y., and Suzuki,
S. (2007). Structure and function

of a hexameric copper-containing
nitrite reductase. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 104, 4315–4320.

Op den Camp, H. J. M., Islam, T.,
Stott, M. B., Harhangi, H. R., Hynes,
A., Schouten, S., Jetten, M. S. M.,
Birkeland, N.-K., Pol, A., and Dun-
ﬁeld, P. F. (2009). Environmental,
genomic and taxonomic perspec-
tives on methanotrophic Verrucomi-
crobia. Environ. Microbiol. Rep. 1,
293–306.
Orphan, V.

J., House, C. H., Hin-
richs, K.-U., McKeegan, K. D., and
DeLong, E. F. (2001). Methane-
consuming archaea
revealed by
directly coupled isotopic and phy-
logenetic
293,
484–487.
Orphan, V.

J., House, C. H., Hin-
richs, K.-U., McKeegan, K. D., and
DeLong, E. F.
(2002). Multiple
archaeal groups mediate methane
oxidation in anoxic cold seep sedi-
ments. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
99, 7663–7668.

analysis.

Science

Patel, G., Khan, A., and Roth, L. (1978).
Optimum levels of sulphate and iron
for the cultivation of pure cultures
of methanogens in synthetic media.
J. Appl. Microbiol. 45, 347–356.

Pernthaler, A., Dekas, A. E., Brown, C.
T., Goffredi, S. K., Embaye, T., and
Orphan, V. J. (2008). Diverse syn-
trophic partnerships from deep-sea
methane vents revealed by direct
cell
capture and metagenomics.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105,
7052–7057.

Poole, R. K., and Hughes, M. N. (2000).
New functions for the ancient glo-
bin family: bacterial responses to
nitric oxide and nitrosative stress.
Mol. Microbiol. 36, 775–783.

Poth, M. (1986). Dinitrogen produc-
tion from nitrite by a Nitrosomonas
isolate. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 52,
957–959.

Poth, M., and Focht, D. D. (1985).
15N kinetic analysis of N2O pro-
duction by Nitrosomonas europaea:
an examination of nitriﬁer denitriﬁ-
cation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 49,
1134–1141.

Reeburgh, W. S.

(2007). Oceanic
methane biogeochemistry. Chem.
Rev. 107, 486–513.

Reeve, J. N., Beckler, G. S., Cram,
D. S., Hamilton, P. T., Brown, J.
W., Krzycki, J. A., Kolodziej, A. F.,
Alex, L., Orme-Johnson, W. H., and
Walsh, C. T. (1989). A hydrogenase-
linked gene in Methanobacterium
thermoautotrophicum strain delta H
encodes a polyferredoxin. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 86, 3031–3035.

Ren, T., Roy, R., and Knowles, R. (2000).
Production and consumption of

nitric oxide by
three methan-
otrophic bacteria. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 66, 3891–3897.

Ritchie, G. A., and Nicholas, D. J. (1972).
Identiﬁcation of
the sources of
nitrous oxide produced by oxidative
and reductive processes in Nitro-
somonas europaea. Biochem. J. 126,
1181–1191.

Rodionov, D. A., Hebbeln, P., Gelfand,
M. S., and Eitinger, T. (2006). Com-
parative and functional genomic
analysis of prokaryotic nickel and
cobalt uptake transporters: evidence
for a novel group of ATP-binding
cassette transporters.
J. Bacteriol.
188, 317–327.

Rogers, J. E., and Whitman, W. B.
(1991). Microbial Production and
Consumption of Greenhouse Gases:
Methane, Nitrogen Oxides,
and
Halomethanes. Washington: Ameri-
can Society for Microbiology.

Rubio, L. M., and Ludden, P. W.
(2008). Biosynthesis of
the iron-
molybdenum cofactor of nitroge-
nase. Annu. Rev. Microbiol.62,
93–111.

Saito, M. A., Goepfert, T. J., and Ritt,
J. T. (2008). Some thoughts on
the concept of colimitation: three
deﬁnitions and the importance of
bioavailability. Limnol. Oceanogr. 53,
276–290.

Sakadevan, K., Zheng, H., and Bavor,
H. J. (1999). Impact of heavy met-
als on denitriﬁcation in surface wet-
land sediments receiving wastewater.
Water Sci. Technol. 40, 349–355.

Santoro, A. E., Buchwald, C., McIl-
vin, M. R., and Casciotti, K. L.
(2011). Isotopic signature of N2O
produced by marine ammonia-
oxidizing
333,
1282–1285.

archaea.

Science

Schauer, N. L., and Ferry, J. G. (1986).
Composition of the coenzyme F420-
dependent formate dehydrogenase
from Methanobacterium formicicum.
J. Bacteriol. 165, 405–411.

Scheller, S., Goenrich, M., Boecher, R.,
Thauer, R. K., and Jaun, B. (2010).
The key nickel enzyme of methano-
genesis catalyses the anaerobic oxi-
dation of methane. Nature 465,
606–608.
Scherer, P.

(1988). Vanadium and
molybdenum requirement for the
ﬁxation of molecular nitrogen by
two Methanosarcina strains. Arch.
Microbiol. 151, 44–48.

Scherer, P., Lippert, H., and Wolff, G.
(1983). Composition of the major
elements and trace elements of 10
methanogenic bacteria determined
by inductively coupled plasma emis-
sion spectrometry. Biol. Trace Elem.
Res. 5, 149–163.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 18

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

Scherer, P., and Sahm, H. (1981). Effect
of trace elements and vitamins on
the
growth of Methanosarcina
barkeri.
1,
57–65.

Biotechnol.

Acta

Schlesinger, W. H. (2009). On the fate of
anthropogenic nitrogen. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 203–208.

Schönheit, P., Moll, J., and Thauer, R. K.
(1979). Nickel, cobalt, and molyb-
denum requirement
for growth
of Methanobacterium thermoau-
totrophicum. Arch. Microbiol. 123,
105–107.

Scott, C., Lyons, T. W., Bekker, A., Shen,
Y., Poulton, S. W., Chu, X., and
Anbar,A. D. (2008). Tracing the step-
wise oxygenation of the Proterozoic
ocean. Nature 452, 456–459.

Semrau,

J. D.
via
of

(2011). Bioreme-
methanotrophy:
diation
ﬁndings
overview
and
future
research. Front. Microbiol. 2:209.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2011.00209

suggestions

recent

for

Semrau, J. D., DiSpirito, A. A., and
Yoon, S. (2010). Methanotrophs and
copper. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 34,
496–531.

Shaw, L. J., Nicol, G. W., Smith, Z.,
Fear, J., Prosser, J. I., and Baggs,
E. M. (2006). Nitrosospira spp. can
produce nitrous oxide via a nitri-
ﬁer denitriﬁcation pathway. Environ.
Microbiol. 8, 214–222.

Shaw, T. J., Gieskes, J. M., and Jahnke, R.
A. (1990). Early diagenesis in differ-
ing depositional environments: the
response of transition metals in pore
water. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 54,
1233–1246.

Shepard, E. M., Boyd, E. S., Broder-
ick, J. B., and Peters, J. W. (2011).
Biosynthesis of complex iron-sulfur
enzymes. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 15,
319–327.

Shima, S., Pilak, O., Vogt, S., Schick,
M., Stagni, M. S., Meyer-Klaucke,W.,
Warkentin, E., Thauer, R. K., and
Ermler, U. (2008). The crystal struc-
ture of [Fe]-hydrogenase reveals the
geometry of the active site. Science
321, 572–575.

Simianu, M., Murakami, E., Brewer,
J. M., and Ragsdale, S. W. (1998).
Puriﬁcation and properties of the
iron-sulfur-containing
heme-and
from
heterodisulﬁde
Methanosarcina
thermophila.
Biochemistry 37, 10027–10039.

reductase

Sowers, K. R.,

and Ferry,

J. G.
(1985). Trace metal and vitamin
requirements of Methanococcoides
methylutens grown with trimethy-
lamine. Arch. Microbiol.
142,
148–151.

Speece, R. E., Parkin, G. F., and Gal-
lagher, D. (1983). Nickel stimulation

of anaerobic digestion. Water Res. 17,
677–683.

Stanley, S. H., Prior, S. D., Leak, D.,
(1983). Copper
and Dalton, H.
stress underlies
the
fundamen-
tal change in intracellular loca-
tion of methane mono-oxygenase
in methane-oxidizing organisms:
studies
in batch and continu-
ous cultures. Biotechnol. Lett. 5,
487–492.

Stein, L. Y. (2011). Surveying N2O-
in bacteria.

producing pathways
Meth. Enzymol. 486, 131–152.

Stein, L. Y., Arp, D. J., Berube, P. M.,
Chain, P. S., Hauser, L., Jetten, M.
S., Klotz, M. G., Larimer, F. W., Nor-
ton, J. M., Op den Camp, H. J. M.,
Shin, M., and Wei, X. (2007). Whole
genome analysis of the ammonia
oxidizing bacterium, Nitrosomonas
eutropha C91: implications for niche
adaptation. Environ. Microbiol. 9,
2993–3007.

Sutka, R. L., Ostrom, N. E., Ostrom,
P. H., Breznak, J. A., Gandhi, H.,
Pitt, A. J., and Li, F. (2006). Dis-
tinguishing nitrous oxide produc-
tion from nitriﬁcation and denitri-
ﬁcation on the basis of isotopomer
abundances. Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 72, 638–644.

Szpunar,

J.

speciation

(2005). Advances

in
analytical methodology for bio-
inorganic
analysis:
metallomics,
metalloproteomics
and heteroatom- tagged proteomics
and metabolomics. Analyst 130,
442–465.

for

Takashima, M., Shimada, K., and
Speece, R. E. (2011). Minimum
requirements
trace metals
(iron, nickel, cobalt, and zinc)
in thermophilic and mesophilic
methane fermentation from glu-
cose. Water Environ. Res.
83,
339–346.

Takashima, M., and Speece, R. E. (1990).
Mineral requirements for methane
fermentation. Crit. Rev. Environ.
Control 19, 465–479.

Taylor, G. T., and Pirt, S. J. (1977).
Nutrition and factors limiting the
growth of a methanogenic bacte-
rium (Methanobacterium thermoau-
totrophicum). Arch. Microbiol. 113,
17–22.

J.

Terlesky, K., and Ferry,

(1988).
Puriﬁcation and characterization of
a ferredoxin from acetate-grown
Methanosarcina thermophila. J. Biol.
Chem. 263, 4080–4082.

Tersteegen, A., and Hedderich, R.
(1999). Methanobacterium thermo-
autotrophicum encodes two mul-
tisubunit membrane-bound [NiFe]
hydrogenases. Eur. J. Biochem. 264,
930–943.

Thauer, R. K. (1998). Biochemistry of
methanogenesis: a tribute to Mar-
jory Stephenson. Microbiology 144,
2377–2406.

Thauer, R. K. (2011). Anaerobic oxi-
dation of methane with sulfate: on
the reversibility of
the reactions
that are catalyzed by enzymes also
involved in methanogenesis from
CO2. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 14,
292–299.

Thauer, R. K., Kaster, A.-K., Goenrich,
M., Schick, M., Hiromoto, T., and
(2010). Hydrogenases
Shima, S.
from
archaea,
nickel, a novel cofactor, and H2
storage. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 79,
507–536.

methanogenic

Thauer, R. K., Kaster, A.-K., See-
dorf, H., Buckel, W., and Hed-
derich, R. (2008). Methanogenic
archaea: ecologically relevant differ-
ences in energy conservation. Nat.
Rev. Microbiol. 6, 579–591.

Thauer, R. K., and Shima, S. (2008).
Methane
anaerobic
microorganisms. Ann. N. Y. Acad.
Sci. 1125, 158–170.

fuel

for

as

Trotsenko, Y. A., and Murrell, J. C.
(2008). Metabolic aspects of aerobic
obligate methanotrophy. Adv. Appl.
Microbiol. 63, 183–229.

Twining, B. S., Mylon, S. E., and Benoit,
G. (2007). Potential role of copper
availability in nitrous oxide accumu-
lation in a temperate lake. Limnol.
Oceanogr. 52, 1354–1366.

Upadhyay, A. K., Hooper, A. B.,
and Hendrich, M. P. (2006). NO
reductase activity of the tetraheme
cytochrome c554 of Nitrosomonas
europaea. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128,
4330–4337.

Vigliotta, G., Nutricati, E., Carata,
E., Tredici, S. M., De Stefano, M.,
Pontieri, P., Massardo, D. R., Prati,
M. V., De Bellis, L., and Alifano, P.
(2007). Clonothrix fusca Roze 1896,
a ﬁlamentous, sheathed, methan-
otrophic gamma-proteobacterium.
Appl.
73,
3556–3565.

Environ. Microbiol.

Vorholt, J. A. (2002). Cofactor-dep-
endent pathways of formaldehyde
methylotrophic
oxidation
bacteria. Arch. Microbiol.
178,
239–249.

in

Vorholt, J. A., Vaupel, M., and Thauer,
R. K.
(1996). A polyferredoxin
with eight [4Fe-4S] clusters as a
subunit of molybdenum formyl-
methanofuran dehydrogenase from
Methanosarcina
J.
Biochem. 236, 309–317.

barkeri. Eur.

Walker, C., De La Torre, J., Klotz,
M., Urakawa, H., Pinel, N., Arp,
D., Brochier-Armanet, C., Chain,
P., Chan, P., Gollabgir, A., Hemp,

J., Hügler, M., Karr, E. A., Kön-
neke, M., Shin, M., Lawton, T.
J., Lowe, T., Martens-Habbena, W.,
Sayavedra-Soto, L. A., Lang, D., Siev-
ert, S. M., Rosenzweig, A. C., Man-
ning, G., and Stahl, D. A. (2010).
Nitrosopumilus maritimus genome
reveals unique mechanisms for nitri-
ﬁcation and autotrophy in glob-
ally distributed marine crenarchaea.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
8818–8823.

Ward, B. B., Tuit, C. B., Jayakumar, A.,
Rich, J. J., Moffett, J., and Naqvi, S.
W. A. (2008). Organic carbon, and
not copper, controls denitriﬁcation
in oxygen minimum zones of the
ocean. Deep Sea Res. Part I Oceanogr.
Res. Pap. 55, 1672–1683.

Ward, N., Larsen, Ø., Sakwa, J., Bruseth,
L., Khouri, H., Durkin, A. S., Dim-
itrov, G., Jiang, L., Scanlan, D., Kang,
K. H., Lewis, M., Nelson, K. E.,
Methé, B., Wu, M., Heidelberg, J.
F., Paulsen, I. T., Fouts, D., Ravel,
J., Tettelin, H., Ren, Q., Read, T.,
DeBoy, R. T., Seshadri, R., Salzberg,
S. L., Jensen, H. B., Birkeland, N.
K., Nelson, W. C., Dodson, R. J.,
Grindhaug, S. H., Holt, I., Eid-
hammer, I., Jonasen, I., Vanaken,
S., Utterback, T., Feldblyum, T. V.,
Fraser, C. M., Lillehaug, J. R., and
Eisen, J. A. (2004). Genomic insights
into methanotrophy: the complete
genome sequence of Methylococcus
capsulatus (Bath). PLoS Biol. 2, e303.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0020303

Wei, X., Vajrala, N., Hauser, L.,
Sayavedra-Soto, L. A., and Arp, D.
J. (2006). Iron nutrition and phys-
iological responses to iron stress in
Nitrosomonas europaea. Arch. Micro-
biol. 186, 107–118.

Wetzel, R. G. (2001). Limnology: Lake
and River Ecosystems, 3rd Edn. San
Diego: Academic Press.

Whitman, W. B., Ankwanda, E., and
Wolfe, R. S. (1982). Nutrition and
carbon metabolism of Methanococ-
cus voltae. J. Bacteriol. 149, 852–863.
Whitman, W. B., Bowen, T. L.,
and Boone, D. R.
(2006). The
methanogenic bacteria. Prokaryotes
3, 165–207.

Whittaker, M., Bergmann, D., Arciero,
D., and Hooper, A. B. (2000). Elec-
tron transfer during the oxidation of
ammonia by the chemolithotrophic
bacterium Nitrosomonas europaea.
Biochim.
1459,
346–355.

Biophys. Acta

Wrage, N., Velthof, G. L., van Beu-
sichem, M. L., and Oenema, O.
(2001). Role of nitriﬁer denitriﬁ-
cation in the production of nit-
rous oxide. Soil Biol. Biochem. 33,
1723–1732.

www.frontiersin.org

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 19

Glass and Orphan

Trace metals in microbial enzymes

Wu, M. L., Ettwig, K. F.,

Jetten,
M. S., Strous, M., Keltjens,
J.
T., and van Niftrik, L.
(2011).
A new intra-aerobic metabolism
in the nitrite-dependent anaerobic
methane-oxidizing bacterium Can-
didatus ‘Methylomirabilis oxyfera.’
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 39, 243–248.

Yoshinari, T. (1985). Nitrite and nitrous
oxide production by Methylosinus
trichosporium. Can. J. Microbiol. 31,
139–144.

Zahn, J. A., Bergmann, D. J., Boyd,
J. M., Kunz, R. C., and DiSpirito,
A. A. (2001). Membrane-associated
quinoprotein formaldehyde dehy-
drogenase from Methylococcus cap-
sulatus Bath.
J. Bacteriol. 183,
6832–6840.

Zahn, J. A., and DiSpirito, A. A. (1996).
Membrane-associated
methane
monooxygenase from Methylococcus
capsulatus (Bath). J. Bacteriol. 178,
1018–1029.

Zandvoort, M. H., Osuna, M. B., Geerts,
R., Lettinga, G., and Lens, P. N.
(2002). Effect of nickel depriva-
tion on methanol degradation in
a methanogenic granular
sludge
bioreactor. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotech-
nol. 29, 268–274.

Zandvoort, M. H., van Hullebusch,
E. D., Gieteling,
J., and Lens,
P. N. L. (2006). Granular sludge
in full-scale anaerobic bioreactors:
trace element content and deﬁcien-
cies. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 39,
337–346.

Zellner, G., and Winter,

J. (1987).
Growth promoting effect of tung-
sten on methanogens and incorpo-
ration of tungsten-185 into cells.
FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 40, 81–87.

Zerkle, A. L., House, C. H., and Brantley,
S. L. (2005). Biogeochemical signa-
tures through time as inferred from
whole microbial genomes. Am. J. Sci.
305, 467–502.

Zhang, Y., Rodionov, D. A., Gelfand,
M. S., and Gladyshev, V. N. (2009).
Comparative genomic analyses of
nickel, cobalt and vitamin B12
utilization. BMC Genomics 10, 1–26.
doi:10.1186/1471-2164-10-78

Zirngibl, C., van Dongen, W., Schwörer,
B., Bünau, R., Richter, M., Klein,
A., and Thauer, R. K. (1992). H2-
forming methylenetetrahydromet-
hanopterin dehydrogenase, a novel
type of hydrogenase without iron-
sulfur clusters in methanogenic arc-
haea. Eur. J. Biochem. 208, 511–520.
Zumft, W. G. (2005). Nitric oxide
reductases of prokaryotes with
emphasis
respiratory,
heme–copper oxidase type. J. Inorg.
Biochem. 99, 194–215.

the

on

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any
commercial or ﬁnancial relationships

that could be construed as a potential
conﬂict of interest.

Received: 05 December 2011; paper
pending published: 21 December 2011;
accepted: 05 February 2012; published
online: 21 February 2012.
Citation: Glass JB and Orphan VJ (2012)
Trace metal requirements
for micro-
bial enzymes involved in the produc-
tion and consumption of methane and
nitrous oxide. Front. Microbio. 3:61. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00061
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Microbiological Chemistry, a specialty of
Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Glass and Orphan.
This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Non Commercial License,
which permits non-commercial use, dis-
tribution, and reproduction in other
forums, provided the original authors and
source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Microbiological Chemistry

February 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 61 | 20

