ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 17 April 2012
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2012.00132

Evidence for horizontal gene transfer of anaerobic carbon
monoxide dehydrogenases

Stephen M. Techtmann1,2, Alexander V. Lebedinsky 3, Albert S. Colman4,Tatyana G. Sokolova3,Tanja Woyke 5,
Lynne Goodwin5 and Frank T. Robb 1,2*

1 Institute of Marine and Environmental Technology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA
2 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA
3 Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
4 Department of the Geophysical Sciences, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
5 DOE Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA, USA

Edited by:
Martin G. Klotz, University of North
Carolina at Charlotte, USA
Reviewed by:
Annette Summers Engel, University
of Tennessee, USA
Viktoria Shcherbakova, Institute of
Biochemistry and Physiology of
Microorganisms, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Russia
*Correspondence:
Frank T. Robb, Institute of Marine and
Environmental Technology, 701 East
Pratt Street, Baltimore, MD 21202,
USA.
e-mail: frobb@som.umaryland.edu

Carbon monoxide (CO) is commonly known as a toxic gas, yet both cultivation studies and
emerging genome sequences of bacteria and archaea establish that CO is a widely utilized
microbial growth substrate. In this study, we determined the prevalence of anaerobic car-
bon monoxide dehydrogenases ([Ni,Fe]-CODHs) in currently available genomic sequence
databases. Currently, 185 out of 2887, or 6% of sequenced bacterial and archaeal genomes
possess at least one gene encoding [Ni,Fe]-CODH, the key enzyme for anaerobic CO utiliza-
tion. Many genomes encode multiple copies of [Ni,Fe]-CODH genes whose functions and
regulation are correlated with their associated gene clusters. The phylogenetic analysis of
this extended protein family revealed six distinct clades; many clades consisted of [Ni,Fe]-
CODHs that were encoded by microbes from disparate phylogenetic lineages, based on
16S rRNA sequences, and widely ranging physiology.To more clearly deﬁne if the branching
patterns observed in the [Ni,Fe]-CODH trees are due to functional conservation vs. evolu-
tionary lineage, the genomic context of the [Ni,Fe]-CODH gene clusters was examined, and
superimposed on the phylogenetic trees. On the whole, there was a correlation between
genomic contexts and the tree topology, but several functionally similar [Ni,Fe]-CODHs
were found in different clades. In addition, some distantly related organisms have sim-
ilar [Ni,Fe]-CODH genes. Thermosinus carboxydivorans was used to observe horizontal
gene transfer (HGT) of [Ni,Fe]-CODH gene clusters by applying Kullback–Leibler diver-
gence analysis methods. Divergent tetranucleotide frequency and codon usage showed
that the gene cluster of T. carboxydivorans that encodes a [Ni,Fe]-CODH and an energy-
converting hydrogenase is dissimilar to its whole genome but is similar to the genome
of the phylogenetically distant Firmicute, Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans. These
results imply that T carboxydivorans acquired this gene cluster via HGT from a relative of
C. hydrogenoformans.

Keywords: carbon monoxide, thermophiles, hydrogenogens, carboxydotrophs, Thermosinus carboxydivorans,
Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans, carbon monoxide dehydrogenase

INTRODUCTION
Carbon monoxide (CO) is most commonly known as a potent
human toxin. Alternatively, CO can provide an energy and car-
bon source in both anaerobic and aerobic microbes (Uffen, 1976;
King and Weber, 2007; Sokolova et al., 2009; Techtmann et al.,
2009). This ability to utilize CO relies upon enzymes known as
carbon monoxide dehydrogenases (CODHs, EC 1.2.99.2; Ferry,
1995; Seravalli et al., 1995, 1997; Ragsdale, 2008). CO oxidation is
performed by aerobic and anaerobic species using CODHs in dif-
ferent classes (Ragsdale, 2004; King and Weber, 2007). While the
overall reaction catalyzed by both aerobic and anaerobic species
), major differences
result from the different terminal electron acceptors of the path-
way. For aerobic species this reaction is catalyzed by the aero-
bic CODH (CoxSML) complex (Hugendieck and Meyer, 1992;

is the same (CO+ H2O→ CO2 + 2H

+ + 2e
−

Schubel et al., 1995). The Cox-type CODH contains a highly con-
served Mo based active site (Meyer and Schlegel, 1983; Meyer
and Rajagopalan, 1984; Meyer et al., 1993; Dobbek et al., 1999;
Gnida et al., 2003). In the case of the aerobic Cox-type CODH,
the electrons generated from oxidation of CO are transferred to
oxygen or, in some cases, nitrate as the ﬁnal electron acceptor
(King, 2003, 2006; King and Weber, 2007). Anaerobic CODHs are
distinct from Cox CODHs and have a Ni–Fe active site (Dobbek
et al., 2001, 2004; Svetlitchnyi et al., 2001, 2004). The anaerobic
CODH generates electrons from the oxidation of CO and trans-
fers them to a variety of acceptors, allowing CO to be the source of
reducing equivalents for various pathways including sulfate reduc-
tion, acetogenesis, methanogenesis, hydrogenogenesis, and metal
reduction, and it can also reduce CO2 to CO used further for
acetate synthesis by the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway (Gonzalez and

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 1

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

Robb, 2000; Svetlitchnyi et al., 2001, 2004; Ragsdale, 2004, 2008;
Wu et al., 2005; Sokolova et al., 2009).

The extreme thermophile Carboxydothermus hydrogenofor-
mans is a prototype anaerobic carboxydotroph with ﬁve distinct
anaerobic CODHs. C. hydrogenoformans can grow efﬁciently on
CO as sole carbon and energy source, conﬁrming that CO can
fuel divergent pathways (Wu et al., 2005). The presence of multi-
ple anaerobic CODHs encoded by a single organism requires that
these homologs arose either by duplication of an ancestral CODH
gene in the same lineage or else have been acquired by horizontal
gene transfer (HGT) between separate lineages.

In this study we identiﬁed [Ni,Fe]-CODH genes in the rapidly
expanding database of microbial genomes in order to under-
stand the mechanisms of evolution and dispersion of [Ni,Fe]-
CODHs. A comprehensive phylogenetic analysis was designed to
observe if CODHs are found in distinct clades. Examination of
the genomic context of each of the [Ni,Fe]-CODHs provided
insights into the functions of [Ni,Fe]-CODH gene clusters. We
then used these functional assignments to determine whether
differences in inferred function of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs explain the
pattern of phylogenetic divergence. In addition, in-depth statis-
tical analysis was performed on two gene clusters that catalyze
similar functions. By examining operons with the same function
we control for differences that have arisen based on functional
diversiﬁcation. The two gene clusters examined were from the pro-
totype thermophilic hydrogenogen – C. hydrogenoformans – and
a thermophilic metal reducing hydrogenogen – Thermosinus car-
boxydivorans. These organisms were chosen based on the following
criteria. (1) They are both thermophilic, thus controlling for selec-
tion due to adaptations to differing growth temperatures. (2) C.
hydrogenoformans and T. carboxydivorans exhibit different types of
cell wall structure and are members of widely divergent classes of
the Phylum Firmicutes: the Clostridia and Negativicutes, respec-
tively. (3) Despite their divergent lineages, their [Ni,Fe]-CODHs
and the linked energy-converting hydrogenases (ECH) are very
similar. The genomes of these bacteria were analyzed to deter-
mine whether the [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene cluster may have
been subject to recent HGT.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
DATABASE SEARCHING FOR [Ni,Fe]-CODH SEQUENCES
The US Department of Energy’s Integrated Microbial Genome
(IMG) database was searched using BLASTp to query the pro-
tein database (Altschul et al., 1990) for sequences correspond-
ing to [Ni,Fe]-CODHs. [Ni,Fe]-CODHs are subdivided into two
types: the type called CooS, which is more frequent in bacte-
ria, and the type called Cdh, occurring almost exclusively in
archaea. The ligands of the Ni,Fe-containing active site (Dobbek’s
C cluster; Dobbek et al., 2001) are conserved, with few excep-
tions, in CooS- and Cdh-type CODHs (Lindahl, 2002). However,
Cdh-type CODHs harbor two additional [Fe4S4] clusters (Gen-
cic et al., 2010), and, on the whole, there is rather low homology
between CooS- and Cdh-type CODHs. Therefore, the IMG data-
base was searched using a CooS-type sequence (CooS-I from C.
hydrogenoformans) and a Cdh-type sequence (Cdh-1 from the
archaeon Archeoglobus fulgidus). Overlapping results and low scor-
ing hits (Quality scores less than 200) were removed from the

ﬁnal [Ni,Fe]-CODH database (Table S3 in Supplemental Mater-
ial). Many of the low scoring hits were often genes annotated as
hydroxylamine reductases. This reﬁned database was then used for
further analysis.

PHYLOGENETIC TREE CONSTRUCTION
The [Ni,Fe]-CODH sequences were aligned using the MUSCLE
alignment program (Edgar, 2004a,b). This multiple sequence
alignment was used to construct phylogenetic trees using Max-
imum Likelihood (ML) and Bayesian inference (BI). ML trees
were constructed using the RAxML-HPC2 program (version
7.2.8; Stamatakis, 2006; Stamatakis et al., 2008) on the CIPRES
servers (Miller et al., 2010). ML trees were constructed using the
WAG+ Γ+ I model which was selected as the best-ﬁt model for
our database by the model selection tool implemented in Topali2
(Milne et al., 2009). Node support was assessed by 1,000 bootstrap
replicates with the same model. BI trees were constructed using
the BEAST program (Drummond and Rambaut, 2007) with the
WAG+ Γ+ I model as was selected as the best-ﬁt model by the
Topali2 package. Searches were run with four chains of 7,500,000
generations, for which the ﬁrst 750,000 were discarded as “burn-
in.” Trees were sampled every 1,000 generations. Stabilization of
chain parameters was determined using the program TRACER
(Rambaut and Aj, 2007). A maximum credibility clade tree was
annotated using the TreeAnnotator program (part of the BEAST
package). Trees were drawn using the FigTree program1. Subtrees
were drawn of each of the clades and are shown in (Figure A2 in
Appendix).

CONSTRUCTION OF FUNCTIONAL TREES
The analysis of the genomic contexts was done using the infor-
mation available at Gene Detail pages of the IMG database and,
where necessary, applying tblastn with appropriate queries at the
IMG website2. This information was used to identify whether the
[Ni,Fe]-CODH gene was located (1) within an ACS gene cluster,
(2) adjacent to an ECH gene cluster, (3) located at a distance less
than 3 kb away from a gene encoding CooF, a ferredoxin-like FeS
protein (Kerby et al., 1992) which carries out electron transfer
from CooS to a variety of electron acceptors, or (4) not clustered
with a cooF gene.

GENOMIC SEQUENCING OF THERMOSINUS CARBOXYDIVORANS
Thermosinus carboxydivorans was grown as previously described
(Sokolova et al., 2004). DNA was extracted using previously
described protocols (Wu et al., 2005). The genome of T. carboxy-
divorans Nor1 was sequenced at the Joint Genome Institute (JGI)
using a combination of 3, 8, and 40 kb (fosmid) DNA libraries.
In addition to Sanger sequencing, 454 pyrosequencing was done
to a depth of 20× coverage. All general aspects of library con-
struction and sequencing performed at the JGI can be found at
http://www.jgi.doe.gov/.
Draft assemblies were based on 28,812 total reads. All
three libraries provided 9.3× coverage of the genome. The

1http://tree.bio.edu.ac.uk/software/ﬁgrtee/
2http://img.jgi.doe.gov/

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 2

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

Phred/Phrap/Consed software package3 was used for sequence
assembly and quality assessment (Ewing and Green, 1998; Ewing
et al., 1998; Gordon et al., 1998). After the shotgun stage, reads were
assembled with parallel Phrap (High Performance Software, LLC).
Possible mis-assemblies were corrected with Dupﬁnisher (Han and
Chain, 2006) or transposon bombing of bridging clones (Epicen-
tre Biotechnologies, Madison, WI, USA). Gaps between contigs
were closed by editing in Consed, custom primer walk or PCR
ampliﬁcation (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN, USA).

A total of 5919 additional reactions were necessary to close
gaps and to elevate the quality of the ﬁnished sequence. The com-
pleted genome sequences of T. carboxydivorans Nor1 contains
36,788 reads, achieving an average of 10-fold sequence cover-
age per base with an error rate less than 1 in 100,000. The
draft genome sequence was deposited into GenBank (Accession
Numbers AAWL01000001–AAWL01000049).

HORIZONTAL GENE TRANSFER ANALYSES OF THE [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH
GENE CLUSTER
The nucleotide sequences for the [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene
cluster were extracted (including genes of all hydrogenase sub-
units) from the C. hydrogenoformans and the T. carboxydivo-
rans genomes. These sequences and the whole genome sequences
for both organisms were used for further analysis. Additionally,
the Escherichia coli K12 genome (GenBank Accession Number
U00096.2) was used as a control.
G+ C content was determined using GC-Proﬁle program (Gao
and Zhang, 2006). Tetranucleotide frequency was determined
using the TETRA program (Teeling et al., 2004). Codon usage
was determined from tables in the codon usage database4. Over-
all codon usage for the 10 genes of the [Ni,Fe]-CODH-ECH gene
cluster was determined by averaging the codon frequency of each
gene in the gene cluster.

The Kullback–Leibler (K–L) divergence metric (Kullback and
Leibler, 1951) was used to determine whether the differences in
G+ C content, tetranucleotide frequency, and codon usage were
signiﬁcant or not. These three metrics and the K–L divergence were
chosen based on a recent paper that suggests that codon usage and
tetranucleotide frequency combined with K–L divergence are the
most accurate metrics for determining HGT (Becq et al., 2010).
K–L divergence was determined using the following formula:

(cid:2)

g||G

(cid:3) = (cid:4)

DKL

i

g (i) ln

g (i)
G (i)

where g is the a parameter (e.g., frequency of a particular tetranu-
cleotide or frequency of usage of a particular codon) for the gene or
operon and G is that same parameter for the whole genome. This
calculation is repeated for all of the tetranucleotide frequencies
and the resulting values are added together to determine the K–L
divergence for tetranucleotide frequency. The same basic calcula-
tion is done for the frequency of usage for each codon to determine
the K–L divergence for codon usage between a gene or operon and
a genome.

3www.phrap.com
4www.kazusa.or.jp/codon/

www.frontiersin.org

RESULTS
MANY ORGANISMS ENCODE MORE THAN ONE [Ni,Fe]-CODH GENE
BLAST searches of the IMG database revealed that a surpris-
ing number of organisms encode [Ni,Fe]-CODH genes. Of the
2887 extant bacterial and archaeal genomes, 185 genomes (>6%)
encoded at least one [Ni,Fe]-CODH gene. Of these 185 genomes,
43% encoded more than one [Ni,Fe]-CODH (Listed in Table S2 in
Supplemental Material). The highest number of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs
detected in a single genome is ﬁve, found in the genome sequences
of C. hydrogenoformans, the Mono Lake isolate delta Proteobac-
terium MLMS-1, and the methanogenic archaeon Methanosarcina
acetivorans. Many of the species that encode multiple [Ni,Fe]-
CODHs have been described as having the ability to utilize CO for
both energy conservation and carbon acquisition, or energy con-
servation alone. Several of the gene clusters have genomic contexts
that indicate probable primary functions such as metal reduction,
oxidative stress responses, and cofactor reduction. In addition, the
important human pathogens Clostridium difﬁcile and Clostridium
botulinum both possess two copies of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs, suggest-
ing a role for [Ni,Fe]-CODHs in their physiology. The majority
of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs found in our analysis occur in strains whose
modes of CO utilization are not yet established, and therefore
more CO-related physiological traits are likely to be discovered in
the future.

PHYLOGENETIC ANALYSIS OF [Ni,Fe]-CODH SEQUENCES REVEALS
SEVERAL DISTINCT CLADES
A dataset of all of the [Ni,Fe]-CODHs from the IMG database
was used to reconstruct the phylogeny of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs. Both
ML and BI phylogenetic analyses were used. The phylogenetic
trees (Figures 1A,B) constructed from both methods were con-
gruent, therefore only the ML trees are shown in subsequent
ﬁgures. These trees both detail six distinct, strongly supported
clades (greater than 50% boostraps for ML trees, with most nodes
supported at >86%, and Bayesian posterior support of greater
than or equal to 0.99). While the branching pattern within clades
differs slightly between ML and BI, the composition of all six
clades in both ML and BI trees are identical (Table S3 in Sup-
plemental Material). The distribution of sequences within these
clades greatly expands our knowledge of the organisms that encode
[Ni,Fe]-CODHs as well as the potential mechanisms for their
evolution.

FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF [Ni,Fe]-CODH CLADES
Analysis of the genomic context was performed so that the [Ni,Fe]-
CODH sequences were binned according to four categories: (1)
within an acetyl-CoA synthase gene cluster, (2) adjacent to an
ECH gene cluster, (3) adjacent to a cooF electron transfer protein,
and (4) not adjacent to a cooF gene. These categories were plotted
on the ML phylogenetic tree displayed in a circular format which
was color coded according to the genomic context of the CODHs
(Figure 2).

SUMMARY OF [Ni,Fe]-CODH CLADES
Clade A is composed of sequences corresponding to the Cdh-type
CODHs, which occur almost exclusively in the Archaea and for the
most part cluster in the genomes as part of the ﬁve-subunit acetyl-
CoA decarbonylase/synthase (ACDS) complex (Terlesky et al.,

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 3

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

FIGURE 1 | Unrooted phylogenetic trees of the [Ni,Fe]-CODH amino
acid sequences encoded by IMG genomes were constructed from (A)
Maximum Likelihood and (B) Bayesian Inference algorithms. Bootstrap
values as a percentage of 1000 replicates or Bayesian posterior

probabilities are shown for the deep branches deﬁning the six
[Ni,Fe]-CODH clades. The compositions of all six clades in both ML and BI
trees are identical (see Figure A1 in Appendix and Table S3 in
Supplemental Material).

1986; Grahame, 1991; Kocsis et al., 1999; Gencic et al., 2010). Only
one bacterium, the deep subsurface pioneer species Candidatus
Desulforudis audaxviator, has a typical archaeal Cdh-type ACDS
complex (Chivian et al., 2008).

Clade B contains [Ni,Fe]-CODHs from an eclectic group of
Bacteria, the majority comprising either gut microbiota or putative
cellulose degraders. This clade includes species found in diverse
enteric environments ranging from cow rumen isolates such as
Ruminococcus spp. to constituents of the human gut microbiome
such as Campylobacter spp. However, this clade also includes
metal reducing Geobacter species, as well as two phototrophs,

Chlorobium phaeobacteroides and Chlorobaculum parvum. These
phototrophs and the second of two CooS sequences from the
homoacetogen Moorella thermoacetica form the most deeply
branching members of this clade. None of the sequences in Clade
B is linked to any other known CO-related genes.

Clade C is composed primarily of clostridial species. Most of
the strains within this clade are found as members of the human
microbiome. A large proportion of the [Ni,Fe]-CODH sequences
within this clade are one of two CooS homologs found in many
strains of the human pathogens C. botulinum and C. difﬁcile. A
large number of these sequences are found adjacent to cooF genes,

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 4

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

FIGURE 2 | Maximum likelihood phylogeny from Figure 1A
drawn as an unrooted circular tree. IMG Gene ID numbers are
shown in parentheses after sequence names. The genomic context
for each of the [Ni,Fe]-CODH sequences is shown by coloring of the
tip labels. Blue indicates CODH occurrence within an ACS gene

cluster. Purple indicates CODH adjacent to an energy-converting
hydrogenase gene cluster. Green indicates that the CODH is
adjacent to a cooF gene. Black indicates that the CODH is not
linked to a cooF gene. Bootstrap values are shown as a percentage
derived from 1000 replicates.

suggesting that these [Ni,Fe]-CODHs are able to use CooF to
transfer electrons to other functional proteins. Thus it is possi-
ble that these [Ni,Fe]-CODHs are coupled to a broad range of
functional processes including disease-related physiology. Further
biochemical investigation is required to determine the function of
the [Ni,Fe]-CODHs within this clade. The most deeply branch-
ing members of this clade are unlinked [Ni,Fe]-CODHs from
hyperthermophilic methanogens including several Methanocaldo-
coccus species and Methanopyrus kandleri. The organisms within
this clade thus span an extraordinary phylogenetic range, from
Bacteria through Euryarchaeota and likely participate in diverse
pathways for CO utilization.

All of the [Ni,Fe]-CODH sequences within Clade D were found
to be “lone” cooS genes, that is, not found in genomic context with
known CO-metabolism related genes. The most deeply branch-
ing group of Clade D is a subclade composed of a few alkaliphilic
bacteria. Another deeply branching group in Clade D is from Eur-
yarchaeal species, either methanogens or Archaeoglobaceae. One

of the subgroups of Clade D contains sequences from the sec-
ond class of C. botulinum [Ni,Fe]-CODH sequences among other
Clostridium spp. A third group of sequences within Clade D is
composed of sequences similar to CooS-V from C. hydrogeno-
formans. The C. hydrogenoformans CooS-V was described in the
genome analysis of C hydrogenoformans as being unique, since it
is the only one of the ﬁve [Ni,Fe]-CODH genes in this genome
without a putative function, and is not directly linked to other
genes that could provide a contextual clue as to its function
(Wu et al., 2005). The majority of Clade D [Ni,Fe]-CODH genes
are encoded in genomes that also encode other [Ni,Fe]-CODH
genes.

Clade E is the largest and most eclectic clade, composed
of several subclades. Representatives of each of the four func-
tional categories used in this study are found in Clade E. One
of the Clade E subclades is dominated by clostridial and delta
proteobacterial [Ni,Fe]-CODHs found within ACS gene clusters.
This group of sequences includes the majority of the known

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 5

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

bacterial CODH/ACS gene clusters. Another large subclade in
Clade E contains sequences from sulfate reducing bacteria as well
as methanogenic archaea. A noteable feature of one more subclade
within Clade E is a group of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs from Thermococcus
spp. that are linked to ECH in these Euryarchaeota. These thermo-
cocci have the ability to couple the anaerobic oxidation of CO to
hydrogen production, via a conserved [Ni,Fe]-CODH-ECH gene
cluster (Lim et al., 2010).

Clade F is numerically small, however members in all of the four
functional categories are represented in this group of CODHs.
The four C. hydrogenoformans [Ni,Fe]-CODH gene clusters in
Clade F have been assigned different metabolic functions based
on biochemical characterization as well as their genetic linkages
to other functional genes (Wu et al., 2005). For example, the
well-characterized [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene clusters originally
described in R. rubrum and C. hydrogenoformans are assigned
to this clade. In addition to these well-characterized [Ni,Fe]-
CODH–ECH operons there are several other ECH-clustered
CODHs within Clade F. Another subgroup within Clade F contains
bacterial CODH/ACS gene clusters.

Clade F also contains many characterized [Ni,Fe]-CODHs with
representatives from each of the four functional classes used in
this study. Many of these have been characterized structurally and
biochemically (Svetlitchnyi et al., 2001, 2004; Soboh et al., 2002;
Volbeda and Fontecilla-Camps, 2005). These biochemical studies
establish Clade F as encompassing the greatest known functional
diversity of [Ni,Fe]-CODH gene clusters.

THE GENOME OF T. CARBOXYDIVORANS ENCODES A MINIMAL CooS
HOMOLOG
The genome of T. carboxydivorans encodes three [Ni,Fe]-CODH
homologs. One of
these homologs is highly similar to the
hydrogenase-linked [Ni,Fe]-CODH from C. hydrogenoformans. A
second [Ni,Fe]-CODH is highly similar to the CODH-V from C.
hydrogenoformans. The third [Ni,Fe]-CODH homolog however
is distinct from all known [Ni,Fe]-CODH sequences (Figure 3).
Other known [Ni,Fe]-CODH sequences are 600–800 amino acid
residues long. This divergent mini-CooS has only 482 amino acid
residues and its short length does not result from frameshift trun-
cation. Upon alignment with other [Ni,Fe]-CODH sequences, it is

FIGURE 3 | Phylogenetic position of the mini-CooS from Thermosinus
carboxydivorans. A maximum likelihood tree was built from a MUSCLE
alignment of representative sequences selected from all of the [Ni,Fe]-CODH

clades deﬁned by Figure 1 as well as the mini-CooS from T. carboxydivorans.
The tree was bootstrapped with 1000 replicates,which are shown as
percentage values at the nodes in the tree.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 6

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

apparent that its small size can be accounted for by many deletions
of varying size relative to standard size CooS genes (Figure 4), how-
ever the mini-CooS seems to retain all of the important domains
of typical CODHs, suggesting that it may be functional (Figure 4).
Dobbek et al. (2004) solved the prototype crystal structure for the
CooS-II from C. hydrogenoformans which revealed three metal
binding clusters (Clusters B, C, and D), each with separate metal
coordinating domains with conserved Cys and His residues essen-
tial for CODH activity. Interestingly, the 11 Cys residues and the
His residue coordinating these clusters are all conserved in the
minimal CooS from T. carboxydivorans. Hydroxylamine reduc-
tases share some sequence similarity with CooS, but they all lack
some of the conserved Cys residues that locate the metal clusters
in CooS. The proximity in the genome of the minimal cooS gene
to a cooF gene provides further evidence for its involvement in
CO-metabolism.

EVIDENCE FOR HGT OF THE [NI,FE]-CODH-ECH GENE CLUSTER OF
THERMOSINUS CARBOXYDIVORANS
The genome sequence of T. carboxydivorans provides insights into
the ability of microbes to utilize CO as a versatile electron donor
as well as potential mechanisms for acquisition of [Ni,Fe]-CODH
operons and the evolution of multi-[Ni,Fe]-CODH genotypes.
As mentioned previously, the draft T. carboxydivorans genome
sequence revealed three CODH gene clusters. The [Ni,Fe]-CODH-
ECH gene cluster is highly similar in sequence and gene content
to the homologs found in C. hydrogenoformans and R. rubrum
as shown in Figure 5. In R. rubrum, this gene cluster has been

shown to comprise two operons: a CODH operon, which con-
tains a cooS gene and the gene for a nickel–iron, electron transfer
protein (cooF), and the adjacent membrane-bound hydrogenase
operon. The [Ni,Fe]-CODH-ECH gene clusters are composed of
similar sets of genes in R. rubrum, C. hydrogenoformans, and T. car-
boxydivorans. In C. hydrogenoformans, the [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH
gene cluster probably comprises two operons (there is an inter-
genic space approximately 100 nt long between the hypA gene and
the cooF gene). In T. carboxydivorans, there is no intergenic space
or putative promoter sequences between the ECH and CODH
sections of the gene cluster, suggesting that it forms a single operon.
Nevertheless, the CODH and the clustered genes encoding the
seven subunits of the membrane-bound hydrogenase from T. car-
boxydivorans are highly similar to the corresponding genes from C.
hydrogenoformans, in both gene order and in nucleotide sequence.
The 11.3 kb operon that comprises the [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene
cluster in T. carboxydivorans is 84% identical on the nucleotide
level to the homologous gene cluster in C. hydrogenoformans, an
observation that prompted us to examine these gene clusters for
quantiﬁable evidence of HGT.
Several in silico methods have been proposed as indicators
of HGT. G+ C content has been a well-established and simple
method for predicting HGT (Lawrence and Ochman, 1998). The
G+ C content of the T. carboxydivorans genome is 51.6% whereas
the G+ C content of its 11.3-kb [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH operon
is 43.4%, which is similar to the overall G+ C content of C.
hydrogenoformans genome (42.0%). The G+ C% of the [Ni,Fe]-
CODH-ECH gene cluster from C. hydrogenoformans (44%) is very

FIGURE 4 | The mini-CooS from Thermosinus carboxydivorans
contains conserved residues essential for CODH activity. An alignment
of Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans CooS-II, the Cdh-type CODH of
Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus (MTH1708), Thermosinus
carboxydivorans mini-CooS, and Thermincola potens hydroxylamine
reductase TherJR_2940 was constructed. Dobbek et al. (2001) deﬁned

three sites as being essential for CooS activity. Cluster C (purple), B (red),
and D (green). All of these residues are present in the C.
hydrogenoformans CooS-II, M. thermoautotrophicus Cdh, and T.
carboxydivorans minimal CooS. Many of these residues are absent in the
hydroxylamine reductase. The sequences were aligned with MAFFT
v6.861b (http://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/server/index.html).

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 7

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

FIGURE 5 | Gene topology for the hydrogenase – CODH gene clusters
from C. hydrogenoformans,T. carboxydivorans, and R. rubrum.
Homologous genes are colored similarly between operons. The C.
hydrogenoformans and T. carboxydivorans gene clusters are identical except
for displacement of the associated cooC gene and presence of intergenic

space between hypA and the cooF in C. hydrogenoformans. Additionally the T.
carboxydivorans cooA gene is located 254 kb away from the rest of the gene
cluster. While the R. rubrum gene cluster has many of the same genes, there
are notable differences in the genes encoding the hydrogenase accessory
proteins (i.e., presence of cooT and cooJ in R. rubrum instead of hypA).

similar to the overall G+ C% of the C. hydrogenoformans genome
(Wu et al., 2005).
Because G+ C content alone is considered to be an inadequate
criterion to detect HGT (Garcia-Vallve et al., 2000) we sought
other criteria to distinguish the [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene clus-
ter in T. carboxydivorans from the genome at large. In a recent
paper, additional methods for determining HGT were evaluated
(Becq et al., 2010). Tetranucleotide frequency and codon usage
similarity quantiﬁed with K–L divergence were proposed as the
most accurate metrics for predicting HGT. We compared the
[Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene clusters of T. carboxydivorans and C.
hydrogenoformans with the full genome sequences of T. carboxydi-
vorans, C. hydrogenoformans, with K–L analysis using the genome
of E. coli K12 as a control to determine if these two CODH-I gene
clusters are divergent from the genomes at large (Table 1).

The T. carboxydivorans [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene cluster was
compared to the T. carboxydivorans genome using tetranucleotide
frequency, resulting in a K–L divergence of 0.217. When codon
usage was used as the metric, the K–L divergence was 0.133. The
threshold values of 0.05 and 0.1 for K–L divergence of codon usage
and tetranucleotide frequency respectively were used to determine
similarity. By both metrics the T. carboxydivorans [Ni,Fe]-CODH–
ECH gene cluster is signiﬁcantly different from the T. carboxy-
divorans genome. As a control, the tetranucleotide frequency
and codon usage of the genes encoding the T. carboxydivorans
[Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene cluster were compared to those of the
E. coli K12 genome. K–L divergences for this comparison are
0.116 and 0.212 for tetranucleotide frequency and codon usage

respectively. These results conﬁrmed that the threshold values are
appropriate for specifying similarity. The K–L divergence of the T.
carboxydivorans [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene cluster vs. the T. car-
boxydivorans genome is thus greater than the K–L distance of the
T. carboxydivorans [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene cluster vs. the E. coli
K12 genome. Based on these metrics it appears that the [Ni,Fe]-
CODH–ECH gene cluster from T. carboxydivorans is signiﬁcantly
divergent from the T. carboxydivorans genome at large.

The same analysis was performed to examine whether the C.
hydrogenoformans [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene cluster is similar to
rest of the C. hydrogenoformans genome. The K–L divergences
comparing tetranucleotide frequency and codon usage for the C.
hydrogenoformans [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene cluster against the
C. hydrogenoformans genome are 0.023 and 0.075 respectively.
Again E. coli K12 was used as a control and the K–L divergences
for tetranucleotide frequency and codon usage are 0.155 and 0.236
respectively. The K–L divergences comparing the C. hydrogeno-
formans [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene cluster with the rest of the
genome are well below the cutoff values and therefore suggest that
the C. hydrogenoformans CODH-I gene cluster is equilibrated with
the C. hydrogenoformans genome.

The K–L divergences for the comparison of tetranucleotide fre-
quency and codon usage of the T. carboxydivorans [Ni,Fe]-CODH–
ECH gene cluster against the C. hydrogenoformans genome are
0.048 and 0.088. These K–L divergences are below the cutoff
values, indicating that the T. carboxydivorans [Ni,Fe]-CODH–
ECH gene cluster is remarkably similar in composition to the C.
hydrogenoformans genome.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 8

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

Table 1 | Kullback–Leibler divergence comparing codon usage (bold) and tetranucleotide frequency (Italics) for various combinations of the
C. hydrogenoformans,T. carboxydivorans, and E. coli K12 genomes and the C. hydrogenoformans and T. carboxydivorans CODH-ECH gene
clusters.

C. hydrogenoformans
genome

T. carboxydivorans
genome

C. hydrogenoformans
CODH–ECH cluster

T. carboxydivorans
CODH–ECH cluster

E. coli K12
genome

C. hydrogenoformans genome
T. carboxydivorans genome
C. hydrogenoformans CODH–ECH cluster
T. carboxydivorans CODH–ECH cluster
E. coli K12 genome

0
0.143
0.075
0.088
0.170

0.302
0
0.154
0.133
0.153

0.023
0.202
0
0.036
0.236

0.048
0.217
0.016
0
0.212

0.155
0.098
0.115
0.116
0

DISCUSSION
The burgeoning release of microbial genomes has revealed that
the ability to utilize CO is a surprisingly common trait shared by
a diverse collection of bacteria and archaea. Phylogenetic analysis
of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs revealed extensive diversity of [Ni,Fe]-CODH
sequences in 6% of the released microbial genomes. Most of these
species have primary physiologies not related to CO metabolism
and have not been scored for CO utilization. Among [Ni,Fe]-
CODH encoding species, more than 40% encode more than one
CODHs. This previously unexplored diversity of sequences has the
potential to provide insights into both the function and evolution
of this important protein family. For the most part the multiple
[Ni,Fe]-CODHs encoded by the same organism are not close rel-
atives. This suggests that these multiple [Ni,Fe]-CODHs in one
genome are not the result of recent gene duplications.

Our phylogenetic analysis conﬁrms prior work which has
shown that there is a clear distinction between the bacterial-type
CODH/ACS and the archaeal-type CODH/ACDS. The clade com-
posed of the archaeal-type CODH/ACDS is populated by archaea
with one noteable exception. There is a sequence for an archaeal-
like CODH/ACDS found in the genome of the deep subsurface
bacterium Candidatus D. audaxviator, which was the sole detected
inhabitant of subterranean efﬂuent waters in a South African gold
mine 2.8 km below the surface (Chivian et al., 2008). So far the
CODH/ACDS from D. audaxviator is the only sequence of a
CODH/ACDS found in a bacterial genome, supporting the notion
that D. audaxviator acquired this CODH/ACDS via a HGT event
from an archaeon.

Aside from D. audaxviator’s CODH/ACDS it is difﬁcult to dis-
tinguish putative HGT events of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs from vertical
descent solely from phylogenetic analysis. There are many exam-
ples of [Ni,Fe]-CODH clades that are composed of organisms that
are not related to one another phylogenetically. For example, in
clades C, D, and E, archaeal [Ni,Fe]-CODHs form deep branches
of a clade composed primarily of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs from bacterial
species, tempting us to infer that these sequences may be the result
of ancient inter-domain HGTs. However, the disparity between the
16S rRNA phylogeny and the [Ni,Fe]-CODH phylogeny recon-
structed here could result from functional distinctions between
CODH lineages. We assume that the function of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs
is determined by their associated proteins encoded within gene
clusters, since this has been observed in many cases. Therefore,
the CODH proteins from one clade may have evolved to associate
with accessory proteins more often clustered with another clade

member, resulting in [Ni,Fe]-CODHs with similar functions to
have convergent sequence motifs, even if originating from different
evolutionary starting points.

It is difﬁcult at this stage to assess with accuracy whether the
[Ni,Fe]-CODH phylogeny is due to divergence along functional
lines as described above, due to the fact that only [Ni,Fe]-CODHs
from clades A and F have been deﬁnitively characterized bio-
chemically. In an effort to clearly elucidate the branching pattern
seen in the global [Ni,Fe]-CODH tree shown in Figure 1, we
have attempted to analyze the genomic context of each of the
[Ni,Fe]-CODHs in the tree. The function of a [Ni,Fe]-CODH is
often determined by the accessory proteins with which it asso-
ciates. In many genomes, these accessory proteins are encoded in
the same operon or adjacent to the [Ni,Fe]-CODH. The analy-
sis of the genomic context and in turn the implied function of
the [Ni,Fe]-CODH may help to distinguish vertical descent along
function-determined lineages from HGT.

The functional tree (Figure 2) shows that on the whole there
is co-occurrence of clades and genomic context. However there
are exceptions where the genomic context is not congruent with
clades. The best example of genomic context being congruent with
phylogenetic lineage is in the case of the archaeal CODH/ACDS
(Figure 2, Clade A). Aside from a few isolated cases, namely A.
fulgidus and M. acetivorans, the remaining members are found
within the context of the CODH/ACDS operon. It is most pos-
sible that in the cases of the exceptions, genomic context does
not reﬂect functional cooperation. For the most part, however,
Clade A is predominated by species from the domain Archaea and
with [Ni,Fe]-CODHs with a conserved genomic context (ACDS
clusters).

The bacterial side of the tree is not as straightforward. There are
many cases in which genomic context does appear to be correlated
with appearance in a common clade. Also, there are a few exam-
ples where similar functions are found in two different clades. The
well-characterized physiology of hydrogenogenic carboxydotro-
phy is encoded by a [Ni,Fe]-CODH linked to an ECH. In this
phylogenetic tree there are two places in which this gene clus-
ter is found (Clade E and Clade F). While it may be difﬁcult to
explain this phenomenon in terms of vertical descent, it is clear
that unlike the CODHs in Clade A the [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene
cluster is not the result of simple vertical descent from an ancestral
[Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH.

Another example of correlation of the genomic context with
the tree topology is provided by the absence of CooS/ACS gene

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 9

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

clusters beyond clades E and F. This could indicate that CooS/ACS
sequences have evolved by vertical inheritance and the presence
of phylogenetically diverse hosts within these clades is not due to
HGT but is a result of conservation of function. However, like the
CODH–ECH gene cluster, the CODH/ACS gene cluster is present
in three clades. Again this points to a more complex evolutionary
history, which may indicate that this gene cluster has arisen more
than once during the course of evolution or potentially a more
complex mechanism involving HGT and genome rearrangements.
By overlaying known functional categories onto the phyloge-
netic tree we were able to clarify some of the phylogenetic history of
[Ni,Fe]-CODHs. However much work needs to be done to further
clarify the function of the many of the remaining [Ni,Fe]-CODHs.
Since it appears that in some cases the clades fall along func-
tional boundaries, the question of the role of HGT as a means of
acquisition of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs could be more clearly addressed by
examining unrelated species that possesses [Ni,Fe]-CODHs that
are highly similar in sequence and function. One such example
is found in the [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH of Clade F. C. hydrogeno-
formans and T. carboxydivorans are two thermophiles from the
Phylum Firmicutes but are from two divergent classes, Clostridia
and Negativicutes, respectively. While these organisms share a
common physiology they represent widely separated phylogenetic
lineages. They both possess [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH homologous
gene clusters with high similarity to each other (84% nucleotide
identity). For this reason we set out to investigate whether the
[Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene cluster could have been acquired by
T. carboxydivorans via an HGT event. Analysis of G+ C content,
tetranucleotide frequency, and codon usage support the hypoth-
esis that the CODH – ECH gene cluster was assimilated by T.
carboxydivorans via HGT.

Based on the high similarity between the hydrogenase – CODH
gene clusters of T. carboxydivorans and C. hydrogenoformans and
on the ﬁtness of the T. carboxydivorans [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH to
the C. hydrogenoformans genome in terms of tetranucleotide fre-
quency and codon usage patterns, it is tempting to propose that T.
carboxydivorans obtained this operon by HGT from C. hydrogeno-
formans or a closely related species. However, closer examination
of the data indicate that there may have been a recent transfer from
a relative of C. hydrogenoformans or else a more ancient transfer
from an ancestor of C. hydrogenoformans into the T. carboxydi-
vorans lineage. First, the nucleotide identity of the gene clusters,
although high (84%), is lower than the ANI value of 95–96%
shown to delimit microbial species (Goris et al., 2007; Richter
and Rossello-Mora, 2009; Tindall et al., 2010). Second, whereas
in C. hydrogenoformans the cluster seems to comprise two oper-
ons, T. carboxydivorans appears likely to encode a single operon
(Figure 5). Third, the order of genes in the gene clusters from T.
carboxydivorans and C. hydrogenoformans has been switched by the
relocation of cooC (Figure 5). The rearrangements suggest further
evolution in T. carboxydivorans or C. hydrogenoformans following
a horizontal transfer. The location of the regulator gene cooA apart
from the [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene cluster in T. carboxydivorans
also suggests that there is ongoing genome reordering of the
CO-related genes in this isolate, or may be interpreted as the acqui-
sition of cooA that occurred independently from the acquisition
of the [Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene cluster. One of the two cooA

genes (cooA-1) in C. hydrogenoformans is directly upstream of its
[Ni,Fe]-CODH–ECH gene cluster. The lone cooA homolog in the
genome of T. carboxydivorans is a homolog of C hydrogenoformans
cooA-1 and is separated by 252 kb from the hydrogenase – CODH
gene cluster. Interestingly, the T. carboxydivorans cooA is ﬂanked
by transposes and phage-related genes, which are known to be
mediators of genomic rearrangement and HGT (Ochman et al.,
2000).

The T. carboxydivorans genome also contains the smallest gene
predicted to contain all of the conserved CooS features. This
putative CODH is 428 amino acid residues long compared with
typical [Ni,Fe]-CODHs that range from approximately 600 to 800
residues long. This “mini-CooS” has been placed in a separate
multiple alignment that gave rise to the ML analysis shown in
Figure 3. Taking into account (i) the acquisition of the hydroge-
nase – [Ni,Fe]-CODH gene cluster via HGT, which we substan-
tiate in this paper, (ii) the separate location of the cooA gene,
and (iii) the fact that the G+ C content of the gene encod-
ing the unusual small cooS is about 10 mol% higher than that
of the genome. Therefore, we speculate that the assemblage of
the carboxydotrophic hydrogenogenic phenotype in T. carboxy-
divorans is an evolutionarily recent event, suggesting that rapid
genome evolution is under way to accommodate selection for CO
utilization.

Due to the large number of species that have been shown to
encode multiple CODHs, it seems probable that multiple [Ni,Fe]-
CODH operons increase the ﬁtness of an organism in CO-rich
milieus by providing divergent metabolic pathways through which
CO can be metabolized. The consumption of CO by indepen-
dent pathways providing energy conservation, carbon ﬁxation,
and nicotinamide coenzyme reduction are now well-established.
On a broader scale, in microbial consortia, CO utilization has
the additional communal beneﬁt of dissipating a potentially toxic
compound (Parshina et al., 2005; Techtmann et al., 2009). Our
recent work revealed that adaptive regulation of expression of
multiple [Ni,Fe]-CODH operons by dual cooA genes may par-
tition CO between multiple competing pathways in response to
varying needs for energy conservation and carbon acquisition
across a wide range of CO concentrations (Techtmann et al.,
2011).

In conclusion, we have developed a comprehensive phylogeny
for [Ni,Fe]-CODHs which revealed the presence of six distinct
clades. Comparison of the genomic contexts with CooS phylogeny
suggests that several clades diverged based on function. These
clades appear to be evolving via vertical descent. However there are
a few CO-related metabolic functions that are spread throughout
various clades on the tree either indicating different evolutionary
events or HGT. It seems likely that both HGT and vertical trans-
mission have driven the remarkable divergence of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs
currently seen in both archaea and bacteria

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by the US National Science Foundation
through award numbers EAR 0747394 (Frank T. Robb), EAR
0747412 (Albert S. Colman), and MCB 0605301 (Frank T. Robb
and Albert S. Colman). The work of Alexander V. Lebedinsky
and Tatyana G. Sokolova has been supported by the Russian

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 10

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

Foundation for Basic Research (project number 11-04-01723-a),
federal targeted program for 2009–2013 “Scientiﬁc and Pedagog-
ical Personnel of Innovative Russia” (GK number P646), and the
program of the Presidium of the Russian Academy of Sciences
“Molecular and Cell Biology.” The sequencing work conducted
by the U.S. Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute is sup-
ported by the Ofﬁce of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy
under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. We are indebted to
our reviewers for helpful comments on phylogenetic methods.
This is Contribution 11-230 from the Institute of Marine and
Environmental Technology.

SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at
http://www.frontiersin.org/Evolutionary_and_Genomic_Micro
biology/10.3389/fmicb.2012.00132/abstract

Table S1 | [Ni,Fe]-CODH sequences found in the IMG database as of
October 1, 2011.

Table S2 | Genomes encoding multiple [Ni,Fe]-CODH homologs.

Table S3 | Composition of the six [Ni,Fe]-CODH clades of both the ML and
BI phylogenetic trees.

REFERENCES
Altschul, S. F., Gish, W., Miller, W.,
Myers, E. W., and Lipman, D. J.
(1990). Basic local alignment search
tool. J. Mol. Biol. 215, 403–410.

Becq, J., Churlaud, C., and Descha-
vanne, P.
(2010). A benchmark
of parametric methods for hor-
izontal
transfers detection. PLoS
ONE 5, e9989. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0009989

Chivian, D., Brodie, E. L., Alm, E. J.,
Culley, D. E., Dehal, P. S., Desan-
tis, T. Z., Gihring, T. M., Lapidus,
A., Lin, L. H., Lowry, S. R., Moser,
D. P., Richardson, P. M., Southam,
G., Wanger, G., Pratt, L. M., Ander-
sen, G. L., Hazen, T. C., Brockman,
F. J., Arkin, A. P., and Onstott, T.
C. (2008). Environmental genomics
reveals a single-species ecosystem
deep within Earth. Science 322,
275–278.

Dobbek, H., Gremer, L., Meyer, O.,
and Huber, R.
(1999). Crystal
structure and mechanism of CO
dehydrogenase, a molybdo iron-
sulfur ﬂavoprotein containing S-
selanylcysteine. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 96, 8884–8889.

Dobbek, H., Svetlitchnyi, V., Gre-
mer, L., Huber, R., and Meyer, O.
(2001). Crystal structure of a carbon
monoxide dehydrogenase reveals a
[Ni-4Fe-5S] cluster. Science 293,
1281–1285.

Dobbek, H., Svetlitchnyi, V., Liss, J., and
Meyer, O. (2004). Carbon monoxide
induced decomposition of the active
site [Ni-4Fe-5S] cluster of CO dehy-
drogenase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126,
5382–5387.

Drummond, A.

J.,

and Rambaut,
A. (2007). BEAST: Bayesian evo-
lutionary
sampling
trees. BMC Evol. Biol. 7, 214.
doi:10.1186/1471-2148-7-214

analysis by

Edgar, R. C. (2004a). MUSCLE: a mul-
tiple sequence alignment method
with reduced time and space com-
plexity. BMC Bioinformatics 5, 113.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-5-113

Edgar, R. C. (2004b). MUSCLE: mul-
tiple sequence alignment with high

accuracy
Nucleic Acids Res. 32, 1792–1797.

and high throughput.

Ewing, B., and Green, P.

(1998).
Base-calling of automated sequencer
traces using phred. II. Error proba-
bilities. Genome Res. 8, 186–194.

Ewing, B., Hillier, L., Wendl, M.
C., and Green, P. (1998). Base-
calling of
automated sequencer
traces using phred.
I. Accuracy
assessment. Genome Res. 8, 175–185.
Ferry, J. G. (1995). CO dehydrogenase.

Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 49, 305–333.

Gao, F., and Zhang, C. T. (2006). GC-
Proﬁle: a web-based tool for visual-
izing and analyzing the variation of
GC content in genomic sequences.
Nucleic Acids Res. 34, W686–W691.
Garcia-Vallve, S., Romeu, A., and Palau,
J. (2000). Horizontal gene trans-
fer in bacterial and archaeal com-
plete genomes. Genome Res. 10,
1719–1725.

Gencic, S., Duin, E. C., and Grahame, D.
A. (2010). Tight coupling of partial
reactions in the acetyl-CoA decar-
bonylase/synthase (ACDS) multien-
zyme complex from Methanosarcina
thermophila: acetyl C-C bond frag-
mentation at the a cluster promoted
by protein conformational changes.
J. Biol. Chem. 285, 15450–15463.

Gnida, M., Ferner, R., Gremer, L., Meyer,
O., and Meyer-Klaucke, W. (2003).
A novel binuclear [CuSMo] cluster
at the active site of carbon monox-
ide dehydrogenase: characterization
by X-ray absorption spectroscopy.
Biochemistry 42, 222–230.

Gonzalez,

J. M., and Robb, F. T.
(2000). Genetic analysis of Carboxy-
dothermus hydrogenoformans car-
bon monoxide dehydrogenase genes
cooF and cooS. FEMS Microbiol.
Lett. 191, 243–247.

Gordon, D., Abajian, C., and Green, P.
(1998). Consed: a graphical tool for
sequence ﬁnishing. Genome Res. 8,
195–202.

Goris, J., Konstantinidis, K. T., Klappen-
bach, J. A., Coenye, T.,Vandamme, P.,
and Tiedje, J. M. (2007). DNA-DNA
hybridization values and their rela-
tionship to whole-genome sequence

similarities. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Micro-
biol. 57, 81–91.

Grahame, D. A. (1991). Catalysis of
acetyl-CoA cleavage and tetrahy-
drosarcinapterin methylation by a
carbon monoxide dehydrogenase-
corrinoid enzyme complex. J. Biol.
Chem. 266, 22227–22233.

Han, C. S., and Chain, P. (2006). “Fin-
ishing repeat regions automatically
with Dupﬁnisher,” in Proceedings of
the 2006 International Conference on
Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology, eds. H. R. Arabnia and H.
Valafar (Las Vegas: CSREA Press),
141–146.

Hugendieck, I., and Meyer, O. (1992).
The structural genes encoding CO
dehydrogenase subunits (cox L, M
and S) in Pseudomonas carboxy-
dovorans OM5 reside on plas-
mid pHCG3 and are, with the
exception of Streptomyces thermoau-
totrophicus, conserved in carboxy-
dotrophic bacteria. Arch. Microbiol.
157, 301–304.

Kerby, R. L., Hong, S. S., Ensign,
S. A., Coppoc, L. J., Ludden, P.
W., and Roberts, G. P.
(1992).
Genetic and physiological charac-
terization of
the Rhodospirillum
rubrum carbon monoxide dehydro-
genase system.
J. Bacteriol. 174,
5284–5294.

King, G. M. (2003). Uptake of carbon
monoxide and hydrogen at environ-
mentally relevant concentrations by
mycobacteria. Appl. Environ. Micro-
biol. 69, 7266–7272.

King, G. M. (2006). Nitrate-dependent
anaerobic carbon monoxide oxida-
tion by aerobic CO-oxidizing bacte-
ria. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 56, 1–7.

King, G. M.,

and Weber, C. F.
(2007). Distribution, diversity and
ecology of aerobic CO-oxidizing
bacteria. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 5,
107–118.

Kocsis, E., Kessel, M., Demoll, E., and
Grahame, D. A. (1999). Structure
of
the Ni/Fe-S protein subcom-
the acetyl-CoA decar-
ponent of
bonylase/synthase
complex from
Methanosarcina thermophila at 26-A

resolution.
165–174.

J. Struct. Biol. 128,

Kullback, S., and Leibler, R. A. (1951).
On information and sufﬁciency.
Ann. Math. Stat. 22, 79–86.

Lawrence,

J. G., and Ochman, H.
archaeology
(1998). Molecular
of
the Escherichia coli genome.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95,
9413–9417.

Lim,

J. K., Kang, S. G., Lebedin-
sky, A. V., Lee, J. H., and Lee,
H. S. (2010). Identiﬁcation of a
novel class of membrane-bound
[NiFe]-hydrogenases in Thermococ-
cus onnurineus NA1 by in silico
analysis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
76, 6286–6289.

Lindahl, P. A. (2002). The Ni-containing
carbon monoxide dehydrogenase
family: light at the end of the tunnel?
Biochemistry 41, 2097–2105.

Meyer, O., Frunzke, K., and Mörsdorf,
G. (eds). (1993). Biochemistry of the
Aerobic Utilization of Carbon Monox-
ide. Andover, MA: Intercept, Ltd.

Meyer, O., and Rajagopalan, K. V.
(1984). Molybdopterin in carbon
monoxide oxidase from carboxy-
dotrophic bacteria. J. Bacteriol. 157,
643–648.
Meyer, O.,

and Schlegel, H. G.
(1983). Biology of aerobic carbon
monoxide-oxidizing bacteria. Annu.
Rev. Microbiol. 37, 277–310.

Miller, M. A., Holder, M. T.,Vos, R., Mid-
ford, P. E., Liebowitz, T., Chan, L.,
Hoover, P., and Warnow, T. (2010).
The CIPRES Portals. CIPRES.
Available at: http://www.phylo.org/
sub_sections/portal

Milne, I., Lindner, D., Bayer, M., Hus-
meier, D., Mcguire, G., Marshall, D.
F., and Wright, F. (2009). TOPALi
v2: a rich graphical
interface for
evolutionary analyses of multiple
alignments on HPC clusters and
multi-core desktops. Bioinformatics
25, 126–127.

Ochman, H., Lawrence,

J. G., and
Groisman, E. A. (2000). Lateral
gene transfer and the nature of
bacterial
innovation. Nature 405,
299–304.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 11

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

Parshina, S. N., Kijlstra, S., Hen-
stra, A. M., Sipma, J., Plugge, C.
M., and Stams, A. J. (2005). Car-
bon monoxide conversion by ther-
mophilic sulfate-reducing bacteria
in pure culture and in co-culture
with Carboxydothermus hydrogeno-
formans. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
68, 390–396.

Ragsdale, S. W. (2004). Life with carbon
monoxide. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol.
Biol. 39, 165–195.

Ragsdale, S. W. (2008). Enzymology of
the wood-Ljungdahl pathway of ace-
togenesis. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1125,
129–136.

Rambaut, A., and Aj, D.

Tracer
http://beast.bio.ed.ac.uk/Tracer

Available

v1.4.

(2007).
at:

Richter, M., and Rossello-Mora, R.
(2009). Shifting the genomic gold
standard for the prokaryotic species
deﬁnition. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 106, 19126–19131.

characterization

Schubel, U., Kraut, M., Morsdorf,
G., and Meyer, O. (1995). Mol-
ecular
the
gene cluster coxMSL encoding the
molybdenum-containing
carbon
monoxide dehydrogenase of Olig-
otropha carboxidovorans. J. Bacteriol.
177, 2197–2203.

of

Seravalli,

Seravalli, J., Kumar, M., Lu, W. P., and
Ragsdale, S. W. (1995). Mechanism
of CO oxidation by carbon monox-
ide dehydrogenase from Clostridium
thermoaceticum and its inhibition by
anions. Biochemistry 34, 7879–7888.
J., Kumar, M., Lu, W.
P., and Ragsdale, S. W. (1997).
Mechanism of carbon monoxide
oxidation by the carbon monoxide
dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA synthase
from Clostridium thermoaceticum:
kinetic
the
intermediates.
36,
11241–11251.

characterization of
Biochemistry

Soboh, B., Linder, D., and Hedderich,
R. (2002). Puriﬁcation and catalytic
properties of a CO-oxidizing:H2-
complex from
evolving enzyme
Carboxydothermus
hydrogeno-
formans. Eur.
J. Biochem. 269,
5712–5721.

Sokolova, T. G., Gonzalez, J. M., Kostrik-
ina, N. A., Chernyh, N. A., Slepova,
T. V., Bonch-Osmolovskaya, E. A.,
and Robb, F. T. (2004). Thermosinus
carboxydivorans gen. nov., sp. nov.,
a new anaerobic,
thermophilic,
carbon-monoxide-oxidizing,
hydrogenogenic bacterium from a
hot pool of Yellowstone National
Park. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 54,
2353–2359.

Sokolova, T. G., Henstra, A. M., Sipma,
J., Parshina, S. N., Stams, A. J.,
and Lebedinsky, A. V. (2009). Diver-
sity and ecophysiological
features
of
thermophilic carboxydotrophic
anaerobes. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 68,
131–141.

Stamatakis, A.

(2006). RAxML-VI-
HPC: maximum likelihood-based
phylogenetic analyses with thou-
sands of taxa and mixed models.
Bioinformatics 22, 2688–2690.

Stamatakis, A., Hoover, P., and Rouge-
mont,
J. (2008). A rapid boot-
strap algorithm for the RAxML Web
servers. Syst. Biol. 57, 758–771.

Svetlitchnyi, V., Dobbek, H., Meyer-
Klaucke, W., Meins, T., Thiele, B.,
Romer, P., Huber, R., and Meyer,
O.
(2004). A functional Ni-Ni-
[4Fe-4S] cluster in the monomeric
acetyl-CoA synthase
from Car-
boxydothermus
hydrogenoformans.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101,
446–451.

Svetlitchnyi, V., Peschel, C., Acker,
G., and Meyer, O. (2001). Two
membrane-associated
NiFeS-
carbon monoxide dehydrogenases

from the
monoxide-utilizing
Carboxydothermus
formans.
5134–5144.

J.

anaerobic

carbon-
Eubacterium
hydrogeno-
183,

Bacteriol.

Techtmann, S. M., Colman, A. S.,
Murphy, M. B., Schackwitz, W.
S., Goodwin, L. A., and Robb, F.
T. (2011). Regulation of multiple
consumption
carbon monoxide
bac-
pathways
teria.
2:147.
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2011.00147

anaerobic
Front. Microbiol.

in

Techtmann, S. M., Colman, A. S., and
Robb, F. T. (2009). ‘That which does
not kill us only makes us stronger’:
the role of carbon monoxide in ther-
mophilic microbial consortia. Envi-
ron. Microbiol. 11, 1027–1037.

Teeling, H., Waldmann, J., Lombar-
dot, T., Bauer, M., and Glockner,
F. O. (2004). TETRA: a web-service
and a stand-alone program for the
analysis and comparison of tetranu-
cleotide usage patterns
in DNA
sequences. BMC Bioinformatics 5,
163. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-5-163

Terlesky, K. C., Nelson, M. J., and Ferry,
J. G. (1986). Isolation of an enzyme
complex with carbon monoxide
dehydrogenase activity containing
corrinoid and nickel from acetate-
grown Methanosarcina thermophila.
J. Bacteriol. 168, 1053–1058.

Tindall, B.

J., Rossello-Mora, R.,
J., Ludwig, W., and
Busse, H.
Kampfer, P.
(2010). Notes on
the characterization of prokary-
ote strains for taxonomic purposes.
Int.
J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 60,
249–266.

Uffen, R. L. (1976). Anaerobic growth
of a Rhodopseudomonas species in
the dark with carbon monoxide as
sole carbon and energy substrate.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 73,
3298–3302.

Volbeda, A., and Fontecilla-Camps, J. C.
(2005). Structural bases for the cat-
alytic mechanism of Ni-containing
carbon monoxide dehydrogenases.
Dalton Trans. 21, 3443–3450.

Wu, M., Ren, Q., Durkin, A. S., Daugh-
erty, S. C., Brinkac, L. M., Dodson,
R. J., Madupu, R., Sullivan, S. A.,
Kolonay, J. F., Haft, D. H., Nelson,
W. C., Tallon, L. J., Jones, K. M.,
Ulrich, L. E., Gonzalez, J. M., Zhulin,
I. B., Robb, F. T., and Eisen, J. A.
(2005). Life in hot carbon monox-
ide: the complete genome sequence
of Carboxydothermus hydrogenofor-
mans Z-2901. PLoS Genet. 1, e65.
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.0010065

Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The
authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any com-
mercial or ﬁnancial relationships that
could be construed as a potential con-
ﬂict of interest.

Received: 07 December 2011; accepted: 20
March 2012; published online: 17 April
2012.
Citation: Techtmann SM, Lebedinsky
AV, Colman AS, Sokolova TG, Woyke
T, Goodwin L and Robb FT (2012)
Evidence for horizontal gene transfer
of anaerobic carbon monoxide dehy-
drogenases. Front. Microbio. 3:132. doi:
10.3389/fmicb.2012.00132
This article was submitted to Frontiers in
Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology,
a specialty of Frontiers in Microbiology.
Copyright  2012 Techtmann, Lebedin-
sky, Colman, Sokolova, Woyke, Good-
win and Robb. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons Attribution Non
Commercial License, which permits non-
commercial use, distribution, and repro-
duction in other forums, provided the
original authors and source are credited.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 12

Techtmann et al.

APPENDIX

Clade D 

Clade F 

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

Clade C 

D
D

e
e

s
s

u
u

lf
lf

u
u

r
r

o
o

b
b

a
a

c
c

t
t

e
e

ri
ri

u

M
M

e
ee
e

t
t

h
h

B
B

B
B

l
l

l
l

a
a

a
a

u
u

L
L

a
a

u
u

t
t
i
i
i

C
C

c
c
c

a
a
a

l
l

h
h
h

t
t
i
i

a
a

.
.
.
.

o
o

.
.

h
h

h
h
h
h

s
s

n
n
n

t
t

o
o
o

y
y
y
y

a
a

a
a

T
T

h
h

e
e
r
r

m
m

o
o

s
s

e
e

di
di

m
m

o
o
v
v
o
o

r
r

a
a
n
n
s
s

d
d
d
d

r
r

i
i

s
s
s
s

d
d

p
p
p
p

R
R

t
t
t
t

r
r
r
r

s
s

r
r
r
r

i
i
i
i

o
o
o
o

u
u

i
i

i
i
i
i

u
u

r
r
r
r

d
d
d
d

e
e

g
g
g
g

n
n

e
e
e
e

i
i
i
i
.
.

a
a
a
a

m
m

c
c
c
c

i
i

m
m

i
i
i

u
u
u
m
m
m

.
.

e
e
e
e

n
n

n
n
n
n

h
h

C
C
C

V
V

o
o
o
o

i
i

a
a
a
a

t
t
t
t

P
P

r
r
r
r

a
a

e
e
e
e

r
r

o
o

.
.
.

l
l
l

c
c

a
a
a

o
o
o

.
.
.
.

o
o

s
s
s

s
s
s

F
F

m
m

n
n

n
n

A
A

e
e
r
r
r
r
o
o

r
r
c
c

.
t
t

h
h

o
oo
o

M
M

c
c
cc

g
g

h
h

h
h

r
r

M
M

T
T

e
e

a
a

E
E

ee
e
e

t
t

l
l

d
d

E
E

u
u

C
C

M
M

u
u

l
l

b
b

o
o

m
m
m

e
e

h
h

o
o
oo

l
l

o
o

a
a

e
e

r
r

b
b

e
e

u
u

o
o

m
m

h
h

o
o
o

t
t

lit
lit
lit

gs
g
s
s
l
l
.
.

o
o

o
o

v
v

i
i

p
p

l
l

a
a

b
b

b
b

D
D

inib
inib
lo
lo

C
C

a
a

e
e

s
s

c
c
t
t
e
e

u
u
lf
lf
ff
o
oo
o
t
tt
t
o
o

r.
r.

stridiu
stridiu

o
o

c
c

e
e

S
S

y
y

n
n

tr
tr

o
o

m
m
m
m

a
a

a
aa
a

a
a

b
b

c
c
cc

e
e

a
a

s
ss
s

n
n

a
a

o
o

c
c

t
t

t
t
r
r
i
i

a
a

o
o

c
c

h
h

c
c

t
t

C
C

.
.

I
I

o
o
o
o

h
h
h
h

n
n

c
c

c
c

a
a

t
t

e
e

d
d

n
n

b
b
b
b

c
c

p
p
p

r
r
r

t
t
t

i
i
i

u
u

c
c
i
.f
fd

s
s

d
d

u

a
a

u
u

n
n

o
o
o
o

o
o

t
t
t
r
r
r

c
c

l
l

d
d

o
o
o

a
a

ri
ri

o
o

.

p
p
p

a

h

l
l

o
o

d
d

cc
c
c

.j
.
.j

a
a

o

n

p
p
p
p

r
r
i
i

u
u

e
e

r
r
i
i

i
i

u
u

o
o

l
l

C
C

p
p
p
p

o
o

a
a
a
a

c
c

i
i
i

a
a
a

d
d
d

.
.

7
7

n
n

c
c
c
c

h
h
h
h

u
u

r
r
r

i
i
i

m
m

m
m

t
t

-
-

c
c
c
c

r
r

2
2

.

i
i

s
s

e
e
e
e

.
.

a
a

.

r
r

i
i
i
i

i
i

t
t
t
t

s
s

a
a
a
a

a
a
a

tt
t
t

gg
g
g

l
l

o
o

i

e
e

f

b
b

d
d

4
4

.

T
T

i

s
s
s

o
o
o
o

u
u

s
s

y
y
y

m
m

.

r

.

h

m

u

c

n

h

u

c

o

a

a

s

i

.

u

r

o

u

D

l
t

O

q

m

u

S

o

s

.

r

s

D

s
.

u

l

g

i

m
m

o

a

l
l
i
i
.

C
C

l
l

o
o
s
s

t
t

r
r

i
i

d
d

i
i

u
u
m
m

.
.

c
c
e
e

l
l

l
l

u
u

C
C

l
l

l
l

o
o

s
s
s
s

l
l

C
C
o
o
s
s

i
i

t
t
r
r
i
i
d
d
u
u
m
m
b
b
o
o

.
.

l
l

i
i

.

t
t
tt

.
.

l
l

.
.

l
i

C
C
o
o
s
s
t
t
tt
r
r
i
i
d
d
u
u
m
m
1
1
1
1
-
-
-
-
b
bSS
S
S
S
S
o
o
o
o
o
oo
o
o
o
u
u
o
o
C
iCClCC
C
C
C
n
n
.
.
u
u
F
F
6
6
m
m
1
1
-
-
o
oo
o
9
9
Btt.
t
tt
t
B
2
2
o
oo
o
.
.
o
o
Cyy
y
yy
y
CC
C
K
NKK
K
N
T
TT
T
.
.
T
T22/22
2
22
/2
2
2
C
C
A
AAA
AA
AAAA
A
A
N
N
3
3
33
m
m
m
m
L
L
u
u
u
u
o
o
oo
n
n
n
n
c
ci
cc
h
u
u
t
M
t
o
o
b
a
b
.
r
.
m
m
e
e
u
u
C
d
d
i
i
o
r
r
t
t
o
s
s
S
o
o
-
C
C
1

1
1
-
-
S
S
o
o
o
o
C
C
.
.
d
d
n
n
a
a
e
e
g
gg
g
n
n
a
aa
a
L
L
.
.
F
F
.
.
m
m
u
u
n
n
u
t
o
b
.
m
u
d
i
r
t
s
o
C

i
i
l

i
l

i
i
l

.
.

l

.
.

i

l

.
.

.

.

/

i

l

i

l

l
l

C
C
o
o
s
ss
s

C
C

l
l

o
o
s
s

t
t
r
r

i
i

d
d

i
i

t
t

r
r

i
i

d
d

i
i

l
l

C
C
o
o
s
s

u
u
m
m

.
.

u
u
m
m
s
s
p
p
o
o

.
.

b
b
b
b
e
e
e
e

.
.

i
i
i
i

i
i
i
i

r
r

j
j
j
j

e
e
e
e

r
r
r
r

o
o
g
g
e
e
n
n
e
e
s
s

n
n
n
c
c
c
k
k
k

i
i
i

.
.
.

.
.

7
7
4
4
3
3
B
B

A
A
T
T
C
C
C

N
N
C
C

I
I

M
B

i
i

i
i

l
l

i
i

i
i

l
l

t
t

.
.

l
l

t
t

.
.

.
.

/
/

i
i

l
l

t
t

.
.

.
.

t
tt
t

l
l
i
i

l
l
i
i

u
u

d
d

t
t
r
r

u
u

C
C
o
o
s
s
t
t
tt
r
r
i
i
d
d
u
u
m
m
b
b
o
o
u
u

C
C
o
o
s
s

n
n
u
u
m
mm
m

u
u
m
m
b
b
o
oo
o

t
t
r
r
i
i
d
d
u
u
m
m
b
b
o
o

n
n
u
u
m
m
B
B
o
o
N
N
T
T
A
A
1
1
A
A
T
T
n
n
C
uC
C
u
m
C
1
B
9
o
3
N
9
T
7
C
A
o
1
o
H
S
a

C
o
o
S

C
C
o
o
s
s
t
t
r
r
i
i
d
d
u
u
m
b
o
u

A
A
A
T
TTyy
T
yy
y
y
y
y
p
pp
p
C
C
e
C
1
5
5
7
9
C
o
o
S

H
a

n
u
m
B

n
n
u
u
m
m
B
B
a
4
6
5
7
C
o
o
S
-
1

A

u
u

-
1

l
i

l
l
i
i

l
l

2

.
.

.

.

f

.

t

.

-

-

.

/

.

-

.

.

i
i

-

t
t
t
t

.
.

.

.

.

1

l

l

m

A

m

ni.
ni.

.

.

O

1

o

o

9

1

e

d

n

a

F

D

H

S

S

A

S

B

m

M

m

S

C

D

C

-

.

.

.

.

o

o

1

6

6

2

h

1

3

3

1

o

o

5

3

S

B

C

D

-

.

.

.

.

.

k

S

S

M

W
W

W
W

M

C

D

D

D

1

o

o

2

2

6

0

4

p

u

2

o

o

3

5

3

3

x

m
e

S

S

V

-

.

.

C

c

s

S

S

1

o

o

7

u

n

a

u

u

C

R

M

3

1

6

e

a

e

M

.

.

.

.

-

S

S

E

s

s

c

C

2

o

o

9

9

6

1

1

A

S

V

7

8

7

1

e

e

n

C

D

.

M

m

.

.

-

M

s

c

v

s

c

c

S

C

D

8

9

6

5

1

1

n

a

n

o

S

S

T

1

o

o

3

8

5

0

2

.

.

.

-

C

D

M

M

S

S

1

o

o

4

0

3

4

6

1

u

d

s

G

.

.

C

-

3

o

o

7

0

5

0

1

S

S

T

C

D

C

s

c

M

.

.

m
m

S

S

P

s

o

o

2

4

6

0

1

2

1

-

5

7

2

3

1

1

3

9

C

D

A

A

B

A

D

R

.

.

-

o

o

n

e

o

p

a

o

n

h

S

S

P
P
P

E
E
E

7

5

_

1

_

8

p

m
m

C

D

S

.

.

-

-

D

D

C

o

o

7

n

a

g

u
u

u
u

S

6

5

7

7

2

e

M

.

.

m
m

m
m

S

S

C

C

c

T

-

C

C

D

D
D

o

o

4

6

6

8

2

2

1

8

9

5

1

l

S

A
A
A
A
A

.

.

F

-

c
c

S

D

m
m

M
M

h

o

o

2

5

3

n
n
n

d
d
d

a
a
a

C

.

.

.

D
D

7

4

_

7

_

1

p

-

T

J
J

S

C

.

.

.

.

M

1

7

2

u

p
p

h
h

o
o

M
M
M
M

m
m

-

-

1

C
C

C
C
C
C

S

i

l

.

.

.

A

A

0

7

8

u

C

i
l

M

.

.

.

A

S

A

o

a
a

e
e

b
b

n
n

1

D

c
c
c
c
c

.

.

.

S

o

o

b
b

e
e

n
n

.

t

.

s
s

M

o

o

2

b
b

s
s

l

i

C

C

.

o

o

5

0

i

l
l

M

.

o
o
o

n
n
n
n

4
4

.

C
C

M

m

6
6
66
6
6

4
4
4
4

.
.

M

2
2
2
2

II

ii.

s
.

r
i
.

-
2

e
r

-
2

s
.

.
n

.
5

4
.

-
1

.
1

6
.

-
3

-
1

8
.

b
ggb
b
g
g
g
g
g

ifi

-
3

Fl

-2

l
l
i
i
.

s
.
J

Clo
Clo

o
0

o
1

rific

inu

.
1
ly

F
A
A

S
-
2
-2

8
0
5
2

D
S
M

C
o
o
S

C
o
o
S

e.Y
C.8

.
.1
8
o

3
5
2
9
6

B.8
B.8
.1
.1
.1
.1
5
5
5
5
2
2
2

Clo
Cloo
Clo
Clo
Clo

stridiu
stridiu

s.
s.
s
s
e.
s

2.
B
-
2.
5
1.
4.C

6
4
8
8
5
1
5
0
0

.lju
.lju
.lju
.lju
ulfito
ulfito
/I
/I
etivib
etivib
etivib
etivib
etivib
o
oo
o
t
t
str
str
str
stridiu
ulu
ulu
idiu
ulfito
ulfito
hlii.
hlii.
rio.c
rio.c
rio.c
rio.c
i.
stridiu
stridiu
s
s.
tt
Clostridiu
Clostridiu
.
cte
cte
gly
gly
.c
.c
.a
.a
c
riu
riu
a
a
a
ellulolytic
ellulolytic
ell
elluloly
ellul
ellulolytic
aa
arb
arb
arb
c
c
cc
c
cteriu
c
cc
c
t
tt
ol
olic
e
tee
eto
.b
.b
eriu
tt
.h
.h
o
xidiv
xidiv
xidiv
m.cellulovora
m.cellulovora
eijerin
eijerin
yt
Clost
Clostridiu
afnie
afnie
u
utylic
ossridiu
tylic
ty
.h
.h
ora
ora
ora
ora
h
aa
af
afnie
c
c
u
u
kii.N
kii.N
Clostridiu
Clostridiu
nie
Clostridiu
Clostssridiu
s.P
s.P
s.P
s.P
m.sp
m.sp
.A
.A
sp
ns.7
ns.7
p
7.D
7.D
7.D
7.D
CI
CI
T
TT
T
oro
oro
oro
Clostridiu
Clostridiu
4
4
S
S
S
S
g
g
g
g
m.bot
m.botulinu
3
3
Clostridium.botulinum.BoNT/A1.ATCC.19397.CooS-
Clostridium.botulinum.BoNT/A1.ATCC.19397.CooS-2
m.b
e
e
e
.b
B.A
B.A
boo
n
nnb
n
Clostridium.botulinum.BoNT/B1.Okra.CooS-2
Clostridium.botulinum.BoNT/B1.Okra.CooS-
es.A
eses
es.A
diu
diu
Clostridiu
Clostridiu
o
oo
otulin
t
ulinu
T
T
ulin
AA
m.botulinu
m.botulinu
m.botulinu
m.botulinu
2.C
Clostridiu
Clostridiu
Clostridiu
T
TT
T
Clostssridium.botooulinum.BoNT/A3
Clostridium.botulinum.BoNT/A3.Loch.Maree.CooS-2
ostridiu
C.3
C.3
u
u
3.C
C
C
C
m.F.Langeland.C
m.F.Langeland
m
m.B
6
6
CC
C
C.1
.B
5
5
5
.1
5
5
Clostridium.botulinum.NCTC.2916.CooS-2
Clostridium.botulinum.NCTC.2916.CooS-
4
4
m.bo
m.botulinu
1
6
L
La
8
8
5
5
5
5
5
5
a
a
a
9
9
9
9
1
angelan
-2
8
8
5
5
5
5
5
5
4
4
4.6
m.botulinu
m.botulinu
m.botulinu
6.C
6
6
6.C
m.botulinu
ngela
.6
m.A2.Kyoto-F.CooS-
m.A2.Kyoto-F.CooS-22
m.A2.Kyoto-F.CooS-2
S-4
m.A2.Kyoto-F.CooS-2
t
5
7
7
7
7
7
7
6
6
Clostridium.saccharolyticum.W
Clostridium.saccharolyticum.W
ulinu
9
9.C
9.C
9
9
9
C
C
4
Carboxydothermus.hydrogenoformans.Z-2901.CooS-V
Carboxydothermus.hydrogenoformans.Z-2901.CooS-
.C
5
5
5
5
4
o
o
8
7
7
7
7.C
C
CC
2
.C
o
2
ndnd.
mKyoto
Kyoto
o
o
o
Thermosinus.carboxydivorans.Nor1.CooS-2
Thermosooinus.caccrborr
C
C
9
S-3
m.F.230613
o
o
o
.C
.F.FF
o
o
o
S-2
C
C
Methanohalobium.evestigatum.Z-7303.DSM.3721.CooS-1
Methanohalobium.evestigatum.Z-7303.DSM.3721.CooS-1
o
o
o
o
/B1.Okra.CooS-
m.type.A.-.Ha
m.type.A.-.Hal
m.type.A.-.Ha
m.type.A.-.Hall
oo
oo
oo
oo
SS
S
S
S-2
23061
B1.Okra.CooS
T/T/
S
SS
S-2
CooS
CooS
CTC.2916.CooS
.Loch.Maree.CooS-2
TC.2916.CooS
3
bo
xyoo
m.evestigatum.Z-7303.DSM.3721.CooS-
hMaree
22
22
xyx
diyy
Methanosarcina.mazei.Go1.DSM.3647.CooS-
Methanosarcina.mazei.Go1.DSM.3647.CooS-2
alalll
MareeCooS
Maree
Maree..CooS-
di
l
vovvranrr
gatum.Z-7303.DSM.3721.CooS
22S-
2
M1.DSM.2544
M1.DSM.254
anns.sNoNor11.Coo
ansNoNor11Coo
Methanococcus.voltae.A
Methanococcus.voltaeA
Methanococcus.voltae.A3
s.Nor1.CooS-2S-
2
CooS2
CooS-2
S-
Methanosarcina.barkeri.Fusaro.DSM.804.CooS-2
Methanosarcina.barkeri.Fusaro.DSM.804.CooS-2-
Methanosarcina.acetivorans.C2A.CooS-
Methanosarcina.acetivorans.C2A.CooS-2
2
22
22
22
22
442
CooS-S2
CooS-S
ccus.voltaeA
4
SM.3721.CooS
SM.3721.CooS3
SS
SS22S-
22
2
Methanosaeta.thermophila.PT.Cdh-1
Methanosaeta.thermophila.PT.Cdh-
VA33A
rans.C2A.CooS
AA
A
ans.C2A.CooS2
saeta.thermophila.PT.Cdh-
saeta.thermophila.PT.Cdh-
DSM.804.CooS-
DSM.804.CooS
DSM.804.CooS2
11
11
Persephonella.marina.EX-H
Persephonella.marina.EX-H1
M.804.CooS
--
Natranaerobius.thermophilus.JW/NM-WN-LF
Natranaerobius.thermophilus.JW/NM-WN-LF
Desulfotomaculum.reducens.MI-1
Desulfotomaculum.reducens.MI-
2
ulfotomaculum.reducens.MI
-
2
22
22
erobius.thermophilus.JW/NM-WN-L
erobius.thermophilus.JW/NM-WN-L
maculum.reducensMI1
22
22
22
Clostridium.tetani.Massachusetts.E88
Clostridium.tetani.Massachusetts.E8
1
11
Dethiobacter.alkaliphilus.AHT1.CooS-
Dethiobacter.alkaliphilus.AHT1.CooS-2
s.JW/NM-WNL
JW/NM-WNL1
Alkaliphilus.metalliredigens.QYMF.CooS-3
Alkaliphilus.metalliredigens.QYMF.CooS-3
11
aliphilus.metalliredigens.QYMF.CooS
phip
FF
FF
met
us.AHT1CooS
us.AHT1CooS 8
iredigeedig
Clos
Clostridium.cellulolyticum.H10.CooS-2
tssridium
gens.QYMFCooS 2
ns.Qns.Q
.celluloly
Clostridium.papyrosolvens.DSM2782CooS
Clostridium.papyrosolvens.DSM.2782.CooS-2
YMFYMF
ellulolyuloly umum.H10H10.CooS-CooS2
22
.CooS-
.CooS
tyyicum
.H10
33
33
.CooS-
Azotobacter.vinelandii.DJ.ATCC.BAA-1303
A
Azotooott
o
ob t vinelandiiDJ
obactccertt vinelandi
2
22
Thermincola.potens.JR.CooS-4
Carboxydothermus
Carboxydothermus.hydrogenoformans.Z-2901.CooS-IV
Desulfitobacterium.hafniense.Y51.CooS-3
Desul
Desulfitobacterium.hafniense.DCB-2.CooS-4
Desulfito
Desulfurispirillum.indicum.S5
Desulfotomaculum.nigrificans.DSM.574.CooS-2
Desulfoff too ott m
Carboxydothermus.hydrogenoformans.Z-2901.CooS-II
Geobacillus.sp..Y4.1MC1
Carboxydothermu
Geobacillus.thermoglucosidasius.C56-YS93
Thermoanaerobacter.tengcongensis.MB4T
Rhodospirillum.rubrum.S1.ATCC.11170
Geoba
Rhodopseudomonas.palustris.BisB18
Therm
T h e r m i n c o l a . p o t e n s . J R . C o o S - 3
T h e r m o s i n u s . c a r b o x y d i v o r a n s . N o r 1 . C o o S - 1
Rh
C a r b o x y d o t h e r m u s . h y d r o g e n o f o r m a n s . Z - 2 9 0 1 . C o o S -
i u m . h a f n i e n s e . D C B - 2 . C o o S - 3
D e s u l f i t o b a c t e r i u m . h a f n i e n s e . Y 5 1 . C o o S - 4
. b e m i d ji e n s i s . B e m . D S M . 1 6 6 2 2 . C o o S - 1
T h e r
A l k a li p h il u s . m e t a lli r e d i g e n s . Q Y M F . C o o S - 1
D e s u lfit o b a c t e ri u m . h a f n i e n s e . Y 5 1 . C o o S - 1
C a r b o x y d o t h e r
o S - 1
i
f
2
D e s u l
D e s u
u
e . D C B - 2 . C o
o S -
S - 3
3 . C o
D e
o
S - 4
1 . C o
7
0
9
s
o
S - 1
n
G e o b a c t e r
a . A T C C . 3
1 . C o
7
a f n i e
G e o b a c t
5 . D S M . 7
o
S - 1
o
c t e ri u m . h
7
R . C
5 . D S M . 7
S - 2
o
A
o
e ti c
s . J
1 . C
S - 2
7
o
5
c
o
n
a
a
s . 5
1 . C
T
o t e
b
S - 2
r m o
o
u lfit o
7
H
n
o
5
a
o l a . p
s . A
n sis
e
sis. C
0
s . 5
x i d
o
e ll a .t h
s
D e
o
M . 5
n
h il u
e t o
D
S -3
3 - 1. C
c
a
a rtie
e r m i n
x i d
r
c
o
S -2
a li p
u l u m . a
S
a rtie
M o
o o
e t o
M
8 . D
m .N a p h S 2.C o o S -2
nia.stuttg
c t e r. a lk
M .3 3 8 2. C
c
o o
T
nia .st u tt g
u l u m . a
S
8
D e sulfo co ccu s.ole o vora n s.H xd 3.C o o S-2
c
2
u lf o t o m a
s. A
K -0 1. C
u lf o t o m
m . Z - 7
M .2 0 7 5
a
n
b
D esulfococcus.oleovorans.H xd3.C oo S-1
u lf o t o m a
uta
e t h i o
e
u
e
D esulfatibacillu m.alkenivorans.A K-01.C oo S-1
u lf o t o
S
a tic
m
n
m .alk e niv ora n s.A
e
2. D
e
D esulfobacteriu m.autotrophicu m.H R M 2.D S M.3382.C ooS-2
D
dis
u
u
b
atu s. K
s
s
s. K
Syntrophobacter.fu m aroxidans.M P O B.C ooS-2
m . a r a
pir a.thio
D esulfarculus.b a arsii.2st1 4.D
M
Desulfurivibrio.alkaliphilus.A H T2.CooS-2
a t u
R
delta.proteobacteriu m.sp..M L M S-1.CooS-5
m . H
did
did
d elta.prote o b a cteriu
delta.proteobacterium.sp..MLM S-1.CooS-3
s
n
n
m .a utotro p hic u
o
delta.proteobacterium.sp..MLM S-1.CooS-4
a
h
n
Candidatus.Desulforudis.audaxviator.MP104C.CooS-1
C
atr o
Am monifex.degensii.KC4
e s ulfatib a cillu
Thermosediminibacter.oceani.JW/IW-1228P.DSM.16646.CooS-2
Eubacterium.limosum.KIST612
Clostridium.ljungdahlii.PETC.DSM.13528.CooS-2
648011544
e s ulfaf
Syntrophobacter.fu m aroxida
D esulfafftaaibacillu m.alkenkk
Candidatus.Desulforudis.audaxviator.MP104C
Eubacterium.limosum.KIST
imosum.KIST
Clostridium.carboxidivorans.P7.DSM.15243.CooS-3
.sp..MLM
M LM L
.sp..M Luu
Am monifex.degen
64801154
d elt
D esulfobacteriu m.autotrophicu m.H R M
autotrophicu m.H R M
D e sulfo
.sp..MLM S
MLM S
MLM S
D esulfarc
Desulfurivibrio.alkaliphilu
D esulfococcu
Thermosediminibacter.oceani.JW/IW-1228P.DSM.16646.C
228P.DSM.16646C
SM.16646C
Clostridium.ljungdahlii.PETC.DSM.13528.Coo
528.Coo
528.Coo
243.CooS-011
648012950
Clostridium.carboxidivorans.P7.DSM.15243.CooS-
243.CooS-
imosum.KIS
mosum.KIS
mosum.KIS
Desulfurivibrio.alkaliphil
MLMLM
243.CooS
243.CooS
211
Clostridium.carboxidivorans.P7.DSM.15243.CooS-1
Clostridium.carboxidivorans.P7.DSM.15243.CooS-1
ifex.deg
64801295
.alkalp
Clostridium.bartlettii.DSM.16795.CooS-2
M.15243.CooS-
243.CooS
243.CooS
M.15243.CooS
2222
22
Clostridium.difficile.630.-.epidemic.type.X.CooS-2
Clostridium.bartlettii.DSM.16795.CooS-
ex.d
otrophicu m
222
Clostridium.difficile.BI9.CooS-2
Clostridium.difficile.630.-.epidemic.type.X.CooS-
o eriu m
2222
Clostridium.difficile.QCD-37x79.NAP1a/001.CooS-2
X.CooS
X.CooS
.CooS-
CooS-
sps
D-63q42.CooS-2
22
D-63q42.CooS-2
CooS
Clostridium.difficile.QCD-37x79.NAP1a/001.CooS-
taccerium
D-63q42.CooS 222
D-76w55.NAP1.CooS-2
CooS
CooS
D-63q42.CooS-
rivibrio
too
P1b/006.CooS-2
P1b/006.CooS 222
P1b/006.CooS-2
63q42.CooS
D-63q42.CooS
D-76w55.NAP1.CooS-
taccerium
D-66c26.CooS12222
D-66c26.CooS-2
P1b/006.CooS-
D196.CooS-1
tt
P1b/006.CooS
P1b/006.CooS
D-66c26.CooS-
D-66c26.CooS-
S-2
222
2
S-2
acc
deltatt.protrooeobac
D196.CooS-
S-2
222 22
2
S-2
tt
S-
deltatt.protrooeobac
2002
S-2
S-
S-S
S
S
S
0
3200
0
S-
BBII99
9
S-2
S-
rooeobac
0101
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
3
3
3
3
3
S
S
ctype
type
I00
S-
o
o
o
B000
S-
S-
S-
S-
tt
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
1
1
9
9
9
9
9
9
S
S
S-
S-
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
7
7
7
7
7
7
.//
S
S
o
o
C
C
2.C
2.C
2.C
2.C
1/
1/
1/
1/
0
0
0
0
0
0
M.5
M.5
tt
o
o
diffficileile
Clostridium.difficile
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
1
1
1
1
1
1
1.C
2.C
1.C
C
P1a/
8.C
8.C
P1a
4
4
4
4
4
4
o
o
o
o
o
o
8.C
8.C
8.C
8.C
R
R
R
R
9
9
9
9
9
9
.prot
tt
o
o
o
o
o
o
2
propr
o
o
o
o
8
8
8
8
8
8
7.C
7.C
1
1
C.2
C.2
C.2
C.2
2
2
F.C
F.C
F.C
F.C
F.C
F.C
3
3
3
3
3
3
S
S
p.S
p.S
3.C
3.C
C
C
2
2
2
2
2
2
S
S
9
9
9
9
m.A
m.A
5
5
9
9
9
9
9
9
C
C
deltatt
4
4
4
4
4
4
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
p
p
dii.D
dii.D
g
g
7
7
7
7
7
7
3
3
C
C
C
C
C
0
0
C
C
C
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
6
6
6
6
6
6
0
0
0
0
Clostridium.difficile.C
Clostridium.difficile.C
s
s
s.s
s.s
M
M
M
M
M
M
Clostridium
2
2
0
0
0
0
0
8
8
8
8
P
P
A
A
A
A
A
A
ostridium.difficile.Q
Q
Clostridium.difficile.Q
Clostridium.difficile.Q
Clostridium.difficile.Q
2
2
2
T
T
T
T
T
T
A
A
A
A
u
u
D-3
D-3
1
1
m.difficile.CIP.1
m.difficile.CIP.1
5
5
5
5
C
C
C
C
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
A
A
R
m.difficile.R
m.difficile.R
4.N
4.N
D-97b34.N
N
D-97b34.N
m.A
m.A
A
A
m.A
m.A
u
u
e
e
m.difficile.N
m.difficile.N
m.difficile.N
m.difficile.N
0
0
0
0
n
n
e
P
P
Q
Clostridium.difficile.Q
e.Q
Clostridium.difficile.Q
Q
Q
s.Q
s.Q
s.Q
s.Q
c
c
c
c
m.difficile.N
m.difficile.N
b
b
M.2
M.2
M.2
M.2
m
m
kla
kla
c
c
c
c
C
C
s.o
s.o
o
o
s
u
u
u
u
C
C
m.difficile.Q
m.difficile.Q
n
n
n
n
c
c
m.stic
m.stic
e
e
e
u
u
S
S
o
o
Clostridium.difficile.Q
Clostridium.difficile.Q
e
e
e
e
b
b
c
c
min
min
dig
dig
dig
dig
4.D
4.D
s.o
s.o
c
c
o
o
etallire
etallire
etallire
etallire
u
u
c
c
u
u
7-2
7-2
stridiu
stridiu
Clostridiu
Clostridiu
o
o
c
c
stridiu
stridiu
stridiu
R
R
Clostridium.difficile.Q
Clostridium.difficile.Q
c
c
min
min
stridiu
stridiu
o
o
PI.C
PI.C
Clostridiu
Clostridiu
c
c
min
min
Clostridiu
Clostridiu
o
o
u
u
m
m
s.m
s.m
Clo
Clo
min
min
Clo
Clo
Clo
R
R
nii.V
nii.V
Clo
Clo
u
u
hilu
hilu
R
R
u
u
R
R
alip
alip
Alk
Alk

e s ulfo b a cteriu
e s ulfo b a cteriu

t o b a c t e r

biu
C
ulfo

s
s
D e
D e
D e
D e

e
e
s
s
n
n
a
a

6
6
1
1
-
-
2
2

di

e t o
e t

alo

C
C

2

33

tt

g

e

n
O

S

a
n

s

n

e

c
c

A
A

D

5

D
D

h

I

D
D

c

utia.h
utia.h
Bla
Bla

Clade E 

0.9951 

S-2
S-2
3.C
3.C

o
o
o
o

1
1
-
-
S
S
o
o
o
o
8.C
8.C

n

M

c

z

M

S
S
S

M

2
2

M

1

2

i

n
a

o
n

.

i
i
l

o
n
a

1

1

1

3

w

C

1

C

A
A

C

C

t
s

t
s

v
o

e
e
v
y

2
2
5
5
3
3

3
3
7
7
8
8

903

d h-1
d h-1

h - 2
h - 2
h -
d
d
h - 1
h - 1

CooS-1

3
6
4
5
1
0
8
4
6

h - 1
h - 1
d
d
h - 2
h - 2
h -
4 . C
4 . C
0
0
7 . C d
7 . C d

CooS-2S-
S-2

1
1
-
-
S
S
Clostridium.difficile.630.-.epidemic.type.X.CooS-1
o
o
-.epidemic.type.X.CooS-
S-1
S-1
P1b/006.CooS-1
2
2
o
o
4
4
P1b/006.CooS-
-
-
C
C
S
S
2
2
o
o
5
5
.
.
o
o
a
a
o
o
S-1
S-1
d
d
M.1
M.1
o
o
r
r
4.C
4.C
n
n
k
k
Clostridium.difficile.QCD-37x79.NAP1a/001.CooS-1
NAP1a/001.CooS-1
C
C
S-1
S-1
M.1
M.1
klu
klu
O
O
w55.NAP1.CooS-1
Clostridium.difficile.QCD-76w55.NAP1.CooS-1
o
o
.
.
6
6
S
S
3
3
2
2
o
o
.
.
Thermosediminibacter.oceani.JW/IW-1228P.DSM.16646.CooS-1
DSM.16646.CooS-1
1
1
1
1
o
o
1
1
7.D
7.D
e.C.-.E
e.C.-.E
63q42.CooS-1
D-63q42.CooS-1
.8
C.8
S
S
5.C
5.C
0
0
B
B
o
o
6
6
1B.DSM.12137
Caldicellulosiruptor.kristjanssonii.177R1B.DSM.12137
63q42.CooS-
S-1
S-1
C
C.D
D5
C.D
2
2
2
2
5
63q42.CooS
3q42.CooS
2.CooS
D-32g58.CooS-1
2.C
2.C
0
0
/
/
T
T
1
1
1
1
5
5
2g58.CooS-
s.P
s.P
C
C
3
3
9
9
C
.
.
.
.
M.5
M.5
N
N
Clostridium.difficile.QCD-66c26.CooS-1
26.CooS-1
w55.NAP1
C
C
C
C
o
o
TT
T
T
S-1
S-1
2
2
7
7
DSM.9545
Caldicellulosiruptor.lactoaceticus.6A.DSM.9545
T
T
T
3
3
o
o
o
o
6
6
m.A
m.A
.
.
n
n
R
R
R
R
D-97b34.N
97b34.N
9
9
F
F
p
p
E
E
E
m.D.1
m.D.1
Clostridium.difficile.QCD-23m63.CooS-1
1.C
1.C
B
B
M.1
M.1
ora
ora
7
7
Desulfotomaculum.acetoxidans.5575.DSM.771.CooS-2
S
S
m.ty
m.ty
B
B
B
B
.
.
o
o
hlii.P
P
hlii.P
m
m
.
.
0
0
m
m
Clostridium.difficile.CD196.CooS-2
oS-2
o
o
ri.D
ri.D
N
N
N
N
u
u
m
m
P.1
m.difficile.CIP.1
hlii
9
9
idiv
xidiv
9.C
m.difficile.BI9.C
u
u
Caldicellulosiruptor.saccharolyticus.DSM.8903
S
S
yDlic
utylic
ri.
ri.
ri.
u
u
2
2
n
n
Tu
T
u
u
u
artlettii.D
D
ulin
n
a
a
a
Clostridium.difficile.NAP07.CooS-1
e
e
e
0
0
u
u
yi.N
otulin
d
Clostridium.difficile.NAP08.CooS-1
u
Caldicellulosiruptor.hydrothermalis.108
v
2
otulin
o
g
y
m.difficile.R
t
b
t
o
arb
klu
m.klu
o
n
eto
Clostridium.difficile.Q
Clostridium.therm ocellum.LQ8.DS M.1313.CooS-2
b
b
m.lju
Clostridium.difficile.Q
.
Clostridium.difficile.Q
m.b
Pelobacter.carbinolicus.DSM.2380.CooS-1
.
m
m.c
m
m.n
m.b
m
c
m.b
m.a
u
ridiu
ridiu
stridiu
stridiu
stridiu
stridiu
d
stridiu
stridiu
i
stridiu
stridiu
r
Clostridiu
Methanopyrus.kandleri.AV19.Cdh-1
t
Clostridiu
s
Clostridiu
o
S M.10642.C dh
O.D S M.10642.C dh
Clo
C andidatus.M ethanoregula.boonei.6 A 8.C dh-1
A 8AA .C dh-1
Clo
Clo
Clo
M ethanospirillu m.hungatei.JF-1.C dh-1
Clo
M ethanopyrus.kandleri.AV19.Cdh-2
Clo
C
Clo
Clo
Clo
M .4 3 0 4.C d h-2
Clo
M .4 3 0 4.C d h-
S M.106
M .3 7 2 1. C
M .3 7 2 1. C
M .4 3 0 4.C d h-1
S M
M .4 3 0 4.C d h-
S
S
F erroglobus.placidus.A E DII12 D
C-1 6.D
m .Z-7 3 0 3. D
Z-7 3 0 3. D
m .Z-7 3 0 3. D
M ethanocella.sp..R C-I
0
S
S
M eth a n osa eta.th er m o p hila.P T
7 3
7 3
.D
C -1 6.D
Arch a e o glo b us.fulgid us.V
2
M .6 2 4 2
9
9
44
M .6 2 4
m .Z
m .Z
1
1
m
M .5
M .5
M .5
m .e v e stig atu
M .
Arc h a e o glo b u s.fulgid u s.V
-1
h -1
S
S
h
S
S
S
D
eth a n o c o c c oid e s.b urto nii. D
d
d
D
D
P . D
P . D
P . D
h - 2
h - 2-
C
A . C
4 . C
4 . C
P .
A .
d
d
L
L
0
0
2
22
2
A . C
C
S
hii. S
M . 8
M . 8
n s. C
n s. C
A .22
d
d
7 . C
7 . C
2
2
S
S
a
eth a n o h alo biu
s. C
s. C
a
a.a c etiv o ra
a r o . D
a r o . D
hilu s. m
4
4
6
6
n
n
S M . 3
S M . 3
h - 3
h - 3
o r a
r a
rr
s
s
d
d
u
u
etiv
A . C
C
e ri. F
ri. F
1 . D
1 . D
p
S M . 8
S M . 8
A .
alo
c
2
22
2
o s a rcin
o
o
a.a
s . C
s . C
a r k
ei. G
ei. G
h
a r o . D
a r o . D
o
4
4
a rcin
n
n
a . b
6
6
n
o r a
r a
1 . D S M . 3
1 . D S M . 3
a
rr
a . m a
ivi o
s
s
a r cin
eth
n
vv
e tiv
u
u
s
e ri. F
e ri. F
a
o
eth
c
n
a r cin
a . a
s
a
e i. G o
e i. G o
a r k
r k
d i s . C 6
d i s . C 6
o
eth
d i s . C
d i s . C
n
a r ci n
s
a . b
a
o
M
e t h
z
z
5CC
d i s . C 5
n
a l u
a l u
a l u
a l u
a . m a
a
a r c i n
d i s . C
s
a
M
o
M e t h
ri p
ri p
i p
ri p
m a
m a
s . m a
d i s . C 7
d i s . C 7
a l u
a l u
a r c i n
a
s
d i s . C
d i s . C
d i s . C
. m a r b u r g e n s i s . M a r b u r g . D S M . 2 1 3 3 . C d h - 2
. D S M . 2 1 3 3 . C d h - 2
c u s . D e lt a . H
r o p h i c u s . D e lt a . H
M e t h
ri p
ri p
n
a
u
m a
s . m a
s
a l u
a l u
a l u
a l u
a l u
2SS
c u s . m a ri p a l u d i s . S 2
M e t h
c
. m a ri p a l u d i s . S
c
m a ri p
m a ri p
m a ri p
m a ri p
i p
s . m a ri p
o
a
c
u
M e t h
o p h i
c
o
a
rr
r
t
t h e r m o a u t o t
B
s . v a n n i e lii. S B
M e t h a n o c o c c u s . v a n n i e lii. S B
c
M e t h
t h e r m o a u t ott
oo
u
s i s . M a r b u
v a n n i e lii. S
c
rr
c
o
MM
c
M e t h
a n n
o
M e t h a n o c o c
r g e n
f e r v i d u s . V 2 4 S . D S M . 2 0 8 8
f e r v i d u s . V 2 4 S . D S M . 2 0 8 8
.
.
M e t h
e r
M e t h a n o t h e r m o b a c t e r
rr
. m a r b u
m o b a c t
aa
4 S D S
4 S
M e t h a n o t h e r m o b a c t e r
r
M e t h a n o c a l d o c o c c u s . v u l c a n i u s . M 7 . C d h - 1
1
ett
o c o c c u s . v u l c a n i u s . M 7 . C d h -
c t
aa
m o b a
m u s .
M e t h a n o t h e r m u s .
s
m u s
f e r v e n s . A G 8 688
f e r v e n s . A G 8 6
o c o c c u s .
M e t h a n o c a l d o c o c c u s .
ococcus. jannasch i
Methanoca ldococcus. jannasch i
o c o c
o co c
Methanocaldococcus.sp..FS406-22.Cdh-1
dococcus.sp..FS406-22.Cdh-
dococcus sp FS406-22 Cdh
Methanothermococcus.okinawensis.IH1
rmococcus.okinawensis.IH1
cus s
rmococcus.okinawensis.IH
coccus
2-
Methanococcus.aeolicus.Nankai-3.Cdh-2
ccus.aeolicus.Nankai-3.Cdh-
rmoc
Candidatus.Desulforudis.audaxviator.MP104C.Cdh-1
Desulforudis.audaxviator.MP104C.Cdh-
ccus.a
cc
Methanocaldococcus.infernus.ME
s.ME
docoo occ ccoo us.infeff rnurr
dd
ccus.aeolicus.Nankai-3.Cdh-1
Methanococcus.aeolicus.Nankai-3.Cdh-1
c
rgrr .DSM.2133.Cdh-1
Methanothermobacter.marburgensis.Marburg.DSM.2133.Cdh-1
sis.Marburr
rgen
rr
rmobactaa ett r.marburr
e
Moorella.thermoacetica.ATCC.39073.CooS-1
3903
ermoacetica ATCC 39073 CooS-1
ermoacetica.ATCC.39073.CooS 1
e
Geobacter.metallireducens.GS-15
.m
m
etee alli
tt
alli
cenc s.GS 15
cencc s.GS-15
Geobacter.bemidjiensis.Bem.DSM.16622.CooS-2
bemidjiensis.Bem.DSM.16622.CooS-2-
bemidjiensis.Bem
bb
b
bb
midjiensis.Bem
i
Geobacter.sp..FRC-32.CooS-2
sp..FRC-32.CooS-
sp..FRC32.Coo
p FRC32.Coo
Campylobacter.concisus.13826
2--
acter.concisus.1382
ac
cte
c
Campylobacter.curvus.525.92
33
6
a
aa
ct
ertt .curvrr us.525
Clostridium.papyrosolvens.DSM.2782.CooS-1
.92
papyrosolvens.DSM.2782.CooS-1
papyroso
p pyros
Clostridium.cellulolyticum.H10.CooS-1
ven
Clostridium.thermocellum.LQ8.DSM.1313.CooS-1
celluloly
SMSM
782.782
tyyicum
Clostridium.thermocellum.DSM.2360
thermocoo ellucc m.LQLL 8.DSM.1313.CooS-1
theh rm e
.H10
heh
.CooS-
Clostridium.thermocellum.ATCC.27405
the
1
hh rmocellum.DSM.2360
Clostridium.cellulovorans.743B.ATCC.35296.CooS-4
herme
hermocellum.ATCC.27405
648852350
ellulovorans.743B.ATCC.35296.CooS-
Veillonella.parvula.ATCC.17745
Veillonella.sp..6_1_27
Veillonella.dispar.ATCC.17748
vula.ATCCTT .17745
Veillonella.sp..oral.taxon.158.F0412
.6_1_27
.6_1_2_1_2
Veillonella.parvula.DSM.2008
ar.ATCC.1774
ar.ATCC.774
Veillonella.sp..3_1_44
ATCC. 74
Veillonella.atypica.ACS-134-V-Col7a
oral.taxon.158.F041
Veillonella.atypica.ACS-049-V-Sch6
la.DSM.2008
laDSM2008
Selenomonas.sputigena.ATCC.35185
Selenomonas.artemidis.F0399
_1_4ACS
Selenomonas.sp..oral.taxon.137.F0430
ACS-134-V-Col7
Mitsuokella.multacida.DSM.20544
Bryantella.formatexigens.I-52.DS
ACS-049-V-Sch6
ACS-049-V-Sch
ACS-049-V-Sch6
Eubacterium.cellulosolvens.6
gena.ATCC.3518
gena.ATCC
gena.ATCC
49-V-Sch
Ruminococcus.flavefaciens.FD-1
idis.F039
Ru
R
minococcus.albus.7
u
al.taxaa
Pseudora
minococcus.albus.8
xx
Orib
on
DSM.2054444
.137.F0430
acteriu
s.I-52.DS
hloro
acteriu
mibacter.alactolyticus.A
hloro
ns.6
b
m.sin
a
ulfo
biu
s
c
m.sa
M.14469.CooS-2
M.14469.CooS-2
ulu
ulfo
FD-1
elta.prote
us.F
ulfo
m.p
micro
elta.p
b
m.p
vibrio.
urre
h
0
arv
a
2
alo
biu
u
ulfo
e
6
r
o
u
ote
m.D
ulfo
biu
b
m.b
m.b
m.N
m.N
ulf
a
a
n
n
lf
a
a
a
a
cteroid
cteroid
cteroid
b
ulf
ulf
ulf
atr
atr
vib
vib
vib
vib
lf
ib
ib
a
a
a
cb
b
b
b
b
.retb
.retb
CIB.8
CIB.8
cc
c
cteriu
lf
l
lff
l
vib
vib
at
tt
a
a
a
a
a
flffo
ff
f
etic
etic
etic
etic
rio.d
rio.d
rio
rio.d
rio.d
rio.d
ulatu
ulatu
ulatu
C.23
C.23263
C.23263
lf
lf
lf
lf
eriu
cc
ctc
ct
cte
o
o
o
f
f
n
n
tt
rio
rio
vi
vi
vi
vi
o
o
e
e
u
u
u
u
e
e
e
riu
riu
ri
ri
ri
ri
a
a
rio
rio
rio
rio
s
s
s.D
s.D
s.D
s.R
s.R
s.R
s.R
.
.
pir
pir
v
v
v
v
m.X.D
m.X.D
m.X.D
.s
.s
i
i
i
i
v
v
.
.
.
.
s
s
o
o
o
o
ulg
ulg
v
v
v
v
a.thio
a.thio
.s
.s
ulfu
ulf
ulfu
ulfu
.
.
S-1
S-1
p..
p..
e.H
e.H
s
s
v
v
v
p
p..
p..
ric
ric
ric
ris
ris
ris
ris
ris
ris
dis
dis
.
.
ri
ris
ri
v
v
.
.
.
.
s.d
s.d
s.d
s
v
v
v
v
.
.
ris
ris
ris
ris
ris
.
.
.
.
.
ki
ki
ki.
.

1
i.DSM.2661.Cdh-1
i.DSM.2661.Cdh-

0.9941 

0.9917 

GG
G
G
G
G
G
GG
G
e
e
ee
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
a
a
a
aaa
a
a
a
a
a
a
a
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c

uta
uta
ulfu
ulfu
ulfu
ild
ild

M.2
M.2
6
6
6
M.4
M.4
4
0
0

vib
vib
vib
vib
ri
ri
ri
ri
ri
ri
ri
i

G
G
e
e
o
o
b
b
a
a
c
c

-1.
-1.
S
S
-
-
1.
1.

M.3
M.3
9
9
3
3

s.
s.
ric
ric
ric

.A
A
A
T
T
T

C
C
C
C
o
o
o
o
s
s
s
s

ulg
ulg
ulg
ulg
l
l
l
l

.
9

redur
redurr

A
A
A
A
A
A
c
c
c
c
c
c
e
e
e
e
e
e

.5
.5
6
6
6

s
s
s
i
i
i
s
s
s
.
.

AC

0.D
0.D

i
i
i
i
r
r
r
r
ill
ill
ill
ill

588

m
m
o
o

l
l
lt
tttt
t
t
t
t
t
tt
ttt
r
r
r
r

ulg
ulg

o
oo
o
o
.
.
a
a
a
a

ulg
ulg
ulg
ulg

D
D
D
D
e
e
e
e

P
P
P
P
e
e
e
e

-2
-2

r
r
r
r
r
.
.
.
.
f
f
f
f

iy
iy
iy

s
s
s
s
.
.
.

l
l
l
l
k
k
k
k

2

8

4

a

v
v
v
v
v
v
i
i
i
i
i
i

4

s
s
.
.

s
s
s
s
s
s
.
.
.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.
.
.
s
s
s
s
s
s

ri
ri
ri
ri
ri
ri

li
li
li

il
il
il

lff
lf
l
l
lff
lf
ff
f
ff

ri
ri

lf
lf

ri
ri
ri
ri
ri
ri

m
m
m
m
m

r
r
r
r

lf
lf
lf
lf
lf
lf

r grr

tto
t
t
t
t

8

M
M
M
M

8
8

6
6
6

u

b

C
C
C

M
M
M
M

2
2

7
7

r
r
i
i

S
S

E

6
6
6

c
c
c

s

M
M

D

2
2
2

8
8
8

s

e

M
M
M
M

C

s

S
S
S

n
n
n
n

u
u
u
u

g
g
g
g

e

1

1
1

9
99
9
9
9

0
0

n
n

e
e

2
2
2

u

e

h

C

S
S
S

l
l
l
l
l

o
o

o
o

L
L

a
a
a
a
a

b
b

d

o

i
i

i
i

S
S

D

s

.
.
.

e
e

i
i
i
i
i
i

i
i
i
i
i
i

l
l
l
l
l
l

o
o
o

o
o

o
o

L
L

d

e
e

l
l
l
l
l
f
f
f
f
f

1

S
S

D

.
.

m
m
m
m
m
m

s
s
s
s
s

s
s
s

s

i
i

l
l

l
l

e
e
e
e

o
o

n
n

e

S
S

S
S

T
T

R
R

s

D

M

e
e
e
e
ee
e

M
M

n
n
n

a
a
a

e
e
e

e
e
e
e
e

o
o

e

l
l
l
l
l
l
f
f
f
f
f
f

.
.

.
.

o
n

T
TT
TT
TT
TT
TTTT
T

s
s

C
C

b
b
b
b

o
o
o
o

u
u
u
u

a
a
a
a

u
u
u
u

t
t
t
t
t

a
a

o
o

a
a

e

m

M
M
M
M
M

D
D
D
D
D
D

s
s
s

z
z
z

y

A
A

S
S

.
.

tt
t
t
t
t

.
.
.

e
e

o
o

h
h

l
l

C
C

o
o
o
o

a
a
a
a

a
a
a

e

M
M

m
m

C
C

M
M

r
r
r

s
s
s
s

.
.
.
.

t
t
t
t

i
i
i
i
i

e
e
e
e
e

o
o
oo
o
o
o
o

h
h
h
h
h
h

o
oo
o
o
o

a
a
a
a

b
b
b
b

u
u
u
u

a
a
a

e
e

g
g
g
g

a
a
a

u
u
u

s
s
s
s

D

r
rr
r
r
r

s
s
s
s
s
s

k
k
k
k

t
t

s
s
s
s
s

.
.

l
l

D
D
D
D
D
D

M
M

M
M

m
m

m
m
m
m

M
M
M
M

e
e
e
ee
e

a
a
a
a

o
o
o
o

n
n
n
n

h
h
h
h

e
e
e
e
ee

a
a
a
a

u
u
u

a
a
a

h
h
h

b
b
b
b

p
p
p

e
e

u
u
u
u

c
c

c
c

c
c

D

.
.
.

t
t
t

l
l
l
l
l
l

t
t
t
t

s
s

s
s

v
v

s
s

O
O

a
a
a
a

a
a
a
a

h
h
h
h

o
o
o
o

n
n
n
n

e
e
e
e

m
m

M
M

M
M

b
b
b
b
b
b

o
o
o
o
o

o
o
o
o
o
o

0
0
0

2
2
2

P
P
P

n
n
n
n

e
e
e
e

u
u
u
u
u
u

e
e
e
e
e
e

a
a
a
a
a

a
a
a
a
a

m
m

c
c
c

c
cc
c
c
c

c
cc
c
c
c

r
r

a
eaa
a
a
a
a
e
e
e
e
e
e

i
i

i
i

t
t

.
.

s
s
s
s
s
s

v
v
v
v
v
v

x
x
x
x
x
x

H
H

D

C
C
C
C
C
C

e
e

o
o

n
n

a
a

a
a

n
n

h
h

ii
i
i
i
i

t
t
t
t
t

s
s
s
s

e
e

n
n

o
o

e
e

u
u

e
e

p
p

o
o

a
a

o
o

b
b

e
e

m
m

m
m
m
m
m

s
s

s
s

c
c

D
D
D

D

r
r

i
i
i
i

a
a
a

e
e
e
e

n
n
n
n

n
n
n

a
a
a
a

o
o
o
o

h
h
h
h

a
a
a
a

t
t
t
t
t
t

s
s
s
s

c
c
c
c

n
n
n
n
n
n

g
g
g
g
g
g

e
e
e
e
e
e

o
o
o
o
o
o

b
b
b
b
b
b

e
e
e
e
e
e

u
u
u
u
u
u

o
o
o
o
o
o

e
e
e
e
e
e

a
a
a
a
a
a

A
A
A

c
c
c
c
c
c

y
y
y
y
y
y
y

r
r
r

i
i

t
t
t
t
t
t

D

b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b

a
a
a
a
a
a

e
e
e
e
e
e

o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

u
u
u
u

e
e
e
e
e
e

u
u
u
u
u
u

s
s

c
c

l
l
l
l

e
e

o
o

p
p

g
g

d
d

o
o

a
a

u
u

b
b

u
u

o

c
c
c
c

r
r
r
r

i
i
i
i

t
t
t
t

r
r

r
r

t
t

.
.

H
H
H

l
l
ll
l
ll
l
l

D

aa
a
a

h
h

d
d

b
b

u
u

a
a

b
b

o
o

s
s
s
s

c
c
c
c

o
o
o
o
o

u
u
u
u
u
u

nn
n
n
n
nn
n
n
n
n

o
o
o
o
o
o

a
a
a
a

b
b
b
b
b
b

a
a
a
a
a
a

o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

h
h
h
h
h
h
h

pp
p
p
pp
p
p
p
p
p
p

s
s
s
s

r
r
r
r

t
t

r
r
r
r

t
tt
tt
tt
t

.
.
.

l
l
l
l

F
F

c
c
c
c
c
c

a
a
a
a
a

u
u
u
u

s
s
s
s
s
s

o
o
o
o
o
o

u
u
u
uu
u

u
u
u
u
u
u

o
o
o
o
o

e
e
e
e
e
e

D
D
D
D
D

o
o
o
o

e
e
e

b
b
b
b

a
aa
a

u
u

e
e
e

d
d
d
d

e
e
e
e

o
oo
o
o
o

p
pp
p

r
r

s
s

t
t
t
t

t
t
t
t
t
t

.
.
.
.

r
r
r
r

y
yy
y

xx
x
x

c
c

n
n

a
a

u
u

e
ee
e

p
p

p
p

ee
e
e

o
o

a
a

h
h

n
n

u
u
u
u

n
n
n
n

e
e
e
e

p
p
p
p

a
a
a
a

u
u
u
u

h
h
h
h

h
h
h
h

o
o
o
o

n
n
n
n

r
r
r

D
D

t
tt
t

t
tt
t

M
M
M

s
ss
s
s
s

f
f
f
f

r
r

rr

D
D

E
E

A
A

G
G
G

c
c
c
c
c

s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s

l
l
l
l

n
n
n
n
nn
n
n
n
n

d
d
d
d
d

a
a
a
a
a
a

d
d
d
d
d
d

a
a
aa
a
a
aa
a
a

e
e
e
e
ee
e
e

n
n
n
n
n

h
h
h
h

a
a
a

u
u
uu
uu

o
o

p
p

e
e

h
h

a
a

n
n

h
h

a
a

e
e

a
a

u
u

p
p

r
r
r
r

s
s

D
D
D
D
D
D

D
D
D
D
D
D

S
S
S
S
S
S

Clade A 

Clade B 

i
i

s
s
s
u
u
u
c
c
c
c
c
c
o
o
o
c
c
c
o
o

-
-
S
S
o
o
o
o
C
C
.
.
7
7
0
0
5
5
0
0
1
1
.
.
M
M
SSS
S
S
S
D
D
D
D
.
.
.
.
a
a
a
aa
a
c
c
c
c
i
i
h
h
h
h
ppp
p
p
p
o
o
o
oo
o
r
r
r
r
t
t
t
tt
t
o
o
o
o
n
n
n
n
e
e
e
e
g
g
g
g
o
o
o
oo
o
r
r
r
r
d
d
d
dd
d
y
yy
y
y
h
h
h
h
.
.
.
.
a
a
a
a
i
i
i
i
t
t
t
t
u
u
u
u
a
a
a
a
B
B
B
B

M
M
M
S
S
D
D
.
.
2
2
5
5
-
-
I
I
.
.
s
s
s
n
n
n
e
e
e
g
g
g
i
i
x
x
e
e
t
t
aa
a
a
m
m
r
r
o
o
ff
f
f
.
.
a
a
e
e
t
t
n
n
a
a
y
y
r
r
B
B

l
l
l
l

l
l

l
l

u
u
c
cc
c
c
cc
c
o
oo
o
c
cc
c
o
o
m
mm
m
r
r
e
e
h
hh
h
T
T

l
l
i
i

u
u
h
h
p
p
o
oo
o
r
r
a
aa
a
b
b
.
.
s
s
u
u
c
cc
c
c
cc
c
o
oo
o
c
cc
c
o
o
m
mm
m
r
r
e
e
h
hh
h
T
T

i
ii
i

t
tt
tt
t

C6
6
CC
C
4
4
a
a
8
8
n
n
8
8
d
dd
d
5
5
d
dd
d
2
2
a
a
8
8
u
u
2
2
s
s
1
1
K
K
o
oo
o
r
r
a
aa
a
r
r
c
cc
c
A
A
h
h
a
a
M
MM
M
e
ee
e
4
4
u
u
C
C
m
m
o
o
oo
.
.
c
c
o
oo
o
r
r
S
SS
S
y
yy
yy
y
p
p-
p
pp
p
p
-
1
1
o
oo
o

.
.

t
tt
t

f
ff
f
i
i
l
l

.
.

u
u
m
m
O
O
P
P
F
F
8
88
8

i
i
i
i

tt
t
t

t
t
t
t
r
r
r
r
i
i
i
i
d
d
d
d
u
u
u
u
m
m
m
m
m
c
c
e
e

o
o
o
o
b
b
b
b
o
o
o
o
o
o
a
a
a
a
h
h
h
h
h
h
c
cc
c
a
a
at
a
a
a
e
e
o
o
o
o
b
.bb
bb
b
b
b
b
b
c
c
u
u
u
u
a
a
m
m
m
m
a
a
a
a
a

r
r
.

l
l
l
l

.
.
.

.
.
.

i
i
i
i
i
i

r
r
r

bb
b
b

i
i

s
s
s
s
s
s
p
p
p
p
p
p

s
s
s
u
u
u

.
.
.
.
.
.

u
u

r
r

l
l
l
l

..ll
.
.
.
.

a
a
n
n

f
f
f

u
u
u

r
r
r

i
i

r
r
r

i
i

F
F
F
F
F
F
R
R
R
R
R
R
C
C
C
C
C
C

r
r

e
e
e
d
d
u
u
c
cc
c
e
e
n
n
s
s

e
e
d
d
u
u
c
c
e
e
n
n
s
s

.
.

.
.

R
R

ff
f
f

4
4

P
P
C
CC
C
A
A

n
n
o
o

l
l

i
i

r
r

a
a
b
b
a
a

l
l

u
u
o
o
v
v
o
o
r
r
a
a
n
n
s
s

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

-
-

t
t
i
i

c
c
u
u
m
m
Z
Z

c
c
u
u
s
s
D
D
S
S
M
M
2
2
3
3
8
8
0
0
C
C
o
o
o
o
S
S

7
7
4
4
3
3
B
B
A
A
T
T
C
C
C
C
3
3
5
5
2
2
9
9
6
6
C
C
o
o
o
o
S
S

7
7
2
2
8
8
8
8
D
D
S
S
M
M
5
5
5
5
0
0
1
1
C
C
o
o
o
o
S
S

.
.

.
.

.
.

.
.

-
-
2
2

-
-

-
-
-

2
2

1
1

0.3

u
u
u

u
u

a
a

n
n
n
n

a
a

s
s
s

.
.

a
a
a
a

.
.

c
c
c
c

t
t
t
t

s
s

.
.
.

t
t

e
e
e
e

.
.

.
.
.

s
s

g
g
g
g
g

h
h

b
b
b

m
m

mm
m
m
m
m

.
.
.

m
m
m

a
a
a

.
.
.
.

m
m

.
.

t
t
r
r

c
c

a
a
a
a

.
.

a
a

o
o

r
r
r
r
r

l
l

l
l

e
e
e
e
e

u
u

o
o
o
o
o

a
a

g
g
g
g

S
S
S
S
S
S

N
N
N

x
x
x
x
x

i
i
i
i
i

II
II

a
a
a
a

a
a
a
a

d
d
d
d

1
1

A
A

T
T
T

F
F
F

s
s

M
M
M
M
M
M

p
p

2
2
.
.

C
C

r
r
r
r

i
i
i
i

p
p

a
a
a
a

e
e

a
a

a
a

e
e

u
u
u
u
m
m
m
m

.
.

.
.

m
m
m
m
m
m
m
m

A
A
M
M
4
4

-
-
-
-

3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2

.
.
.
.

t
t
t
t

h
h
h
h

r
r

r
r

z
z

t
t
i
i

m
m

k
k

e
e

e
e

i
i
.
.

o
o

a
aa
a
a
a

p
p

r
r

i
i

.
.

G
G

u
u
u
u
u
u

p
p

c
c

e
e

g
g
g
g

s
s

e
e
e
e

t
t
t
t
t

aa
a
a

e
e

a
a

o
o
o
o
o

t
t

v
v

c
c

t
t
t
t
t

o
o

u
u
u
u
u

r
r
i
i

l
l
l
l

t
t
t
t

p
p
p
p

a
a
a
a
a

2
2

t
t
r
r
i
i

i
i
i
i
.
.
.
.

J
J
J
J

h
h
h

n
n
n
n
n

.
.
.
.
.

o
o

-
-

D
D

2
2
2
2
2

S
S

s
ss
s
s
s

2
2

.
.
.

O
O

6
6
6
6

.
.

o
o

r
r
r
r

u
u

a
a
a
a

F
F
F
F

2
2

M
M
M
M
M

r
r

o
o
o
o

c
c

s
s

x
x

i
i

.
.

E
E

-
-
-
-

.
.

.
.

3
3
3
3
3

D
D

D
D

8
8
8

S
S

s
s

.
.

i
i
f
f
i
i

a
a

p
p
p
p

d
d

.
.

b
b
b

u
u

1
1
1
1

C
C

P
P
P
P

S
S

t
t
tt
t
t

h
h

F
F

o
o

n
n

h
h
h
h

o
o
o

.
.

.
.
.

e
e
e
e

C
C
o
o

r
r
r
r

C
C
C
o
o
o
o
oo
o
o
o
SS
S
S
S

m
m
m
o
o
o

l
l
l

i
i
i

o
o
S
S

l
l
l

l
l

u
u

1
1

i
i

s
s

e
e
e

a
a

s
s

r
r
r

.
.

a
a

P
PP
P

a
a

.
.

.
.

D
D

C
C

r
r

S
S

n
n

T
T

o
o

-
-
-

t
t
t

--
-
-

s
s

.
.

.
.

i
i
i
i

m
m

c
c
c
c

.
.

a
a

S
S

o
o
o

1
1

.
.
.
.

-
-

o
o

O
O
O
O
O

n
n

E
E

o
o
o

C
C
C
C

9
9

o
o

M
M

u
u
u
u

J
J

B
B

s
s

.
.

.
.

2
2

m
m
m
m

M
M

5
5

R
R

D
D

i
i
i
.
.

-
-

1
1

n
n
n

c
c

o
o
o
o

S
S

e
e
e

o
o
o
o

C
C
C

B
B
B
B

.
.
.

.
.

1
1

S
S
S
S

o
o
o

6
6

S
S

-
-

o
o
o

4
4

3
3

1
1

0
0

6
6

o
o

o
o

1
1
1

h
h
h

2
2

A
A

.
.

M
M

.
.

H
H
H
H

.
.

5
5

.
.

6
66
6
6

D
D

7
7

4
4

.
.

E
EE
E

J
J

C
C

D
D

.
.

C
C

o
o

S
S

o
o

3
3

R
R
R
R

6
6

M
M
M
M

o
o

3
3

o
o

M
M

4
4

A
AA
A
A

1
1

S
S

5
5

8
8

8
8

M
M

.
.

4
4

M
M

D
D

7
7

.
.

1
1

.
.

S
S

.
.

9
9

D
D

9
9

S
S

.
.

7
7

S
S

2
2
2

1
1

-
-

8
8

.
.

-
-

1
1

0
0

C
C

.
.

2
2

M
M

S
S

1
1

D
D

6
6

.
.

5
5

8
8

o
o

t
t

r
r

o
o

p
p

h
h

S
S
S

2
2

-
-

.
.

1
1

C
C

o
o

o
o

S
S

-
-

1
1

e
e

a
a
a

4
4
4

n
n

n
n
n

S
S
-
-
1
1

s
s.
s.

3
3
-
-
1.
1.

A
A

b
b

o
o
r
r
o
o

T
T

C
C

o
o

u
u

C
C

o
o

S
S

-
-
1
1

g
g

h
h

C
C

.2
.2

S
S
-
-
1
1

M
M

.
.

1
1

0
0

7
7

7
7
7

7
77
7

4
4

4
4

o
o

.
.

o
o

C
C

S
S

S
S

55
5
5

7
7

M
M

3
3

M
M

1
1

1
1

7
7

.
.

.
.

.
.

1
1

o
o

-
-

3
3

C
C

5
5

o
o

1
1

3
3

S
S

-
-

1
1

8
8

2
2

.
.

C
C

o
o

7
7

o
o

1
1

S
S

-
-

1
1

o
o

o
o

S
S

-
-

1
1

u
u
m
m

.
.

B
B
S
S
A
A

.
.

D
D
S
S
M
M

.
.

1
1

1
1

6
6

9
9

9
9

.
.

C
C
o
o

o
o
S
S

-
-

1
1

FIGURE A1 | Circular Bayesian Inference tree with sequence names shown (Same tree as Figure 1B). Posterior probabilities for deeply branching nodes
are displayed.

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 13

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

FIGURE A2 | Continued

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 14

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

FIGURE A2 | Continued

www.frontiersin.org

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 15

Techtmann et al.

Anaerobic carbon monoxide dehydrogenase HGT

FIGURE A2 | Subtrees of maximum likelihood tree of [Ni,Fe]-CODHs (Figure 2) divided based on clades.

Frontiers in Microbiology | Evolutionary and Genomic Microbiology

April 2012 | Volume 3 | Article 132 | 16

