æREVIEW ARTICLE

Methanogenic Archaea and oral
infections  ways to unravel the black
box

Hans-Peter Horz* and Georg Conrads

Division of Oral Microbiology and Immunology, RWTH Aachen University Hospital, Aachen, Germany

Archaea, organisms that make up the third domain of cellular life are members of the human oral microflora.
They are strikingly less diverse than oral bacteria and appear to be relatively rare with respect to their
numerical abundance. Since they have been exclusively found in association with oral infections such as
periodontitis and apical periodontitis and given their unique physiology and energy metabolism, it is highly
plausible that they are more than just secondary colonizers of infected areas, but instead are actively involved
in the overall poly-microbial
it is a highly challenging task to clearly
demonstrate their possible active participation  mostly due to the difficulty to grow them in routine
microbiology laboratories. This current review points out the importance for understanding the medical
impact of methanogens and aims at devising strategies for elucidating the true function of archaea in the oral
ecosystem.

infection process. Conversely,

Keywords: methanogenic archaea; human microbial ecosystems; oral infections; interspecies hydrogen transfer

Received: 22 December 2010; Revised: 25 January 2011; Accepted: 26 January 2011; Published: 23 February 2011

Archaea  one of the three domains of cellular life

(besides Bacteria and Eukarya) consist of the four
major divisions Euryarchaeota, Crenarchaeota,
Korarchaeota, and Nanoarchaeota. While the human
oral microbiota is primarily composed of organisms
from the domain Bacteria, members of the domain
Archaea are conspicuously underrepresented. This is
surprising, since Archaea are widespread in nature and
are capable of occupying almost any ecological niche,
even those exhibiting extreme environmental conditions.
Putting in numbers, approximately 700 bacterial phylo-
types (1, 2) are ‘confronted’ with less than a handful of
methane-producing Archaea (methanogenic archaea). In
light of the overwhelmingly high diversity and dominance
of bacteria, the question arises whether few archaeal
species matter at all in oral microbiology. Or, in other
words: Are archaea an important or worthwhile research
object for promoting our understanding of the role of the
human microbiota in health and disease? Owing to their
unique physiology and energy metabolism, their explicit
occurrence at sites of infection with reasonably high
proportions and prevalence, the answer is clearly yes. This
current review details the life style that distinguishes
methanogenic archaea from bacteria, discusses the most
recent
findings underscoring the importance of oral
archaea and suggests strategies on how to get to the

bottom of the true ecological functions of archaea in
humans.

Detection of archaea in the oral cavity
Methanogenic archaea have been detected in the oral
cavity by both cultivation-based methods and molecular
methods previously (e.g. 3, 4). However, due to the
difficulty in cultivating them, evidence of their existence
in this human ecosystem has primarily been provided by
PCR-based techniques targeting either the 16S rRNA
gene and/or the functional gene mcrA encoding for the
Methyl-Coenzym M reductase, a key enzyme involved in
methanogenesis. In the essence, only one distinct culti-
vated representative of methanogenic Archaea, namely
Methanobrevibacter oralis (3), is currently known and its
pre-dominance has been verified by several PCR-based
studies. The genus Methanobrevibacter consists of several
species of which many appear to be specialized to the
intestinal tract systems of animals (e.g. M. smithii in the
human gut systems). Phylogenetically this genus groups
within the order Methanobacteriales  one of the five
known orders of methanogens, all of which belong to
Euryarchaeota (Fig. 1). Recently an additional as yet
uncultivated Methanobrevibacter phylotype in the oral
cavity has been reported by PCR-based methods (5).
Furthermore, first evidence of the presence of Thermo-

Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011. # 2011 Hans-Peter Horz and Georg Conrads. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 Unported License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), permitting all non-commercial use, distribution, and
Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5940 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

1

(page number not for citation purpose)

Hans-Peter Horz and Georg Conrads

*

Halobacteriales

Methanobrevibacter

Methanosphaera

Methanobacterium

Methanothermobacter

Methanothermus

Methanobacteriales

Methanosarcinales

Euryarchaeota

Methanomicrobiales

Thermoplasmatales

Archaeoglobales

Thermococcales

Methanococcales

**

*

Bacteria, Eukarya

Nanoarchaeota

Crenarchaeota

Korarchaeota

Fig. 1. Dendrogramm depicting major taxonomic groups of Archaea. The dendrogramm is based on representative 16S rRNA
gene sequences (clustered in boxes) calculated with the ARB software package (www.arb-home.de). The size and shape of the
boxes roughly reﬂect the proportions of known phylotypes and phylogenetic depth. Note, that the tree is not a rigorous
phylogenetic analysis, but an attempt to convey sequence relationship among archaeal organisms. The names in frames indicate
four major orders of methanogens. Another ﬁfth order of methanogens that is represented by only one species, namely,
contain recognized human methanogens
Methanopyrus kandleri
(i.e. Methanobrevibacter oralis as primary colonizer of the oral cavity, M. smithii and Methanosphaera stadtmanae as primary
colonizer of the gut system) are highlighted in black. The stars within light boxes indicate sporadic detection of 16S rRNA genes
(single star: detection in the human gut system, double star: detection in the gut system and oral cavity). For further information
see main text.

tree. The boxes

included in the

is not

that

first, all of

plasma-like organisms (also belonging to Euryarchaeota)
in the oral cavity exists as well (6). Two aspects are
worth notifying here:
the above named
organisms have been identified in samples from period-
ontal plaque and in some cases even in association with
apical periodontitis, suggesting medical relevance (see
later in this article). Second, it is plausible to assume
that the full diversity of oral (methanogenic) archaea has
not yet been fully explored for reasons also outlined
later in this article.

What makes M. oralis (or other methanogenic
Archaea) so unique compared to oral bacteria?

Methanogens and interspecies hydrogen transfer
Methanogenic archaea (in the following referred to as
‘methanogens’), while ubiquitous in anaerobic environ-
ments, such as wetlands, rice fields, biological treatment
systems, or the gastro-intestinal tract system of rumi-
nants, are the only biological source of methane (CH4) on
Earth. And since CH4 is a prominent greenhouse gas
(with a global warming potential 21 times higher than
CO2) (7), methanogens have been extensively studied in

different natural habitats. From these studies it has
become evident that methanogens closely interact with
a variety of bacterial species, in that they collaboratively
degrade organic matter under anaerobic conditions.
Important is that this cross-feeding behavior, or syn-
trophic growth on substrates,
is obligatory for these
partners as none of them would be able to utilize the
required substrates alone due to thermo-dynamical con-
straints. The substrates in question are volatile fatty acids
(VFAs) such as acetate, propionate, and butyrate (8).
Although being important intermediate metabolites, they
are unfavorable substrates for anaerobes, since their
oxidation to H2 and CO2 is endergonic under standard
conditions [that is the changes in the Gibbs free energy
are positive, (8)]. Oxidation is thermodynamically only
feasible when the H2 partial pressure is kept low. This
introduces the key-role of methanogens that use such
‘simple’ molecules like H2 and CO2 as substrates to form
CH4, a considerably exergonic reaction. It has been
demonstrated that the resulting free energy is not only
sufficient for growth of the methanogenic populations
but also for those bacterial populations that transformed
the VFA thereby generating H2 (8, 9). This syntrophic

2

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5940 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940

growth on VFA has received a general term in literature,
namely,
interspecies hydrogen transfer (9). It is now
recognized as a mutually beneficial, unidirectional pro-
cess that plays a central role in the anaerobic fermenta-
tion of organic matter in natural environments. It is
important to understand that VFA fermentation is not
inhibited by mere accumulation of H2 (i.e. end-product
inhibition). If so, simple, non-enzymatic removal of H2
out of the ecological system (for instance diffusion)
would make the biochemical reaction run autonomously.
Instead,
the energy that becomes available by the
anaerobic oxidation of H2 is eminent, making metabolic
H2-consumtion essential for anaerobic use of VFAs. This
implies that methanogens and syntrophic bacterial part-
ners have to be physically, very closely connected for
efficient interspecies hydrogen transfer.

Possible medical importance of methanogens
If we apply this knowledge to methanogens present
exclusively at sites of poly-microbial anaerobic biofilms
in the oral cavity (e.g. periodontal pockets), it is plausible
to assume that they support the growth of fermenting
bacteria, which themselves are opportunistic pathogens.
Hence, methanogens  if active  are involved in the
overall
infectious process with interspecies hydrogen
transfer being an indirect mechanism of virulence. But
are methanogens really in a viable state in dental plaque?
As a matter of fact this question has already been
answered by relatively old studies that have provided
evidence of CH4 formation from isolated methanogenic
species derived from primate but also human plaque
samples (1012). However, it is not simply the question of
activity (why should a given microorganism not be active
at least for some time in a given habitat, anyway?). The
question is rather, what precisely is the nature of the
activity within periodontal plaque and what are the
microbial interactions? In this context it is important to
note that methanogens can form methane independently
from H2 by using other electron donors, such as
methanol, methylamine, acetate, ethanol, or formiate
(8). In fact, oral methanogens are able to use some of
these compounds besides H2 and CO2 (12). But only in
the case of H2 used as substrate, a support of fermenting
pathogens by methanogens (through interspecies hydro-
gen transfer) is possible. So, what we need to know is,
whether H2-consumption linked with syntrophic growth
on VFA really occurs within the complex oral plaque
consortium. Before finding answers to this, it is further-
more notable that there exists also a direct potential of
methanogens for harming the host: The mechanism
under discussion is the capability of methanogens to
effectively transform heavy metals or metalloids into
volatile methylated derivatives that are known to be more
toxic than the original compounds (13). This feature is
shared with some bacteria, but interestingly, methanogens

Archaea and oral infections

isolated from the human gut have been shown to possess
a much higher potential for metal(loid) derivatization
(e.g. bismuth, selenium, tellurium, and mercury) in vitro
compared to bacterial gut isolates (14). The immediate
consequences of such transformation for human health
have to be elucidated. However, as an example, use of
bismuth containing compounds in pharmaceutical pro-
ducts have been linked with poisoning during prolonged
medical therapy with the consequences of renal failure
and mental disorders as described by Michalke et al. (13).
It is likely that frequent exposure with such heavy metals
through use of cosmetics or pharmaceutical products
increases the possibility of its methylation by methano-
gens followed by increased toxicity. Whether or not
methanogens in the oral cavity also have the potential
or opportunity for such toxic transformations has not
been investigated so far, but given the high number and
diversity of dental materials potentially releasing heavy
metals (crowns, bridges, amalgam, composites) this could
be of great clinical importance as well.

Possible clinical relevance of methanogens in the
oral cavity
Methanobrevibacter oralis has long been identified in
periodontal pockets and its proportional increase with
severity of disease has meanwhile been confirmed by
various groups. The prevalence of detection using PCR-
based methods varied greatly not only due to methodo-
logical differences but probably also due to different
geographic/ethnic distribution of M. oralis [i.e. 22% for
Japanese patients (15), 36% for US patients (4), 43% for
German patients (16), and even up to 73% in Chinese
patients (6)]. Notably, M. oralis was never detected at
healthy sites; hence, this organism exhibits a positive
predictive value for periodontitis of almost 100%, which
is to our knowledge not reached by any bacterial species
involved in this disease.

Mean relative proportions of these archaeal species
varied depending on the study but also on the severity of
periodontal disease [e.g. ranging from approximately 0.5
up to 18% compared to the entire prokaryotic load (16, 4,
respectively)]. To our knowledge for no other periodonto-
pathogenic bacterium, a mean proportional level as high
as 18% has been described. But even values below 1% are
not negligible, since particular members of the genus
Methanobrevibacter are known to consume H2 almost
completely if present at such low abundance (e.g. shown
for mesophilic bioprocesses treating several types of
wastewater) (17). Evidence of clinical significance of
M. oralis has also been given by immunological findings.
Yamabe et al.
investigated its distribution in
Japanese patients with periodontitis and examined the
serum IgG responses to archaeal components. Western
immunoblotting
against
M. oralis in sera from 8 of 11 tested patients suggesting

IgG antibodies

detected

(15)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5940 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940

(page number not for citation purpose)

3

Hans-Peter Horz and Georg Conrads

is

(18)

especially

important

identified one of

antigenic potential. Furthermore, in a follow-up study
Yamabe et al.
the antigenic
molecules as subunit of the group II chaperonins (also
known as thermosomes in Archaea and CCT in Eukarya).
The authors (18) also demonstrated cross-reactivity with
the human chaperonin CCT applying western immuno-
blotting. This
given our
knowledge regarding cross-reactivity of bacterial chaper-
onins with human molecules. For instance, members of
the bacterial Hsp60 group (group I Chaperonin also
known as GroEL in bacteria) are highly antigenic
in many pathogenic
molecules (19, 20) and present
bacteria. Furthermore, several
immune disorders such
as rheumatoid arthritis or rheumatoid fever are thought
to be triggered by these molecules. Although further
investigation is needed for definite conclusions, the data
indicate that antigenic molecules of M. oralis could have
the potential to act as modifier or even initiator of
inflammatory processes such as periodontitis.

Interestingly, further evidence that the human immune
system recognizes and responds to Archaea comes from
older studies that investigated the potential of archaeal cell
membrane lipids (incorporated into liposomes and gen-
erally referred to as ‘archaeosomes’) as self-adjuvanting
antigen-delivery vehicles. Such archaeal lipid structures
derived from a range of different environmental archaea
but also from members of the genus Methanobrevibacter
exhibited higher adjuvant activity than conventional
adjuvants such as bacterial
liposomes [described in
more detail
in (21, 22)]. For instance, vaccination of
mice with archaeosome-entrapped listeriolysin leads to
rapid and prolonged specific immunity against Listeria
monocytogenes infection and is superior to several other
antigen-delivery vaccine strategies. This implies that the
distinct structures of archaeal lipids (branched phytonyl
chains attached to glycerol backbones via ether bonds, as
opposed to the ester-linked fatty-acyl chains in Bacteria
and Eukarya) not only confer considerable stability to
liposomes but also that the mammalian immune system
seems to be genetically programmed to ‘consider’ archaea
as potential pathogens.

The identification of M. oralis at primary sterile
localizations provides more evidence of medical rele-
vance, although the question about cause and effect (23)
remains unanswered so far. M. oralis was identified in
25% of samples retrieved from patients with endodontic
infections previously (24). Further studies on US and
Chinese patients have confirmed the presence of M. oralis
in infected root canals, though with varying prevalence
(25, 26). The latter study reported three additional
interesting observations worth notifying. First, the com-
bined presence of archaea (i.e. M. oralis) and bacteria was
associated with a significantly higher prevalence of
clinical symptoms (e.g. pain) compared to the number
of cases with sole presence of bacteria. Second, archaea

were identified also in persisting or secondary endodontic
infections; that is, in cases of failed root canal treatment.
This is especially interesting, since the response of
methanogens to classical endodontic disinfectants such
as sodium hypochloride or chlorhexidine has not been
investigated so far. Lastly, Jiang et al. (26) identified
archaea using an rRNA-based approach. This demon-
strates that M. oralis was in fact present in a viable state
in infected root canals and reduces speculations that the
former DNA-based studies only detected the stable DNA
released from cells already dead or damaged.

The significance of these findings have yet to be
elucidated; however, it is conceivable that methanogens
are more than just secondary colonizers of infected areas.
Their occurrence in endodontic environments also im-
plies the existence of strategies to invade and survive
primary sterile compartments. This in turn leads to the
intriguing question how likely the involvement of
M. oralis or other archaea in infectious processes of
otherwise sterile sites is, such as brain abscesses, perito-
nitis, or endocarditis? This question is warranted since
distinct members of the endogenous microflora (from the
oral cavity) while harmless in their natural location can
cause severe life-threatening infections. Syntrophic inter-
actions of these species with methanogens could be a
driving factor for such kinds of polymicrobial diseases,
provided that methanogens also get access to the primary
sterile sites. However, our initial attempts to look for
methanogens in extra-oral, ‘real’ clinical samples were
unsuccessful so far. Non-detection of methanogens was
accompanied with cross-reaction of archaeal PCR pri-
mers with human DNA. So, even if present, it is likely
that methanogens are overlooked due to the unfavorable
ratio of human DNA versus microbial DNA in those
clinical samples.

Does M. oralis serve as keystone species in
H2-consumption of oral ecosystems?
As mentioned above, the overwhelmingly high number of
oral bacteria gives rise to the question if few archaeal
species do matter at all. They do if we look at a well-
recognized principle in ecology, namely, the concept of
keystone species. This concept has been developed by
ecological and conservation biologists over 40 years ago.
According to that concept, keystone species (traditionally
referred to animals) are rare members of a complex
community and are usually only noticed when they are
removed or they disappear from an ecosystem, resulting
in dramatic changes to the rest of the community (27). In
other words, a keystone species is one whose impact on its
community or ecosystem is large  in any case greater
than would be expected from its relative abundance or
total biomass. This phenomenon is well accepted among
ecologists and has been observed in a wide range of
ecosystems. While providing a powerful model for under-

4

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5940 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940

standing the forces that organize ecological communities,
the term keystone species has also found its way into the
literature of microbial ecologists (e.g. 28).

replace it,

Just consider that microbial communities are com-
posed of members who can carry out the same or similar
biochemical reactions (functional redundancy) and of
members exhibiting unique physiological traits (keystone
species). As a consequence, the functional diversity of
complex microbial communities is much lower than their
phylogenetic diversity (29). In the case of the anaerobic
degradation of organic matter, this means that most
biochemical conversions can be performed by more than
one bacterial species. This should especially be true for
human microbial ecosystems since the host depends on a
more or less stable supply with metabolic end-products
of his microbial symbionts [‘top-to-down selection’(30)].
If a species goes extinct, other species (with the same
functions) will
thereby maintaining the
microbial homeostasis. By contrast, this is not true for
keystone species, which are niche specialists with unique
physiologies that cannot or only hardly be replaced. If
keystone species within macro-organisms fail for some
reason, the effect will be either beneficial or harmful to
the host depending on their ecological role for a
physiological or pathogenic microbial community in
the first place. In the case of methanogens at sites of
oral infections, one could think of a beneficial outcome
upon their elimination for reasons given earlier. It
should be noted though that methanogens can theore-
tically be replaced by two different functional groups
from the domain Bacteria, namely, dissimilatory sulfate
reducers (SRB) and reductive acetogens, both of which
can grow on H2 with the resulting end-products H2S and
acetate, respectively. In fact, all three hydrogenotrophic
functional groups were identified in sub-gingival plaque
samples previously (16). However, an association with
disease could be established only for methanogens and
SRB, as reductive acetogens were also detected in
healthy persons and their levels (unlike methanogens
and SRB) even decreased with severity of the period-
ontal conditions. Furthermore, methanogens and SRB
were found to the exclusion of each other in 46% of
patients, although multiple plaque samples per patient
were pooled prior to analysis (16). This indicates an
apparent lack of one group in the oral cavity  probably
due to host-specific factors. By contrast, both H2-
consuming microbial groups were found together in
only about 20% of patients (16). Hence, for a substantial
number of periodontitis patients, H2-consumption seems
to be a process performed by only one type (keystone)
species because functional replacement is not possible
due to the absence of an appropriate alternative
syntrophic partner.

Archaea and oral infections

Future strategies

Lessons from human gut microbiota studies
Syntrophic archaeal-bacterial interactions

The fact that both the human intestinal tract system
and the oral cavity share surprisingly few bacterial
species (31, 32) applies also to archaea since it is not
M. oralis but a related species, namely, M. smithii as the
major archaeal player in the human gut system. The
disorders in which M. smithii is probably involved are
inflammatory bowel disease (or Crohn’s disease), irrita-
ble bowel syndrome, colorectal cancer, diverticulosis, or
obesity and current knowledge has been well discussed
in the review articles by Nakamura et al. (33) and
Roccarina et al. (34). Although different human dis-
orders may be linked with different microbial members
of either compartment,
it is likely that the nature of
archaeal interactions with gut bacteria  in particular the
role as H2-consumer and supporter of the fermenting
microbiota  has meaningful parallels to the situation in
the oral cavity. Since much more attention has been
devoted to the role of gut archaea, the most striking
novel insights and possible implications for oral archaea
are addressed subsequently. Based on a gnotobiotic
mouse model, a link between M. smithii and host energy
balance could be established (35). The colon of germ-
free mice was colonized with a polysaccharide-degrading
bacterium (Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron), a sulfate-redu-
cing bacterium (Desulfovibrio piger), and M. smithii in
different combinations (35). B.
thetaiotaomicron de-
graded polyfructose-containing glycans more efficiently
in the presence of M.
In addition, mice
colonized with these two microbes showed increased
fermentation products and an increase in adiposity
(increased storage of energy in fat cells). These effects
were not observed after co-colonization with the pair
B. thetaiotaomicron and D. piger (as alternative H2-
consumer), emphasizing the critical role of M. smithii in
promoting polysaccharide degradation,
followed by
absorption of the fatty acids that lead to liver lipogenesis
and formation of fat deposits. These experiments sub-
stantiate the hypothesis that by providing the final step
in energy extraction from degradation of organic com-
pounds, methanogens have an enormous potential for
altering the whole gut physiology with profound con-
sequences for the host. As such they could also be an
interesting target
therapeutical manipulation of
for
obesity. In fact,
further evidence has recently been
provided by Zhang et al. (36). Using real-time PCR,
they detected significantly higher numbers of H2-utiliz-
ing methanogens in three obese individuals than in three
normal-weight or three post-gastric-bypass individuals.
The numbers of the H2-producing Prevotellaceae were
also highly enriched in the obese individuals supporting
the hypothesis that interspecies hydrogen transfer may

smithii.

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5940 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940

(page number not for citation purpose)

5

Hans-Peter Horz and Georg Conrads

species

take place between these bacterial
and
M. smithii. It is currently discussed that exactly this
bacterial-archaeal interaction is an important mechan-
ism for increasing energy uptake by the human large
intestine in obese persons. Likewise, since many species
of Prevotellacaea (55 distinct Prevotella taxons according
to the HOMD database [http://www.homd.org/]) are
common members in periodontal pockets, analogous
relationships could exist with M. oralis.

A good indication about the nature of the syntrophi-
cally used substrate in humans does also exist. Abell et al.
(37) found a negative correlation between mean fecal
butyrate concentration and methanogen abundance by
testing eight individuals weekly over a 12-week period
and using molecular methods. Their findings suggest on
the one hand an indirect association of methanogens with
colorectal cancer (considering that butyrate is the pri-
mary energy source for immunologically active cells
lining the colon, e.g. enhancement of cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis) (38, 39). On the other hand it is likely that
the methanogens live in syntrophy with butyrate degrad-
ing organisms via interspecies hydrogen transfer. Hence,
butyrate producing and butyrate fermenting bacteria may
also be interesting candidates to look at when searching
for syntrophic partners of M. oralis in the oral cavity as
well.

Detection targets to reveal diversity
Although this review focuses on oral archaea, novel
insights regarding the diversity of archaea in the gut
system are given here, because it is likely that M. oralis
shares its niches in the oral cavity with so far undetected
methanogens. Scanlan et al. (40) and Mihajlovski et al.
(41) have identified mcrA gene sequences only distantly
related to cultured methanogens from the five recognized
orders (i.e. Methanomicrobiales, Methanopyrales, Metha-
nobacteriales, Methanococcales, and Methanosarcinales,
Fig. 1). McrA encodes one of the key enzymes (Methyl-
involved in H2-
Coenzyme M reductase, see later)
consumption and is specific to methanogens. The authors
hypothesized that this novel mcrA gene type corresponds
to an uncultured phylotype that makes up a putative sixth
methanogenic order (41). In a subsequent extended study,
by using newly designed PCR primers specific to the
novel group, Mihajlovski et al. (42) identified further
mcrA gene types also grouping within the same clade of
this putative sixth methanogenic order. In addition, these
sequence types shared close to moderate similarity with a
number of clone sequences recovered from animal studies
subjecting cattle and pigs (42), further supporting the
possibility of a novel group of methanogens adapted to
the animal intestinal tract. Besides finding a correlation
between that novel mcrA-gene type and age of the tested
individuals, Mihajlovski et al. (42) detected also 16S
rRNA gene sequences grouping within the Thermoplas-

matales but with no cultured relatives (Fig. 1). The 16S
rRNA gene sequences were only found in the samples
that were also positive for the novel mcrA gene type. It is,
therefore,
likely that a novel sister group of Thermo-
plasmatales probably capable of methanogenesis exists in
the human gut system. Since Thermoplasma-like se-
quences have also been identified in samples from
periodontal pockets (6), it would be highly interesting
to test the newly designed specific mcrA-primers in order
to elucidate whether a novel as yet undetected form of
methanogens there also exists.

Knowledge regarding archaeal diversity has been
further advanced by a study of Oxley et al. (43). In
their study of the microbiota in colonic mucosal biopsies
from 8 out of 39 patients with inflammatory bowel
disease, they found 16S rDNA sequences representing a
phylogenetically rich diversity of halophilic archaea (15
different phylotypes)
from the Halobacteriaceae (ha-
loarchaea)
including those with no directly related
cultured representatives. This means that archaeal diver-
sity within humans is not limited to the coherent group
of methanogens (Fig. 1). Furthermore, aerobic enrich-
ment cultures prepared from a patient biopsy at low
salinity (2.5% NaCl) yielded haloarchaeal sequence types
and subsequent microscopic observation after fluores-
cence in situ hybridization provided evidence of the
presence of viable archaeal cells in these cultures. These
results prove the survival of haloarchaea in the human
digestive system and suggest that they may be members
of
the mucosal microbiota. Whether they constitute
regular colonizers and whether they occur in abundance
comparative to methanogenic archaea is unknown so
far. In addition since most intestinal microbes initially
enter through the oral cavity, an intriguing question is
whether distinct niches in the oral cavity also provide
appropriate conditions for colonization by this novel
group of Archaea.

Sample processing with higher DNA extraction
efficiency and primer design strategies for PCR
analysis
As stated above, recent findings have enlarged the known
diversity of Archaea in humans now including further
phylotypes of Methanobrevibacter but even an entire
novel order of methanogens, as well as members of
Thermoplasmatales and Halobacteriacaea. The question
arises here why their presence has largely eluded detection
in many studies before. One apparent answer is that the
primers used to amplify their DNA were not specific and/
or sensitive enough. From our experiences, most primers
designed in older, environmental studies for characteriza-
tion of naturally occurring archaea are not suitable for
detection of human-associated archaea. In many cases
cross-reaction with human DNA was observed in our
laboratory, in an extent that we rarely observed with

6

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5940 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940

Bacteria-specific primers. The reasons may be the
unfavorable ratio between archaeal-to-human DNA
(consider the relative low abundance of archaea com-
pared to bacteria), but also a higher degree of sequence
similarity between archaea-specific primers and human
gene sequences. Hence, careful design of novel primers as
well as the use of multiple molecular targets (16S rDNA
and mcrA) is highly important in recovering a wider
range of human methanogens. An alternative approach
may be the separation of human and microbial DNA
prior to PCR amplification. Two different approaches
have been developed (44), which might also be useful for
metagenomic studies of the human microbiome (45). The
fact that the choice of the molecular approach greatly
influences our perception of archaeal diversity and
prevalence in humans can be best illustrated in another
most recent study, again focused on the human gut flora.
Dridi et al. (46) developed a new protocol for the
extraction and PCR-based detection of M. smithii and
Methanosphaera stadtmanae DNA in human stool sam-
ples. The protocol included a mechanical lysis step with
glass beads that was applied twice, combined with an
overnight incubation with proteinase K. The PCR-based
detection included newly designed primers targeting the
16S rRNA gene but also the rpoB gene, which encodes
the b subunit of RNA polymerase, one of the core genes
shared by Bacteria and Archaea. By testing fecal samples
from 700 (!) volunteers by real-time quantitative PCR,
they found M. smithii in virtually all individuals and M.
stadtmanae in almost 30% of cases. Double treatment
with glass beads was performed because gut methanogens
have been shown to possess a proteinase K resistant cell
wall (47)  and apparently the extensive mechanical
action was decisive in the efficiency of DNA extraction.
Similarly Salonen et al. (48) found an increased pre-
valence of methanogenic Archaea in human fecal samples
by repeated mechanical disruption steps, compared to
other extraction protocols. These findings revise our
perspective that methanogens colonize the gut of only
about half of the human population. Instead, M. smithii
appears as an almost ubiquitous inhabitant of
the
intestinal microbiome. As such, it sheds additional light
on the paramount role that methanogenic species may
have in the overall microbial ecology of the digestion
process. Given the effect of differential DNA extraction
protocols on the recovery of archaeal DNA as indicated
by the above studies, the true prevalence and proportions
of oral archaea has also to be re-considered.

All of the above mentioned Archaea belong phylogen-
etically to the major archaeal phylum Euryarchaeota.
Whether or not Archaea other
than Euryarchaeota
(namely from the phyla Crenarchaeota, Korarchaeota, or
Nanoarchaeota) are as yet undetected colonizers of the
oral cavity is currently speculative (Fig. 1). However,

Archaea and oral infections

members belonging to Crenarchaeota have been detected
in the human gut system previously with PCR-based
methods (49). In order to reproduce this intriguing result,
we tested the same primers and PCR conditions in our
laboratory. No 16S rRNA genes of Crenarchaeota were
obtained in our study, neither from five selected fecal nor
from five oral samples, so that the findings of Rieu-
Lesme et al. (49) are preliminary for now and require
further investigation. In addition, when testing further
Crenarchaeota specific-primers (50) we only amplified
and detected the 16S rRNA gene of M. oralis in oral
samples, indicating an apparent lack of Crenarchaeota
and an abundance of M. oralis sufficiently high enough to
overcome mismatches to the crenarchaeota primers. In
another
first attempt, we tested published primers
specifically designed for the detection of Korarchaeota
(51) and Nanoarchaeota (52) with oral samples. In
both cases we observed cross-reaction with human
DNA, even under highly stringent PCR conditions.
Again, new primer systems and/or efficient strategies
for removal of human DNA are required to find clear
answers.

Genome, metagenome, pangenome analysis
A major step toward a better understanding of the
function and dynamics of human archaea will be done
by results originating from the Human Microbiome
Project (45). Whole genome analysis of several M. smithii
strains in comparison with close relatives from environ-
mental systems has already been performed and shown
that M. smithii is highly adapted to the human gut system
(53). This includes its capability of (1) producing surface
glycans resembling those found in the gut mucosa, (2)
expressing of adhesion-like proteins, (3) consuming of a
high variety of fermentation products by saccharolytic
bacteria, and (4) effectively competing for nitrogenous
nutrient sources (53). A genome comparison with M.
oralis (to our knowledge there has so far been no strain
subjected to whole genome sequence analysis) will lead to
the discovery of those genes responsible for successful
colonization of the human oral cavity versus gastroin-
testinal tract. However, genome analysis of a few isolated
strains may not be sufficient. Given the recognized
plasticity of the genomes of most opportunistic patho-
genic bacteria (e.g. acquisition of virulence factors or
antibiotic resistance mechanisms),
it is important to
assess the ‘pangenome’ of M. smithii and M. oralis as
well by testing a high number of individuals. Since
isolation of methanogens is a daunting task and even
impossible for most laboratories the clue for gaining
more genomic insights will come from metagenomic
analysis, once the ever decreasing sequencing costs have
reached a level making the testing of a high number of
individuals affordable. Such metagenomic analyses for

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5940 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940

(page number not for citation purpose)

7

Hans-Peter Horz and Georg Conrads

establishing a microbial gene catalogue of the human gut
or oral cavity will not only reveal whether or not
horizontal gene transfer is common in M. oralis and/or
M. smithii but also  once a sufficiently high number of
individuals is tested  if certain human physiological
disorders are potentially linked with a given archaeal
strain (or phylotype).

Phenotype identification strategies
Monitoring interspecies hydrogen transfer via stable
isotope probing
The possibility that interspecies hydrogen transfer based
on methanogenesis is a virulence mechanism at sites of
periodontal disease is unproven so far. If occurring, a
close physical contact between methanogens and the
complementary syntrophic partner (co-aggregation) is
required (54). Such close physical contact has been shown
in the case of natural environments where biomass is
tightly aggregated, for instance in granular sludge from
upflow anaerobic sludge blankets (55). Although the
milieu of periodontal pockets provides different and
varying conditions, close physical contact in the biofilm
should be possible since archaeal-bacterial co-aggrega-
tion along with interspecies hydrogen transfer has even
been demonstrated in the case of liquid media (54).
Crucial for co-aggregation and interspecies hydrogen
transfer in the liquid media were the type of substrate
(i.e. VFA) and the identity and activity of the syntrophic
bacterial partner. Hence, if we wish to find out whether
such interactions also occur in the oral cavity, we should
find the syntrophic partner(s) and the collaboratively
used VFAs. A clue to this could be stable isotope probing
(SIP) of different organic compounds such as butyrate or
propionate, which has become a popular method to

investigate syntrophic methanogen-bacterial interactions
in various habitats (e.g. 56, 57). The advantage of SIP is
that
it provides a link between the phylogeny and
function of microbes in a complex community without
the need for species isolation. The idea is that the
physiologically active subset of organisms within envir-
onmental samples (here clinical samples, i.e. periodontal
plaque samples), when offered substrates labeled with a
stable isotope (typically 13C), would incorporate the
heavier C-source into cell components including DNA
(Fig. 2). Stable isotopes are the non-radioactive isotopes
of elements (e.g. 15N, 18O, 2H, 13C) that do not emit
ionizing radiation and thus have the advantage over
radioisotope techniques of not affecting the viability of
some organisms. After an appropriate time of incubation
with the labeled substrate, DNA is extracted and the
‘light’ and ‘heavy’ fractions are physically separated by
density-gradient (isopycnic) ultracentrifugation (58). The
‘heavy’ DNA is subjected to PCR amplification of
ribosomal RNA and functional genes (e.g. mcrA of
methanogens) to assess the identity of those microorgan-
isms that feed on the labeled VFA. If mcrA was identified
in the ‘heavy’ DNA, it could be concluded that methano-
gens were actively involved in the degradation process of
VFA and have assimilated the 13C-source into their
DNA. In addition, using universal PCR targeting the
16S rRNA gene, those organisms that oxidized the VFA
could also be identified. A more advanced approach
would even be to look at labeled rRNA (59) instead of
DNA because of its higher turn-over rates and because it
takes considerable time until DNA is sufficiently labeled
up to detectable levels given that DNA-labeling requires
cell proliferation, and methanogens are slow-growing
organisms.

13C-labelling 

Incorporation of 13C 

of a 

microcosm

into DNA

Extraction of total 
community DNA

Separation of DNA 
by density gradient

centrifugation

Molecular
analysis

13C-butyrate

„light“ 12C-DNA

„heavy“ 13C-DNA

Inactive Microbe

13C

13C

Active Microbe

00

0

0 0

0

0

0

0

0

0
0 0

0
0

Fig. 2. Schematic representation of a SIP experiment. Clinical samples (e.g. from periodontal plaque) are incubated
anaerobically in a liquid medium with addition of 13C-labelled butyrate as substrate. If syntrophic growth occurs between a
butyrate-degrading bacterium and methanogens (via interspecies hydrogen transfer), the labeled 13C will ultimately be
assimilated and incorporated into their DNA. After some time of incubation, total DNA is extracted and the ‘heavy’ and ‘light’
fractions are physically separated. Analysis of ‘heavy’ DNA by PCR, cloning, and comparative sequence analysis will then allow
identiﬁcation of the active microbial populations in the microcosm. For further information see main text.

8

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5940 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940

Besides adaptation of this technique from protocols
from environmental microbiologists  a major challenge
is to achieve in vivo conditions as close as possible when
incubating sub-gingival plaque samples in the labo-
ratory. Clearly, sub-gingival plaque samples do not fully
resemble the periodontal environment and a laboratory-
based study of microbial activity in plaque does not
necessarily reflect the true microbial activity at site of
infection.
In worst case, SIP experiments might result in changes in
the metabolic activity of the flora over time and thus not
reflect the natural process at sites of infection. None-
theless, once methanogenic activities and putative syn-
trophic partners were assessed through SIP,
it shows
proof-of-principle and the results could be verified by
follow-up experiments. These could be SIP experiments
with different types and/or concentration of VFAs and
varying incubation times. Furthermore, real-time quanti-
tative PCR directly from DNA from sub-gingival plaque
of the same patients could be performed to specifically
trace those microorganisms identified via SIP. Such
experiments would not only lead to the identification of
interacting bacterial partners but also  once established 
enable monitoring the dynamics of such partnerships
over time through repeated sampling and testing. Using
SIP for linking structure and function of human micro-
bial ecosystems is still
in its infancy. However, such
techniques have been launched for studying the impact of
the gut microflora on inflammatory bowel disease (60). It
might be worthwhile to consult respective literature
regarding technical challenges and possible drawbacks
prior to setting up own experiments. Furthermore,
isotopically labeled 15N has recently been successfully
used to demonstrate that denitrification is an important
microbial process taking place in dental plaque, a finding
highly encouraging for the experiments proposed here
(61).

Monitoring interspecies hydrogen transfer via inhibition of
methanogenesis
Another interesting strategy to identify metabolic activity
of methanogens in sub-gingival plaque could be its
biochemical inhibition. As stated earlier, the end-product
of methanogens (CH4) contributes substantially to global
warming. In addition CH4 production in ruminants is
loss (215%) of gross
believed to cause a substantial
energy intake thereby decreasing productivity (62).
Therefore, in order to mitigate the formation of CH4 in
anaerobic environments and in order to understand the
ecology of its formation, a wide range of inhibiting
compounds have been investigated (e.g. 6365). Clearly,
in our case methanogenesis per se is not what we need to
prevent in periodontal plaque but H2-consumption. Both

Archaea and oral infections

reactions however, although at opposite ends of a
complex biochemical cascade within methanogens, are
tightly linked such that once the final step of CH4
formation is inhibited, the entire process is blocked. For
example, 2-bromoethane sulfonate (BES), which is a
structural analogue of coenzyme M,
is often used to
specifically inhibit methanogenesis (63). Coenzyme M is
the C1-carrier, required for the final methyl-transfer
reactions in the metabolism of methanogens. BES stops
CH4 formation and as a consequence should also impede
interspecies hydrogen transfer,
if existing. If we now
consider a SIP experiment as described in the previous
paragraph (see also Fig. 2), methanogenesis and degra-
dation of VFAs could be monitored with and without
inhibitors. After incubation it could then be tested for the
presence of mcrA in the ‘heavy’ DNA. Lack of mcrA in
‘heavy’ DNA versus presence of mcrA in positive controls
(i.e.
incubated samples without inhibition with BES)
would not only demonstrate successful
inhibition of
methanogenesis but also that H2-consuming methano-
genesis has actually taken place in the non-inhibited
plaque samples. Such experiments would also provide the
framework for the major next step that would have to
follow as outlined below.

Final remarks
The above experiments should give substantial confi-
dence/evidence regarding the occurrence of interspecies
hydrogen transfer in periodontal plaque samples with
M. oralis. As such it could provide an important avenue
for novel strategies in the treatment of poly-microbial
oral infections. Future research could then be directed at
controlling the activity or levels of methanogens at the
site of disease. An alluring possibility would be the search
for compounds suitable for specifically inhibiting metha-
nogenesis within patients. The intriguing advantage
would be that, once methanogenesis is inhibited, this
may negatively affect the associated pathogenic flora
while simultaneously leaving the physiological
flora
unaffected. However, unlike in the case of laboratory
demonstration or outdoor experiments, use of such
inhibitors for therapeutic purposes will of course require
substances to be entirely harmless to the host. This means
that traditionally used substances like BES are unlikely
candidates. However, a better strategy might be to look
for further (natural) products, e.g. those produced by
plants. It is known, that plants produce a diverse array of
plant secondary metabolites (PSM) to protect against
microbial and insects attacks. There even exists a number
of PSM that are specifically active against methanogen-
esis. These compounds already hold great promise as
natural,
safe feed additives alternative to chemical
additives to inhibit enteric methanogenesis in ruminants

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5940 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940

(page number not for citation purpose)

9

Hans-Peter Horz and Georg Conrads

[reviewed in (66)]. These include saponins, tannins, and
flavonoids. Since there have been described up to 200,000
different PSM worldwide (67), a biocompatible and
effective substance may eventually also be found for
interfering with CH4-formation in the oral cavity. How-
ever, before we have reached the position to ‘make the
case’ against methanogens, more experimental data are
needed to definitely understand their role in health and
disease.

Conflict of interest and funding
This work was supported by the START program of the
Faculty of Medicine, RWTH Aachen University Hospi-
tal, Germany.

References

1. Dewhirst FE, Chen T, Izard J, Paster BJ, Tanner ACR, Yu WH,
et al. The human oral microbiome. J Bacteriol 2010; 192:
500217.

2. Paster BJ, Boches SK, Galvin JL, Ericson RE, Lau CN,
Levanos VA, et al. Bacterial diversity in human subgingival
plaque. J Bacteriol 2001; 183: 377083.

3. Ferrari A, Brusa T, Rutili A, Canzi E, Biavati B. Isolation and
characterization of Methanobrevibacter oralis sp. nov. Curr
Microbiol 1994; 29: 712.

4. Lepp PW, Brinig MM, Ouverney CC, Palm K, Armitage GC,
Relman DA. Methanogenic archaea and human periodontal
disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004; 101: 617681.

5. Vianna ME, Conrads G, Gomes BPFA, Horz HP. T-RFLP-
based mcrA gene analysis of methanogenic archaea in associa-
tion with oral infections and evidence of a novel Methano-
brevibacter phylotype. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2009; 24:
41722.

6. Li CL, Liu DL, Jiang YT, Zhou YB, Zhang MZ, Jiang W, et al.
Prevalence and molecular diversity of archaea in subgingival
pockets of periodontitis patients. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2009;
24: 3436.

7. IPCC, 2007. Summary for policymakers. In: Solomon, S.,
Qin, D., Manning, M., Chen, Z., Marquis, M., Averyt, K.B.,
Tignor, M., Miller, HL, eds. Climate Change 2007: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Cambridge, UK and New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.

8. Thauer RK, Kaster AK, Seedorf H, Buckel W, Hedderich R.
Methanogenic archaea: ecologically relevant differences in
energy conservation. Nat Rev Microbiol 2008; 6: 57991.

9. Schink B. Energetics of syntrophic cooperation in methanogenic

degradation. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 1997; 61: 26280.

10. Kemp CW, Curtis MA, Robrish SA, Bowen WH. Biogenesis of
methane in primate dental plaque. FEBS Lett 1983; 155: 614.
11. Robrish SA. Biotechnology and ecological studies on the oral

cavity. Microb Ecol 1986; 12: 5364.

12. Robichaux M, Howell M, Boopathy R. Methanogenic activity

in human periodontal pocket. Cur Microbiol 2003; 46: 538.

13. Michalke K, Schmidt A, Huber B, Meyer J, Sulkowski M,
Hirner MA, et al. Role of intestinal microbiota in transforma-
tion of bismuth and other metals and metalloids into volatile
methyl and hydride derivatives in humans and mice. Appl
Environ Microbiol 2008; 74: 306975.

14. Meyer J, Michalke K, Kouril T, Hensel R. Volatilisation of
metals and metalloids: an inherent feature of methanoarchaea?
Syst Appl Microbiol 2008; 31: 817.

15. Yamabe K, Maeda H, Kokeguchi S, Tanimoto I, Sonoi N,
Asakawa S, et al. Distribution of Archaea in Japanese patients
with periodontitis and humoral
immune response to the
components. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2008; 287: 6975.

16. Vianna ME, Holtgraewe S, Seyfarth I, Conrads G, Horz HP.
Quantitative analysis of
three hydrogenotrophic microbial
groups, methanogenic archaea, sulfate-reducing bacteria, and
acetogenic bacteria, within plaque bioﬁlms associated with
human periodontal disease. J Bacteriol 2008; 190: 377985.

17. Narihiro T, Terada T, Ohashi A, Wu JH, Liu WT, Araki N, et al.
Quantitative detection of culturable methanogenic archaea
abundance in anaerobic treatment systems using the sequence-
speciﬁc rRNA cleavage method. ISME J 2009; 3: 52235.

18. Yamabe K, Maeda H, Kokeguchi S, Soga Y, Meguro M,
Naruishi K, et al. Antigenic group II chaperonin in Methano-
brevibacter oralis may cross-react with human chaperonin CCT.
Mol Oral Microbiol 2010; 25: 11222.

19. Zugel U, Kaufmann SHE. Immune response against heat shock

proteins in infectious diseases. Immunobiol 1999; 201: 2235.

20. Zugel U, Kaufmann SHE. Role of heat shock proteins in
protection from and pathogenesis of infectious diseases. Clin
Microbiol Rev 1999; 12: 1939.

21. Eckburg PB, Lepp PW, Relman DA. Archaea and their potential

role in human disease. Infect Immun 2003; 71: 5916.

22. Cavicchioli R, Curmi PMG, Saunders N, Thomas T. Pathogenic

archaea: do they exist? Bioessays 2003; 25: 111928.

23. Editorial. Cause and effect. Nat Rev Microbiol 2006; 4: 414.
24. Vianna ME, Conrads G, Gomes BP, Horz HP. Identiﬁcation
and quantiﬁcation of archaea involved in primary endodontic
infections. J Clin Microbiol 2006; 44: 127482.

25. Vickerman MM, Brossard KA, Funk DB, Jesionowski AM, Gill
SR. Phylogenetic analysis of bacterial and archaeal species in
symptomatic and asymptomatic endodontic infections. J Med
Microbiol 2007; 56: 1108.

26. Jiang YT, Xia WW, Li CL, Jiang W, Liang JP. Preliminary study
of the presence and association of bacteria and archaea in teeth
with apical periodontitis. Int Endod J 2009; 42: 1096103.

27. Mills LS, Soule ME, Doak DF. The keystone-species concept in

ecology and conservation. BioScience 1993; 43: 21924.

28. Allen EE, Banﬁeld JF. Community genomics in microbial

ecology and evolution. Nat Rev Microbiol 2005; 3: 48998.

29. Rousk J, Brookes PC, Baath E. Contrasting soil pH effects on
fungal and bacterial growth suggest functional redundancy in
carbon mineralization. Appl Environ Microbiol 2009; 75: 1589
96.

30. Ley RE, Daniel A, Peterson DA, Gordon GI. Ecological and
evolutionary forces shaping microbial diversity in the human
intestine. Cell 2006; 124: 83748.

31. Maukonen J, Motto J, Suihko ML, Saarela M. Intra-individual
diversity and similarity of salivary and faecal microbiota. J Med
Microbiol 2008; 57: 15608.

32. Rajilic-Stojanovic M, Smidt H, de Vos WM. Diversity of the
tract microbiota revisited. Environ

human gastrointestinal
Microbiol 2007; 9: 212536.

33. Nakamura N, Lin HC, McSweeney CS, Mackie RI, Gaskins
HR. Mechanisms of microbial hydrogen disposal in the human
colon and implications for health and disease. Ann Rev Food
Science Technol 2010; 1: 36395.

34. Roccarina D, Lauritano EC, Gabrielli M, Franceschi F, Ojetti V,
Gasbarrini A. The role of methane in intestinal diseases. Am J
Gastroenterol 2010; 105: 12506.

10

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5940 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940

35. Samuel BS, Gordon JI. A humanized gnotobiotic mouse model
of host-archaeal-bacterial mutualism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2006; 103: 100116.

36. Zhang HS, DiBaise JK, Zuccolo A, Kudrna D, Braidotti M, Yu
YS, et al. Human gut microbiota in obesity and after gastric
bypass. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009; 106: 236570.

37. Abell GCJ, Conlon MA, McOrist AL. Methanogenic archaea in
adult human faecal samples are inversely related to butyrate
concentration. Microb Ecol Health Dis 2006; 18: 15460.

38. Avivi-Green C, Polak-Charcon S, Madar Z, Schwartz B.
Apoptosis cascade proteins are regulated in vivo by high
intracolonic butyrate concentration: correlation with colon
cancer inhibition. Oncol Res 2000; 12: 8395.

39. Zgouras D, Stein J. Butyrate impairs intestinal tumor cell
induced angiogenesis by inhibiting HIF-1 alpha nuclear trans-
location. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2003; 300: 8328.

40. Scanlan PD, Shanahan F, Marchesi JR. Human methanogen
diversity and incidence in healthy and diseased colonic groups
using mcrA gene analysis. BMC Microbiol 2008; 8: Article-
no. 79.

41. Mihajlovski A, Alric M, Brugere JF. A putative new order of
methanogenic archaea inhabiting the human gut, as revealed by
molecular analyses of the mcrA gene. Res Microbiol 2008; 159:
51621.

42. Mihajlovski A, Dore J, Levenez F, Alric M, Brugere JF.
Molecular evaluation of the human gut methanogenic archaeal
microbiota reveals an age-associated increase of the diversity.
Environ Microbiol Rep 2010; 2: 27280.

43. Oxley APA, Lanfranconi MP, Wu¨ rdemann D, Ott S, Schreiber
S, McGenity TJ, et al. Halophilic archaea in the human
intestinal mucosa. Environ Microbiol 2010; 12: 2398410.

44. Horz HP, Scheer S, Huenger F, Vianna ME, Conrads G.
Selective isolation of bacterial DNA from human clinical
specimens. J Microbiol Methods 2008; 72: 98102.

45. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Hamady M, Fraser-Liggett CM,
Knight R, Gordon JI. The Human Microbiome Project. Nature
2007; 449: 80410.

46. Dridi B, Henry M, Khechine AE, Raoult D, Drancourt M.
High prevalence of Methanobrevibacter smithii and Methano-
sphaera stadtmanae detected in the human gut using an
improved DNA detection protocol. PLoS ONE 2009; 4:
Article-ID e7063.

47. Kubota K, Imachi H, Kawakami S, Nakamura K, Harada H,
Ohashi A. Evaluation of enzymatic cell treatments for applica-
tion of CARD-FISH to methanogens. J Microbiol Methods
2008; 72: 549.

48. Salonen A, Nikkila¨ J, Jalanka-Tuovinen J, Immonen O, Rajilic´-
Stojanovic´ M, Kekkonen RA, et al. Comparative analysis of
fecal DNA extraction methods with phylogenetic microarray:
effective recovery of bacterial and archaeal DNA using mechan-
ical cell lysis. J Microbiol Methods 2010; 81: 12734.

49. Rieu-Lesme F, Delbes C, Sollelis L. Recovery of partial 16S
rDNA sequences suggests the presence of Crenarchaeota in the
human digestive ecosystem. Curr Microbiol 2005; 51: 31721.
50. Ochsenreiter T, Selezi D, Quaiser A, Bonch-Osmolovskaya L,
Schleper C. Diversity and abundance of Crenarchaeota in
terrestrial habitats studied by 16S RNA surveys and real time
PCR. Environ Microbiol 2003; 5: 78797.

51. Burggraf S, Heyder P, Eis N. A pivotal archaea group. Nature

1997; 385: 780.

Archaea and oral infections

52. Huber H, Hohn MJ, Rachel R, Fuchs T, Wimmer VC, Stetter
KO. A new phylum of Archaea represented by a nanosized
hyperthermophilic symbiont. Nature 2002; 417: 637.

53. Samuel BS, Hansen EE, Manchester JK, Coutinho PM,
Henrissat B, Fulton R, et al. Genomic and metabolic adapta-
tions of Methanobrevibacter smithii to the human gut. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2007; 104: 106438.

54. Ishii S, Kosaka T, Hori K, Hotta Y, Watanabe K. Coaggregation
facilitates interspecies hydrogen transfer between Pelotomaculum
thermopropionicum and Methanothermobacter thermautotrophi-
cus. Appl Environ Microbiol 2006; 71: 783845.

55. De Bok FAM, Plugge CM, Stams AJM. Interspecies electron
transfer in methanogenic propionate degrading consortia. Water
Res 2004; 38: 136875.

56. Hatamoto M, Imachi H, Yashiro Y, Ohashi A, Harada H.
Detection of active butyrate-degrading microorganisms
in
methanogenic sludges by RNA-based stable isotope probing.
Appl Environ Microbiol 2008; 74: 36104.

57. Lueders T, Pommerenke B, Friedrich MW. Stable-isotope
probing of microorganisms thriving at thermodynamic limits:
syntrophic propionate oxidation in ﬂooded soil. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2004; 70: 577886.

58. Radajewski S, McDonald IR, Murrell JC. Stable-isotope prob-
ing of nucleic acids: a window to the function of uncultured
microorganisms. Curr Opin Biotechnol 2003; 14: 296302.

59. Maneﬁeld M, Whiteley AS, Grifﬁths RI, Bailey MJ. RNA stable
isotope probing, a novel means of linking microbial community
function to phylogeny. Appl Environ Microbiol 2002; 68: 5367
73.

60. Barclay AR, Morrison DJ, Weaver LT. What is the role of the
metabolic activity of the gut microbiota in inﬂammatory bowel
disease? Probing for answers with stable isotopes. J Pediatr
Gastroenterol Nutr 2008; 46: 48695.

61. Schreiber F, Stief P, Gieseke A, Heisterkamp IM, Verstraete W,
de Beer D, et al. Denitriﬁcation in human dental plaque. BMC
Biology 2010; 8: Article-no. 24.

62. Johnson KA, Johnson DE. Methane emissions from cattle. J

Anim Sci 1995; 73: 248392.

63. Conrad R, Klose M. Selective inhibition of reactions involved in
methanogenesis and fatty acid production on rice roots. FEMS
Microbiol Ecol 2007; 34: 2734.

64. Ungerfeld EM, Rust SR, Boone DR, Liu Y. Effects of several
inhibitors on pure cultures of ruminal methanogens. J Appl
Microbiol 2004; 97: 5206.

65. Lenz M, Janzen N, Lens PNL. Selenium oxyanion inhibition of
hydrogenotrophic and acetoclastic methanogenesis. Chemo-
sphere 2003; 73: 3838.

66. Patra AK, Saxena J. A new perspective on the use of plant
secondary metabolites to inhibit methanogenesis in the rumen.
Phytochemistry 2010; 71: 1198222.

67. Hartmann T. From waste products to ecochemicals: ﬁfty years
research of plant secondary metabolism. Phytochemistry 2007;
68: 283146.

*Hans-Peter Horz
Division of Oral Microbiology and Immunology
RWTH Aachen University Hospital
Aachen, Germany
Email: hhorz@ukaachen.de

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5940 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5940

(page number not for citation purpose)

11

