æREVIEW ARTICLE

The role of viruses in oral disease
Bjørn Grinde1,* and Ingar Olsen2
1Department of Virology, Division of Infectious Disease Control, Norwegian Institute of Public Health,
Oslo, Norway; 2Institute of Oral Biology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway

The focus has traditionally been on bacteria and fungi when discussing microbiological aspects of oral
disease. Viruses are probably more involved in diseases associated with the oral cavity than has been
previously thought. The role of several viruses in ulceration is well known, but viruses of the herpes family
may play a role in periodontitis, and papillomaviruses are probably involved in oral cancer. This review offers
a brief introduction to virology before discussing the role of the more relevant viruses in oral disease. As to
clinical application, it is concluded that the anti-herpes medication may, in some cases, be relevant in treating
periodontitis, while papillomavirus vaccine would be expected to decrease the prevalence of oral cancer.

Keywords: virology; periodontitis; cancer; herpesvirus; papillomavirus; enterovirus

Received: 3 November 2009; Revised: 12 January 2010; Accepted: 20 January 2010; Published: 12 February 2010

The oral cavity is home to a rich flora of bacteria;

some 700 different species have so far been
described (1). Viruses are by nature more difficult
to detect, at least with traditional methods such as in vitro
cultivation. However, the advent of the tools of molecular
biology, particularly various PCR-based methods, has
changed the situation. We can now readily detect not only
bacteria that have not yet been cultivated, but also human
viruses, which are indeed common in samples from the
oral cavity. Consequently, it is important to know the role
that viruses play in oral disease. This topic has recently
been reviewed extensively (2).

While it has long been known that most of the bacteria
associated with your body do not cause any harm, viruses
have a more dubious reputation. The point probably
reflects, at least partly, the fact that they have been more
invisible to the clinician. Prior to the advent of PCR,
people rarely looked for viruses except as suspects when
diagnosing a particular clinical condition; and if a virus
was found, it was typically assumed to be the cause of the
condition. Recent investigations have shown that certain
viruses are highly prevalent in the human body. Circo-
viruses, for example, are present in more than 90% of
adults and may never cause any disease (3, 4); poly-
omaviruses are present, at least in some points in life, in a
majority of the population, but are only rarely associated
with any symptoms (5). Moreover, even viruses that are
known to be capable of serious complications can be
highly prevalent in people without any overt symptoms;
examples include the herpesvirus family and entero-
viruses. Thus, the mere presence of virus in a sample
taken from diseased oral
to

tissue is not sufficient

implicate the virus in the pathological changes observed.
The present review discusses the evidence for a direct
viral involvement, and to what extent that should affect
clinical practice in the form of treatment or preventive
measures. The focus is on viruses that may cause clinical
symptoms, as opposed to those that simply use an oral
route of infection, or transmission, without manifesting
themselves in the mouth; or viruses that affect oral health
indirectly, for example, by causing immunodeficiency,
such as HIV.

Clinical virology
The process of evolution has shaped viruses towards the
same objective as other organisms, that is, survival and
procreation. As with any obligate parasite, a winning
strategy requires not just efficient replication, but also a
means of transmission between hosts. Consequently it is
not an optimal strategy to kill the host; in fact, it is
generally preferable to reside in an active, implying not
very sick, host. Unfortunately, evolution rarely forms
optimal organisms.

One feature that distinguishes viruses is their extreme
form of what in biology is referred to as ‘r-selection’. The
term is used for organisms that produce as much progeny
as possible without bothering about quality assurance or
putting resources into each one of them. This strategy
allows the virus to have more sloppy machinery for RNA
or DNA replication than any other cellular organisms;
viruses can afford to make thousands of worthless copies
of themselves for each competent viral particle. The point
is a nightmare for clinicians, in that viruses relatively
easily develop resistance to antiviral medication, and in

Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010. # 2010 Bjørn Grinde and Ingar Olsen. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 Unported License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), permitting all non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction
Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010. 2: 2127 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.2127
in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

1

(page number not for citation purpose)

Bjørn Grinde and Ingar Olsen

that they escape vaccines or the immunological memory
of previous infections.

In certain cases, however, replication in the mouth may be
preferable.

Although viruses as a rule of thumb are best served by
having a healthy host, they can still cause serious disease.
Three factors are of particular importance for the clinical
outcome of a viral infection. For one, pathology depends
on how advanced the relationship between virus and host
is. Viruses that have a long evolutionary history with a
particular host generally have evolved mechanisms to
avoid unnecessary damage to their host, while viruses
that recently jumped from one species to another have
not had the chance to do so. Consequently, zoonotic
viruses pose a particular threat to human health. The
second factor is whether the virus is inclined to remain
with the host for a long time, preferably throughout the
life-span, or if it is more of a ‘hit-and-run’ virus. In the
latter case there is obviously less selection as to restrain-
ing the virus from causing harm. The third factor is
whether the virus requires particular behaviour of the
host in order to be transmitted to another individual;
coughing is perhaps the most obvious and well-known
example. In Table 1, the various strategies and clinical
symptoms are outlined schematically.

Viruses can infect any type of cell in human body, with
the possible exception of erythrocytes; still the mouth has
a particular significance. For one, the mouth offers a
perfect entrance to a new host. We breathe, drink and eat
every day; thus all that is required for the virus is a strategy
that allows transmission either through air or through
water/food. The former is typically cared for by the
infected host when he coughs and thus sends out aerosols
containing viral particles; the latter is reflected in trans-
mission by the faecaloral route, that is, the virus infects
the guts and is thus released to the environment through
the faeces. In order to pursue these strategies, viruses are
not required to replicate in the mouth, and most viruses do
not. For various reasons they prefer, respectively, the
respiratory system or the intestines, consequently the
concomitant disease is typically restricted to these organs.

Humans are not the only species that have developed a
delight in kissing, but probably no other species are prone
to engage in the exchange of sputum to the extent that we
humans are. Not surprisingly, certain viruses apparently
have adapted to this behaviour in their approach to the
issue of transmission. In order to assure viral presence in
sputum, it is preferable to replicate in cells lining the oral
cavity and release a continuous stream of viral particles.
Herpesviruses and papillomaviruses are among the
viruses that presumably use this strategy. Obviously,
replication in oral tissue places the oral cavity more at
risk for clinical symptoms.

The herpesvirus family
Herpesviruses have a double-stranded DNA genome and
are among the largest and most complex human viruses.
There are eight members of the human herpesvirus
(HHV) family (Table 2). The more common, as to oral
health problems, are the two herpes simplex viruses
(HSV-1 and -2), which cause recurrent herpetiform
ulcerations
referred to as cold sores. These ulcers
typically occur on the lips, but the viruses can also cause
similar lesions in the mucosa, such as in the case of
gingivostomatitis. The mucosal affection is normally
associated with a primary herpes infection in children,
and is accompanied by bodily symptoms such as fever
and malaise. Both HSV-1 and -2 may be involved in oral
manifestations, although the latter is primarily associated
with the genitals.

Epstein-Barr virus

(EBV) and cytomegaloviruses
(CMV) are present in the vast majority of adults, but in
most cases probably without ever causing any overt
disease. Both can, however, cause mononucleosis; EBV
being responsible for most of the cases. Mononucleosis is
also known as ‘kissing disease’, suggesting that the virus
spread through direct mouth-to-mouth contact. The
condition is common at puberty, and is considered a
consequence of the host not having been in contact with

Table 1. Schematic presentation of clinical symptoms caused by viruses.

Rational

Symptoms/disease

Examples

Virally intended: ‘hit-and-run’ viruses Coughing

Virally intended: chronic viruses

Diarrhoea

Bleeding
Blisters, soars, ulcers

Rhinoviruses, influenza

Noro- and rotaviruses

Ebola- and hantaviruses
Herpes- and enteroviruses

Not in viral strategy

Cancer

Papilloma- and polyomaviruses

Behavioural change, e.g. aggression

Rabies virus

Immunodeficiency

Fever

Inflammation and concomitant tissue damage

HIV

Many viruses

Many viruses

Gross immunological overreaction and secondary infections

Pathogenic influenza

2

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 2127 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.2127

The role of viruses in oral disease

Table 2. Classiﬁcation of human herpesviruses (HHV) and their associated diseases.

Type

Primary target cell

Oral affection

Other pathology

1. Herpes simplex virus-1 Mucoepithelial

2. Herpes simplex virus-2 Mucoepithelial

Herpes ulcers

Herpes ulcers

Genital ulcers

Genital ulcers

3. Varicella Zoster virus

Mucoepithelial

Possible oral manifestations of

Chicken pox, herpes zoster

4. Epstein-Barr virus

B-cells and epithelial cells

chicken pox and herpes zoster

Hairy leukoplakia, periodontitis,
(nasopharyngeal carcinoma)

Mononucleosis, lymphoma

5. Cytomegalovirus

Monocytes, lymphocytes and

Periodontitis?

Mononucleosis

epithelial cells

6. Human herpesvirus-6

T-cells and possibly others

7. Human herpesvirus-7

T-cells and possibly others

8. Human herpesvirus-8

Probably lymphocytes and

epithelial cells

Roseola in infants

Roseola in infants

Kaposi’s sarcoma (in AIDS patients)

the virus earlier in life. EBV’s potential for affecting the
mouth is further underlined by oral hairy leukoplakia, i.e.
white patches typically on the side of the tongue with a
hairy appearance, a rare condition restricted to immuno-
suppressed patients.

Varicella-Zoster virus (VZV) is associated with chicken
pox, as a primary infection, and with herpes zoster if
reactivated later in life. The vesicular rash formed occurs
primarily in the skin, but may also affect the mucosa. The
three remaining human herpesviruses (HHV-6, -7 and -8)
rarely cause serious disease, but the former two are
responsible for a particular type of rash (roseola) with
associated fever in infants. HHV-8 is presumably respon-
sible for Kaposi’s sarcoma, a rare form of skin cancer
seen in immunosuppressed patients.

The herpesviruses typically form chronic infections
where the virus remains with its host till death do them
apart; much of the time in latency, but with occasional
bursts of activity. As these viruses are contact transmitted,
either by means of virus production in the skin accom-
panied by rashes and blister or viral presence in sputum, it
is not surprising to find viral activity in the oral cavity. In
addition to the traditional clinical picture referred to
above, two of them in particular, EBV and CMV have been
associated with periodontitis (recently reviewed in Refer-
ence (6)). Several laboratories have demonstrated that
these viruses are found significantly more frequently in
samples taken from affected pockets compared to healthy
pockets (710), however, this association does not neces-
sarily mean that they are involved in the pathology. Some
authors, e.g. Slots et al. (7, 8), suggest that these viruses
can influence the development and course of periodontitis,
while others are more sceptical, partly due to the low
numbers of virus observed (9, 11, 12). Periodontitic lesions
may, in part, be the transmission strategy for these viruses,
particularly CMV, as replication in the lesions allows

viruses to reach the saliva and thus potentially infecting
other individuals (13).

One should be careful when evaluating the presence of
low levels of viral genomes in clinical samples as an
indication of a viral role in pathogenesis. EBV and CMV
are known to be occasionally found in any mouth, as
long as a relevant sample of sufficient size is analysed by
a sensitive technique. EBV in particular is known to be
cyclically active in the body and periodically present in
sputum. Thus, the mere presence of viruses in the absence
of signs of local viral activity, either in the form of high
viral
titres or detection of viral RNA or proteins,
probably do not constitute any appreciable impact on
the aetiology. Moreover, associations such as between
viruses and particular bacterial species, or between
viruses and the severity of
the condition, may be
explained by confounding factors; for example, a more
active inflammation would be expected to correspond to
the presence of particular bacteria, and cause more pain,
but also to contain more lymphoid cells and/or more
body fluids. The latter factors could explain the associa-
tion with herpesviruses as both EBV and CMV replicate
in leukocytes.

The observation that a patient recovered from a
chronic and highly treatment refractory periodontal
condition upon antiviral treatment (500 mg valacikolovir,
Valtrex†, orally 2 over 10 days) may be the single
most-relevant data suggesting an occasional clinical role
for these viruses in periodontitis (14). The initial viral
load in this patient was considerably higher than what
was observed in any of the other patients tested. Both the
clinical condition and the viral load remained stable, and
close to the detection level, during a one-year follow-up
period after
treatment. Although the
amount of sample obtained from the various teeth
examined was not standardised, and is expected to be

the antiviral

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 2127 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.2127

(page number not for citation purpose)

3

Bjørn Grinde and Ingar Olsen

smaller when obtained from healthy pockets, the sam-
pling differences can neither explain the three log increase
in initial viral load compared to other patients, nor the
five to six log drop in viral load observed after treatment.
More cases utilising similar antiviral
treatments are
necessary to provide statistical significance to implicate
a potential role of viruses in periodontitis.

Antiviral treatment seems to be the best way to shed
light on the actual role of EBV or CMV in periodontitis.
Moreover, if successful, it may save the patients from
considerable pain and agony. We therefore believe that
quantitative antiviral tests, such as real-time PCR, are
relevant in the management of these patients, maybe
particularly in juvenile and/or chronic and aggressive
cases for which other therapy fails. If the tests find
appreciable amounts of virus, or other signs of local viral
activity, antiviral treatment should be considered as an
adjunct to conventional periodontal therapy. It should be
noted that the latter form of therapy has also been
reported to reduce the viral load (15).

Viralbacterial interactions

Herpesviruses are well known for their capacity to
manipulate the immune system. Although the obvious
purpose of manipulation is to boost viral replication, it is
easy to envision that a down-regulation of immunological
surveillance may also benefit other agents present, such
as bacteria. The issue, in regard to periodontitis, has been
recently reviewed by Slots (16). Briefly, viral activity in
periodontal tissues may impact the local
immune re-
sponse in a way that benefits opportunistic bacteria, and
thus leads to aggravated symptoms. For example, the
viruses produce cytokine mimics designed to modulate
the host’s immune defence.

It should be noted that the microbial activity can also
induce viral replication, as has been shown recently in the
case of EBV and malaria (17). If the impact of viral
replication on the bacterial environment is real, then it
might be expected that the bacterial profiles would differ
between sites with or without virus. Such correlations
have been previously reported (16).

Papillomaviruses
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a DNA virus that can
cause chronic infection of either skin or mucosal epithe-
lium. Parts of the viral genome are occasionally inte-
grated in the DNA of the host cells, and some of the
genes are assumed to have a malignant potential, as
reviewed in Reference (18). The role of HPV in cervical
cancer is well accepted and has led to the widespread use
of papillomavirus vaccines for young women; related
carcinomas occur in the mouth cavity as well as in the
oropharyngeal area, however, the role of HPV is less
obvious in these cases (19). Based on their putative role in
cervical carcinoma, the viruses are classified as having

either high (primarily 16 and 18) or low (primarily 6 and
11) oncogenic potential.

Although the reported prevalence varies considerably,
HPVs are common in oral samples such as biopsies or
brush samples of mucosa, indeed one laboratory reported
that 95% of superficial scrapes from healthy mouths were
positive (20). Although HPVs are also found in biopsies
from healthy mouths, their prevalence is typically re-
ported to be higher in biopsies from oral lesions such as
leukoplakia or cancers. In the former case, the association
with oncogenic HPVs is less obvious; while in the case of
malignant cancers most
laboratories find a definite
overrepresentation of the more malignant HPVs (19
22). The observed prevalence of oral cancers are, how-
ever, considerably lower than those reported for cervical
cancers. Still the case favouring a role of these viruses is
reasonably strong.

In future, as those who receive papillomavirus vaccines
grow up,
it will be interesting to see whether the
prevalence of oral carcinomas declines along with the
expected decline in cervical cancer. In fact, it has been
argued that the vaccines should also be offered to men,
partly because they too are at risk for genital cancer, and
partly due to the assumed connection with oral cancer
(23). The main argument against vaccinating both sexes is
that these forms of cancer have a considerably lower
prevalence in males compared to cervical cancer in
females. As the virus forms chronic infections, vaccina-
tion of individuals who already contain the potentially
malign subtypes is considered less useful. Nevertheless, it
seems reasonable, however, to make the vaccine available
at an early age to both sexes.

Enteroviruses
The enteroviruses belong to the family of picornaviruses.
Enteroviruses have a single-stranded RNA genome and
are classified into five species with all together more than
a hundred subtypes. Although the majority of human
enterovirus (HEV) infections are asymptomatic, they can
cause upper respiratory illness,
febrile rash, aseptic
meningitis, pleurodynia, encephalitis, acute flaccid pa-
ralysis and neonatal sepsis-like disease (24).

As to oral affection, the enteroviruses are primarily
associated with hand, foot and mouth disease. This is a
febrile illness with tender papulovesicular lesions of both
the hand, feet and oral mucosa (25, 26). It occurs mostly
in children, but can also affect adults. The association
with enteroviruses primarily concerns the type A viruses,
e.g. Coxsackie virus A16 and enterovirus-71, but other
enteroviruses may also be involved. Herpangina is a
related condition where the clinical manifestation is
primarily in the oral cavity in the form of ulceration
and blisters. Again, the condition is rare and restricted to
children.

4

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 2127 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.2127

Detection of viruses in the oral cavity
Viral diagnostics have become more relevant in clinical
dentistry. This is partly because of an increased awareness
that viruses are possible aetiological agents, and partly
because the methods of viral detection have become
considerably easier. The preferred methods are based on
variants of real-time PCR, which not only offer a test for
the viral presence, but also yield quantitative data. The
latter point is particularly relevant as several of the
viruses in the oral cavity may be prevalent even in healthy
mouths. A high viral load in a sample taken from affected
tissues may, however, as a rule of thumb, suggest direct
involvement in the underlying condition.

One problem is that several viruses that are chronically
present in the body can replicate in leukocytes (e.g. EBV
and CMV). As the typical clinical samples will stem from
inflamed tissues, such as periodontal pockets or ulcera-
tions, one would expect a presence of these viruses; if for
no other reason due to the accumulation of leukocytes; a
point that has been demonstrated at least in the case of
CMV and periodontitis (27). Again, a clinical role is
suspected if the titre is particularly high, and even more
so if the condition improves upon antiviral treatment.

In order to take samples for detection of viral nucleic
acids, whether by PCR or other methods, it is preferable
to immediately transfer the sample to a small tube
containing lysis buffer. The lysis buffer will block the
bacterial activity and stabilise the viral RNA and DNA
present. The tubes are advised to be frozen unless the
samples are to be tested within a day or two, in which case
they may be kept in the refrigerator. Upon arrival in an
analytical laboratory, RNA and/or DNA are extracted
from the samples, and aliquots added to a reaction mix
for PCR.

Standardisation of sampling is a challenge in connec-
tion with oral disease. Whether the samples consist of
saliva, brush scrapings from mucosa, dental plaque or
subgingival plaque, both the actual amount of sample
and the content, e.g. contaminants from blood, can vary
considerably. Theoretically, one might correlate the
presence of virus with other markers in the sample,
such as bacterial 16S rRNA or human genes, but that
does not offer a convincing standardisation. It seems that
the best option is to be careful as to adding relevance to
minor amounts of virus, or small differences between
samples; however, major differences such as in the
antiviral treatment study (14) cannot be due to sampling
variations.

A main limitation of PCR-based methods is that they
only detect the viruses they are designed to detect. Several
novel human viruses have appeared during the last
decade, and most likely the human body is the host to
a range of viruses that are yet to be described. Moreover,
the cost of the methods restricts analyses to a few viral
species; thus the total spectrum of potentially relevant

The role of viruses in oral disease

viruses is rarely tested. Two recent strategies compensate
for this limitation: microarrays and pyrosequencing. In
microarrays, probes detecting different viruses (or other
agents) can be applied to a slide and the sample DNA or
RNA hybridised onto the slide, thus offering the possible
detection of all known viruses. In pyrosequencing, the
complete nucleic acids present in the sample are se-
quenced to look for recognisable viral sequences by
searching relevant databases. Both these methods have
the same, twofold limitations: one, they are less sensitive
than PCR; and two, they are considerably more expen-
sive, although the costs for pyrosequencing is becoming
more cost-efficient. Thus, these techniques are not useful
for routine diagnostics, but they may be valuable when
investigating a possible viral cause of unknown condi-
tions. One such case is the common apthous ulcers, also
known as canker sores. Although various viruses have
been implicated by the association (28), it seems unlikely
that the true viral culprit, if any, is yet to be found.

Conflict of interest and funding
There is no conflict of interest in the present study for any
of the authors.

References

1. Aas JA, Paster BJ, Stokes LN, Olsen I, Dewhirst FE. Deﬁning
the normal bacterial ﬂora of the oral cavity. J Clin Microbiol
2005; 435: 72132.

2. Slots J. Oral viral infections of adults. Periodontol 2000. 2009;

49: 6086.

3. Huang L-Y, Jonassen TØ, Hungnes O, Grinde B. High
prevalence of TTV viremia (90%) and diverse viral genotypes
in Norwegian blood donors. J Med Virol 2001; 64: 3816.

4. Moen EM, Huang L-Y, Grinde B. Molecular epidemiology of
TTV-like mini viruses (TLMV) in Norway. Arch Virol 2002; 147:
1815.

5. Jiang M, Abend JR, Johnson SF, Imperiale MJ. The role of
polyomaviruses in human disease. Virology 2009; 384: 26673.
6. Grinde B, Olsen I. Do cytomegalovirus or Epstein-Barr virus
play a role in periodontitis? In: Gluckman TR, ed. Herpesvir-
idae: viral structure, life cycle and infections. New York: Nova
Science; 2009. p. 16778.

7. Slots J. Update on human cytomegalovirus in destructive
periodontal disease. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2004; 19: 21723.
8. Slots J, Saygun M, Sabeti M, Kubar A. Epstein-Barr virus in

oral diseases. J Periodontal Res 2006; 41: 23444.

9. Cappuyns I, Gugerli P, Mombelli A. Viruses in periodontal

disease  a review. Oral Dis 2005; 11: 21929.

10. Passariello C, Palamara A, Garaci E, Pasquantonio G. Herpes-
viruses and periodontal disease: a cautionary tale. Int J
Immunopathol Pharmacol 2009; 22: 2638.

11. Nibali L, Atkinson C, Grifﬁths P, Darbar U, Rakmanee T,
Suvan J, et al. Low prevalence of subgingival viruses in
periodontitis patients. J Clin Periodontol 2009; 36: 92832.

12. Sahin S, Saygun I, Kubar A, Slots J. Periodontitis lesions are the
salivary cytomegalovirus. Oral Microbiol

main source of
Immunol 2009; 24: 3402.

13. Sunde PT, Olsen I, Enersen M, Beiske K, Grinde B. Human
cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus in apical and marginal

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 2127 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.2127

(page number not for citation purpose)

5

Bjørn Grinde and Ingar Olsen

periodontitis: a role in pathology?. J Med Virol 2008; 80:
100711.

14. Sunde PT, Olsen I, Enersen M, Grinde B. Patient with severe
periodontitis and subgingival Epstein-Barr virus treated with
antiviral therapy. J Clin Virol 2008; 42: 1768.

15. Grenier G, Gagnon G, Grenier D. Detection of herpetic viruses
in gingival crevicular ﬂuid of patients suffering from periodontal
diseases: prevalence and effect of treatment. Oral Microbiol
Immunol 2009; 24: 5069.

16. Slots J. Herpesviral-bacterial synergy in the pathogenesis of

human periodontitis. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2007; 20: 27883.

17. Cheˆne A, Donati D, Guerreiro-Cacais AO, Levitsky V, Chen O,
Falk KI, et al. Molecular link between malaria and Epstein-Barr
virus reactivation. PloS Pathog 2007; 3: e80.

18. Nair S, Pillai MR. Human papillomaviruses and disease
mechanisms: relevance to oral and cervical cancers. Oral Dis
2005; 11: 3509.

19. Giuliano AR, Tortolero-Luna G, Ferrer E, Burchell AN, de
Sanjose S, Kjaer SK, et al. Epidemiology of human papilloma-
virus infection in men, cancers other than cervical and benign
conditions. Vaccines 2008; 265: K1728.

20. Furrer VE, Benitez MB, Furnes M, Lanfranchi HE, Modesti
NM. Biopsy vs. superﬁcial scraping: detection of human
papillomavirus 6, 11, 16, 18 in potentially malignant and
malignant oral lesions. J Oral Pathol Med 2006; 35: 33844.

21. Luo C-W, Roan C-H, Liu C-J. Human papillomaviruses in oral
squamous cell carcinoma and pre-cancerous lesions detected by
PCR-based gene-chip array. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 2007;
36: 1538.

22. Koyama K, Uobe K, Tanaka A. Highly sensitive detection of
HPV-DNA in parafﬁn sections of human oral carcinomas.
J Oral Pathol Med 2007; 36: 1824.

23. Zelkowitz R. HPV casts a wider shadow. Science 2009; 323:

5801.

24. Pallansch MA, Roos RP. Enteroviruses: polioviruses, coxsack-
ieviruses, echoviruses, and newer enteroviruses. In: Knipe DM,
Howley PM, Grifﬁn DE, Lamb RA, Martin MA, Roizman B,
Straus SE, eds. Fields virology. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2001, pp. 72375.

25. Lopez-Sanchez A, Guijarro-Guijarro B, Hernandez-Vallejo G.
Human repercussions of foot and mouth disease and other
similar viral diseases. Medicina Oral 2003; 8: 2632.

26. Wong SS, Yip CC, Lau SK, Yuen KY. Human enterovirus 71
and hand, foot and mouth disease. Epidemiol Infect 2010; 8:
119.

27. Sabeti M, Daneshmand A, Simon JH, Slots J. Cytomegalovirus-
infected inﬂammatory cells in dental periapical lesions. Oral
Microbiol Immunol 2009; 24: 4346.

28. Lin SS, Chou MY, Ho CC, Kao CT, Tsai CH, Wang L, et al.
Study of the viral
infections and cytokines associated with
recurrent aphthous ulceration. Microbes Infect 2005; 7: 63544.

*Bjørn Grinde
Department of Virology
Division of Infectious Disease Control
Norwegian Institute of Public Health
P.O. Box 4404 Nydalen
NO-0403 Oslo, Norway
Email: bjgr@fhi.no

6

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 2127 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.2127

