æORIGINAL ARTICLE

Quality control for diagnostic oral
microbiology laboratories in
European countries
Riina Rautemaa-Richardson13*, Wil A Van der Reijden WA4,
Gunnar Dahlen5, Andrew J. Smith6; and on behalf of the Clinical
Oral Microbiology (COMB) Network

1Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, School of Translational Medicine and University
Hospital of South Manchester, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK; 2Department of Oral
Medicine, Institute of Dentistry, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; 3Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Diseases, and Laboratory Diagnostics of the Helsinki University Central Hospital,
Finland; 4Department of Oral Microbiology, Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands; 5Department of Oral Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Odontology,
Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Sweden; 6College of Medical, Veterinary and Life
Sciences, Glasgow Dental Hospital and School, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

Participation in diagnostic microbiology internal and external quality control (QC) processes is good
laboratory practice and an essential component of a quality management system. However, no QC scheme for
diagnostic oral microbiology existed until 2009 when the Clinical Oral Microbiology (COMB) Network was
created. At the European Oral Microbiology Workshop in 2008, 12 laboratories processing clinical oral
microbiological samples were identified. All these were recruited to participate into the study and six
laboratories from six European countries completed both the online survey and the first QC round. Three
additional laboratories participated in the second round. Based on the survey, European oral microbiology
laboratories process a significant (mean per laboratory 4,135) number of diagnostic samples from the oral
cavity annually. A majority of the laboratories did not participate in any internal or external QC programme
and nearly half of the laboratories did not have standard operating procedures for the tests they performed. In
both QC rounds, there was a large variation in the results, interpretation and reporting of antibiotic
susceptibility testing among the laboratories. In conclusion, the results of this study demonstrate the need for
harmonisation of laboratory processing methods and interpretation of results for oral microbiology
specimens. The QC rounds highlighted the value of external QC in evaluating the efficacy and safety of
processes, materials and methods used in the laboratory. The use of standardised methods is also a
prerequisite for multi-centre epidemiological studies that can provide important information on emerging
microbes and trends in anti-microbial susceptibility for empirical prescribing in oro-facial infections.

Keywords: diagnostics; multicentre; oral microbiology; periodontitis; endodontic; periodontal pocket; root canal; quality
control

Received: 22 July 2011; Revised: 8 October 2011; Accepted: 14 October 2011; Published: 9 November 2011

Infections of the oral mucosa, teeth (caries and root

canal
infections) and their supporting structures
(periodontitis, dento-alveolar abscess) are polymicro-
bial, although usually associated with a characteristic
microbiota linked to the site of infection (1). However,
identification of
the relevant oral pathogens is not
commonly undertaken in diagnostic clinical microbiology
laboratories due to lack of expertise in handling fasti-
dious oral microbes and interpretation of the findings.
When specimens from oral diseases are processed, they

are frequently reported as ‘mixed oral flora’. This type of
reporting is unhelpful both to clinicians and to epide-
miologists collating data for disease and anti-microbial
susceptibility trends. This probably reflects the lack of
input by experts in oral microbiology into general guide-
lines for processing and reporting samples from the oral
cavity. Although there is a general consensus within the
dental and maxillo-facial surgery community on the role
of the major pathogens for many types of infection, there
is controversy on the role of some species, first line

Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011. # 2011 Riina Rautemaa-Richardson et al. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 Unported License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), permitting all non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction
Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 8395 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.8395
in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

1

(page number not for citation purpose)

Riina Rautemaa-Richardson et al.

anti-microbial agents and their associated breakpoints.
Furthermore, there is poor uptake and understanding of
microbiology diagnostic services by the dental profession,
inappropriate specimens and misinterpretation of culture
results (2, 3).

testing the ability to culture,

Microbiological diagnostics relies on the quality of the
test performance. This can be assured by internal
controls:
identify and
determine the anti-microbial profiles for indicator micro-
organisms with known susceptibility profiles. Standard
operating procedures (SOPs) and internal audits further
improve the accuracy and quality of the laboratory
performance. However, such data must be laboratory
independent, and exposure to external audits and quality
control (QC) rounds is essential. There are proficiency
schemes available for clinical microbiology laboratories
such as the United Kingdom National External Quality
Assessment Service (UK NEQAS; http://www.ukneqas-
micro.org.uk) and the Quality Control for Molecular
Diagnostics (QCMD; http://www.qcmd.org) for general
microbiology. However, external QC schemes for diag-
nostic oral microbiology are not available in any of the
European countries. To fulfil the requirements of diag-
nostic laboratory accreditation,
the adoption of an
external QC process is mandatory in many countries. In
the 2008 European tri-annual meeting of oral microbiol-
ogy specialists (European Oral Microbiology Workshop
2008, Helsinki, Finland), a number of diagnostic oral
microbiology laboratories agreed to participate in the
collation of data from diagnostic laboratory processes,
interpretative criteria and quality assurance. The Clinical
Oral Microbiology (COMB) Network was created to
provide external QC rounds for member laboratories and
to collaborate on SOPs for processing and reporting
samples from the oral cavity.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the range of oral
infection specimens processed, diagnostic methods, inter-
nal and external QC programmes used in European
diagnostic oral microbiology laboratories by an online
questionnaire. In addition, we determined the perfor-
mance of respondent European oral microbiology diag-
nostic laboratories in processing and reporting blinded
spiked oral specimens from hypothetical oral disease
scenarios.

Materials and methods
At the European Oral Microbiology Workshop 2008
(EOMW2008), Helsinki, Finland, 12 laboratories proces-
sing clinical oral microbiological samples were identified.
All these were recruited to participate in the study and
seven originating from six European countries completed
both the online survey and the first QC round. Three
additional
laboratories participated in the second QC
round.

Survey
The online survey consisted of a total of 18 open and
closed questions on the numbers and types of specimens
processed, molecular methods used, SOPs and participa-
tion in internal and external QC. The link to the survey
was sent to representatives of all 12 laboratories identified
at the EOMW 2008 meeting.

First QC round
A periodontal pocket QC specimen was prepared by
spiking sub-gingival plaque from a healthy volunteer
with the following pathogens: Aggregatibacter actinomy-
cetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingivalis and Parvimonas
micra. The QC specimen (approximately 1010 cfu/mL)
was prepared in thioglycolate broth of which 100 ml was
transferred into anaerobically prepared 2 ml VMGAIII
transport medium vials (4) and sent to participating
laboratories by a courier. The specimen was accompa-
nied with the following information: ‘The specimen is
from a 7 mm periodontal pocket, upper 1st molar in a
56-year old male patient with type II diabetes and is
allergic to penicillin’. Participants were asked to analyse
the specimens using their normal SOPs and methods.
Laboratories were also asked to perform antibiotic
susceptibility tests on significant isolates. Information
on the assays, culture techniques and media used, as well
as transportation time, were recorded in a standardised
data collection sheet. A copy of a standard report was
also collated. The laboratory providing the round
cultured a control sample after 3 days of storage at
room temperature.

Second QC round
An endodontic QC specimen was prepared into Luria-
Bertani broth, Lennox (BD Difco, Sparks, MD, USA) by
spiking with an Escherichia coli (NCTC 13353; extended
spectrum beta-lactamase, extended spectrum beta-lacta-
mase (ESBL) positive), alpha haemolytic streptococci
(non-speciated) and Fusobacterium nucleatum (final con-
centration approximately 1010 cfu/mL). Three paper
points (#50) were soaked in the spiked broth and
transferred into VMGAIII transport medium vial (4)
and sent to participating laboratories by a courier. The
specimen was accompanied with the following informa-
tion: ‘Root treatment started four days ago (old filling fell
out one month ago), now a flare up, lots of pus from root
canals. Patient has chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) and is allergic to penicillin’. The laboratories
were asked to analyse and report the specimens as
previously. The laboratory providing the round cultured
a control sample after 3 days of storage at room
temperature.

2

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 8395 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.8395

Results

Survey
Based on the survey questionnaire, each laboratory
processed, on average, a total of 4,135 samples per
annum. Five of the seven laboratories (71%) did not
participate in any internal or external QC programme,
and three (43%) of the participating laboratories did not
have SOPs for the tests they performed. The numbers and
types of samples processed by the participant laboratories
are summarised in Fig. 1. The most common sample type
processed was sub-gingival plaque from patients with
various forms of periodontal disease: mean 3,037 sam-
ples/laboratory annually (range 1016,000). All labora-
tories processed these samples. Other clinical samples
processed were mucosal swabs, pus swabs and aspirates
(from dento-alveolar infections) in addition to perform-
ing dental caries susceptibility tests using stimulated
saliva as a clinical specimen. However, the mean annual
numbers for these were low: mean 118, 68, 77 and 134
samples/laboratory annually, respectively (range 0400).

First QC round
Six laboratories processed, analysed and reported the
sample within the specified time of 3 weeks. The mean
transportation time was 1.8 (13) days. The methods used
for anaerobic culture included conventional or fastidious
anaerobe blood agar
(usually Columbia agar base

Quality control for diagnostic oral microbiology

supplemented with defibrinated horse or sheep blood
(5%), haemin (5 mg/l) and menadione (110 mg/l)), and
on selective media, such as tryptic soy serum bacitracin
for the cultivation of A.
vancomycin agar (TSBV)
(5). Two laboratories used
actinomycetemcomitans
PCR techniques. One laboratory used a Real-Time
PCR-panel for periodontal pathogens (6, 7). Another
laboratory used conventional PCR with agarose gel
electrophoresis (8).

The findings reported by the laboratories are listed in
Table 1. Six laboratories reported one or more period-
ontal pathogens from the sample. The predominant
pathogens
(A. actinomycetemcomitans, P. gingivalis)
were identified by three of six laboratories. The most
commonly identified finding was A. actinomycetemcomi-
tans (five of six laboratories). P. gingivalis and P. micra
were recovered by three of six laboratories. One labora-
tory reported that periodontal pathogens were not found.
Three laboratories identified and reported a number of
oral streptococci. The laboratory providing the round
detected all spiked pathogens.

Five laboratories performed susceptibility testing pri-
marily by disc diffusion. There was large variation in the
antibiotic susceptibility testing performed. Most often
susceptibility testing was performed for A. actinomyce-
temcomitans (n4) (Table 2). It was reported susceptible
to penicillin (two of three), amoxicillin (three of three)
and doxycycline/tetracycline (three of four) and resistant

Fig. 1. Proportion of participant laboratories (n6) that processed the indicated samples (hatched bars and upper x-axis) on a
routine basis and annual mean number of samples processed by the laboratories (solid bars and lower x-axis).

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 8395 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.8395

(page number not for citation purpose)

3

Riina Rautemaa-Richardson et al.

Table 1. Isolates recovered by culture techniques and species identiﬁed by PCR from the Round 1 sub-gingival plaque sample
spiked with Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingivalis and Parvimonas micra analysed by six
independent laboratories from six European countries

Laboratory

Isolate

Streptococcus agalactiae

Streptococcus sanguis

Streptococcus sp.

Abiotrpohia adjacens

Actinomyces odontolyticus
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans
Porphyromonas gingivalis

Porphyromonas sp.
Parvimonas micra

Tannerella forsythia

Fusobacterium nucleatum

Fusobacterium sp.

Prevotella intermedia/nigrescens

Prevotella melaninogenica

Prevotella sp.
Veillonella sp.

Total bacterial count (cfu/ml)

Transportation time

Culture techniques

PCR

1

2

3

4

5

6

1

4

Percentage of total flora

Semi quantitative amount

PCR signal

0.5

80.9

4.1

0.7

0.15

0

2.0

10.0

7.0

0

1.6

31.0

0.5

0

B0.01

0












































5.5107
1 day

1108

2 days

1.1107
3 days

1 day

1 day

1 day

to clindamycin (three of three) and erythromycin (three
of three IR). One laboratory reported that the isolate
was susceptible to metronidazole and two laboratories
reported that the isolate was resistant to metronidazole.

Second QC round
Nine laboratories processed and reported the sample
within the specified time of 3 weeks. The mean transpor-
tation time was 3.6 (26) days. All nine laboratories had
identified a heavy growth of a coliform. Six of these
identified the coliform as Escherichia coli and five
identified it as an ESBL producer. In addition, one
laboratory which did not name the coliform to species

Table 2. Antibiotograms reported for A. actinomycetemco-
mitans by four participant laboratories (S, susceptible; I,
intermediate; R, resistant)

AB

LAB Pen Amox Ery Clinda Doxy/tet Met Amox-Cla

1

2

4

5

S

S

S

S

R

S

I

R

I

R

R

R

S

S

S

R

S

R

R

S

level identified it as an ESBL producer. The E. coli was
identified by VITEK (n3) or by biochemical tests (one
by API 20E and one using API 32E (Biomerieux, La
Balme Les Grottes, France) and one not specified) (n
3). One laboratory reported that VITEK 2 had flagged
the E. coli as O157 requiring referral to a reference
laboratory, and no further processing of the sample was
carried out due to infection control guidance. Two of the
six laboratories that identified the ESBL-producing E.
coli highlighted the need to implement infection control
precautions in their report. Four laboratories isolated and
identified the alpha haemolytic streptococci to species
level and three of these reported anti-microbial suscept-
ibility data on this isolate. One laboratory reported the
isolate resistant to penicillin by disc diffusion. None of
the laboratories recovered and identified Fusobacterium
nucleatum. The laboratory providing the round detected
all spiked pathogens.

Discussion
Participation in diagnostic microbiology internal and
external QC processes is good laboratory practice and
an essential component of laboratory quality manage-
ment system. In many European countries, it is compul-
sory for all diagnostic laboratories
to participate.
However, no QC scheme for diagnostic oral microbiology

4

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 8395 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.8395

existed until 2009 when the COMB Network was created.
The results of this study show that European microbiol-
ogy laboratories process a significant number of diag-
nostic samples from the oral cavity annually. At the same
time, the majority of the surveyed laboratories did not
participate in any internal or external QC programme
and nearly half of the laboratories did not have SOPs for
the tests they performed.

Laboratories reported that they all processed period-
ontitis samples routinely. Therefore, it was decided to
provide a periodontitis QC specimen in the first instance.
Most of
the laboratories were able to recover the
microaerophilic A. actinomycetemcomitans by culture.
However, only half of the laboratories recovered and
identified the anaerobic pathogens in the specimen. The
two PCR methods used by the laboratories in this study
appeared to be equally sensitive in detecting the patho-
gens. Interestingly, Tannerella forsythia was detected by
one of the PCR methods. The sample was not spiked with
this pathogen, but it is possible that it was present in low
numbers in the sub-gingival plaque from the healthy
volunteer used in preparation of the sample. Therefore, it
is possible that not all samples had detectable amounts of
T. forsythia. Other laboratories identified and reported a
number of facultative commensals of dental plaque as
pathogens reflecting lack of consensus regarding the
causality of the disease. These results highlighted the
challenges of recovering and identifying anaerobic bac-
teria by culture methods.

The results of

the second round endodontic QC
specimen from a COPD patient also highlighted the
challenges of anaerobe diagnostics because no laboratory
was able to recover the F. nucleatum from the sample. A
high inoculum of E. coli may have inhibited or masked
the growth of F. nucleatum. All nine laboratories reported
heavy growth of a coliform, six of which identified it as an
ESBL producer. However, only two of these laboratories
highlighted the need to take infection control precautions
in their report. Many hospitals make every effort to
isolate patients colonised with resistant pathogens,
although guidelines vary nationally. Both laboratories
that mentioned the need for infection control measures
were attached to larger general microbiology laboratories.
Updating and maintaining quality is a major challenge
for small isolated laboratories. Open access guidelines
and SOPs for processing and reporting oral samples
would provide minimum level of standardisation. This
QC highlighted the importance of knowledge of current
anti-microbial susceptibility mechanisms linked to infec-
tion prevention issues.

In both QC rounds, there was large variation in the
results, interpretation and reporting of antibiotic suscept-
ibility testing among the laboratories. This
is not
surprising considering the various methodologies and
media used. In addition, there are no clinically proven

Quality control for diagnostic oral microbiology

break points for a number of oral pathogens, and
interpretation is frequently based on the literature from
structurally similar pathogens resulting in discordant
results. This highlights the importance of closer coopera-
tion between diagnostic oral microbiology laboratories
within Europe. Considering the large number of patients
with oro-facial infections, it is disappointing that use of
diagnostic microbiology facilities is not utilised to a
greater extent. One of the challenges in working in the
speciality of diagnostic oral microbiology is the relatively
small numbers of laboratories undertaking such work in
Europe. This QC has demonstrated the importance of
closer collaborative working not just only for SOPs and
reporting but also for training and developing a con-
census in clinical interpretation of results and commu-
nication to clinicians and other medical microbiology
colleagues.

In conclusion, the results of this study demonstrate the
need for harmonisation of laboratory processing methods
and interpretation of results for oral microbiology speci-
mens. The use of standardised methods is also a
prerequisite for multi-centre epidemiological studies that
can provide important information on emerging microbes
and trends in anti-microbial susceptibility for empirical
prescribing in oro-facial infections. The results of the QC
rounds also highlighted the value of external QC in
evaluating the efficacy and safety of processes, materials
and methods used in the laboratory. Historically, anae-
robic culture methods are recognised as the gold standard
and molecular methods as a second line alternative (9
11). The results of these QC rounds should trigger a
critical evaluation of the sensitivity and reliability of the
culture methods used for the detection of anaerobic oral
bacteria. This exercise has also fostered collaborations
between a network of reference laboratories in the EU
identifying and characterising relevant pathogens from
oral infections, this should also provide a useful resource
for diagnostic medical microbiology laboratories.

Conflict of interest and funding
There is no conflict of interest in the present study for any
of the authors.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank all the laboratories that have
participated in the European COMB Network oral microbiology
quality control programme: Dr. R. Claesson, Umea˚ Dental School,
Sweden; Dr. W. Godfrey, University Dental Hospital, Cardiff,
United Kingdom; Mrs. M.S. Jackson, Dental Hospital & School,
Glasgow, United Kingdom; Mrs. H. Torkko, HUSLAB, Helsinki,
Finland; Mrs. J. Ursem, ACTA, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Dr.
Vinuesa, L Hospitalet de LLobregat, Llobregat, Spain; Prof. P.

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 8395 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.8395

(page number not for citation purpose)

5

Riina Rautemaa-Richardson et al.

Holbrook, University of Iceland, Reykyavı´k, Iceland; and Prof. E.
Nagy, University of Szeged, Hungary.

References

1. Peterson LR, Thomson RB, Jr. Use of the clinical microbiology
laboratory for the diagnosis and management of infectious
diseases related to the oral cavity. Infect Dis Clin North Am
1999; 13: 77595.

2. Roy KM, Smith A, Sanderson J, Bagg J, MacKenzie D, Jackson
MS, et al. Barriers to the use of a diagnostic oral microbiology
laboratory by general dental practitioners. Br Dent J 1999; 186:
3457.

3. Palmer NO, Martin MV, Pealing R, Ireland RS, Roy K, Smith
A, et al. Antibiotic prescribing knowledge of national health
service general dental practitioners in England and Scotland. J
Antimicrob Chemother 2001; 47: 2337.

4. Van Steenbergen TJ, Petit MD, Tijhof CJ, Van Winkelhoff AJ,
Van der Velden U, De Graaff J. Survival in transport media of
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingi-
valis and Prevotella intermedia in human subgingival samples.
Oral Microbiol Immunol 1993; 8: 3704.

5. Slots J. Selective medium for

isolation of Actinobacillus

actinomycetemcomitans. J Clin Microbiol 1982; 15: 6069.

6. Kuboniwa M, Amano A, Kimura KR, Sekine S, Kato S,
Yamamoto Y, et al. Quantitative detection of periodontal

pathogens using real-time polymerase chain reaction with
TaqMan probes. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2004; 19: 16876.

7. Boutaga K, Van Winkelhoff AJ, Vandenbroucke-Grauls CM,
Savelkoul PH. Periodontal pathogens: a quantitative compar-
ison of anaerobic culture and real-time PCR. FEMS Immunol
Med Microbiol 2005; 45: 1919.

8. Ashimoto A, Chen C, Bakker I, Slots J. Polymerase chain
reaction detection of 8 putative periodontal pathogens in
subgingival plaque of gingivitis and advanced periodontitis
lesions. Oral Microbiol Immunol 1996; 11: 26673.

9. Paju S, Pussinen PJ, Suominen-Taipale L, Hyvonen M, Knuut-
tila M, Ko¨ no¨ nen E. Detection of multiple pathogenic species in
saliva is associated with periodontal infection in adults. J Clin
Microbiol 2009; 47: 2358.

10. Griffen AL, Becker MR, Lyons SR, Moeschberger ML, Leys
EJ. Prevalence of Porphyromonas gingivalis and periodontal
health status. J Clin Microbiol 1998; 36: 323942.

11. Riggio MP, Macfarlane TW, Mackenzie D, Lennon A, Smith
AJ, Kinane D. Comparison of polymerase chain reaction and
culture methods for detection of Actinobacillusactinomycetem-
comitans and Porphyromonas gingivalis in subgingival plaque
samples. J Periodontal Res 1996; 31: 496501.

*Riina Rautemaa-Richardson
The University of Manchester
Manchester, UK
Email: riina.richardson@manchester.ac.uk

6

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 8395 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.8395

