æORIGINAL ARTICLE

Porphyromonas endodontalis in
chronic periodontitis: a clinical and
microbiological cross-sectional study
Telma Blanca Lombardo Bedran1*, Rosemary Adriana C.
Marcantonio1, Rubens Spin Neto1, Marcia Pinto Alves Mayer2,
Daniel Grenier3, Luis Carlos Spolidorio4 and Denise Palomari
Spolidorio4
1Department of Oral Diagnosis and Surgery, Araraquara Dental School, State University of Sa˜ o Paulo,
Araraquara, Brazil; 2Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sa˜ o
Paulo, Sa˜ o Paulo, Brazil; 3Oral Ecology Research Group, Faculty of Dentistry, Universite´ Laval,
Quebec City, Quebec, Canada; 4Department of Physiology and Pathology, Araraquara Dental School,
State University of Sa˜ o Paulo, Araraquara, Brazil

Background: Although previous studies have shown the presence of Porphyromonas endodontalis in chronic
periodontitis associated with periapical lesions, the occurrence of this pathogen in diseased periodontal sites
without periapical lesions has been poorly investigated.
Objective: The aims of this study were to quantify P. endodontalis in patients with chronic periodontitis
without periapical lesions, to evaluate the potential correlation of P. endodontalis with Porphyromonas
gingivalis and Tannerella forsythia, and to evaluate the ability of periodontal treatment to reduce these
pathogens.
Design: Patients with generalized chronic periodontitis were selected by recording clinical attachment level
(CAL), probing depth (PD), and bleeding on probing (BOP). Subgingival samples from 30 diseased
nonadjacent sites (CAL]5 mm, PD between 5 and 7 mm and positive BOP) and 30 healthy nonadjacent
sites (PD53 mm and negative BOP) were collected and subjected to microbial analysis by quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). The variables of age, PD, CAL and BOP of all
individuals were
analyzed using the paired t-test (GrapPad Prism5†). Data of bacteria quantification were subjected to a
normality test (D’Agostino-Pearson Test). For bacterial correlation analysis, the Spearman correlation was
used.
Results: Our results showed that diseased sites had significantly higher levels of P. endodontalis compared to
healthy sites, similar to the results obtained for P. gingivalis and T. forsythia. The numbers of all bacterial
species were reduced significantly after mechanical periodontal treatment. P. endodontalis was significantly
correlated with the presence of T. forsythia and P. gingivalis in the diseased group.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that there is a high prevalence of P. endodontalis, P. gingivalis and T. forsythia
in periodontitis sites and that mechanical periodontal treatment is effective at reducing the pathogens studied.

Keywords: periodontitis; polymerase chain reaction; porphyromonas endodontalis; porphyromonas gingivalis; Tannerella
forsythia

Received: 27 September 2011; Revised: 7 November 2011; Accepted: 5 December 2011; Published: 5 January 2012

Periodontitis is an inflammatory disease initiated by

specific bacterial species that colonize the subgin-
gival area between the tooth surface and the
marginal gingiva. This disease causes the destruction of
tooth-supporting tissues, including connective tissue and
alveolar bone, and can lead to tooth loss (1).

The main periodontal pathogens of periodontal disease
include Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, fa-
cultative and strictly anaerobic bacteria (2). Porphyromo-
nas gingivalis, Treponema denticola and Tannerella
forsythia have been strongly associated with the chronic
form of periodontitis and are thought to play important

Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012. # 2012 Telma Blanca Lombardo Bedran et al. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 Unported License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), permitting all non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 10123 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.10123
medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

1

(page number not for citation purpose)

Telma Blanca Lombardo Bedran et al.

roles in pathogenesis (1, 3, 4). Although individual
bacterial species and groups of bacteria have been
identified as etiological factors of periodontitis, interac-
tions between microorganisms and the host also play a
key role in the etiopathogenesis of the disease (5).

Several reports have shown that the presence of other
bacterial species, including Porphyromonas endodontalis, is
associated with chronic periodontitis (5, 6). Further
studies are required to verify the relationship of these
species with the disease and their exact contribution
to the
etiology and progression of periodontitis.
P. endodontalis is primarily found in infections that
originate in the pulp, but has also been isolated from the
tonsillar area, the dorsum of the tongue and the period-
ontal pockets of patients with periodontal and pulp lesions
(6, 7, 8). Tran et al. (6) were the first to report the detection
of this species in periodontal pockets, although it was
present at a low concentration. P. endodontalis is an
asaccharolytic, black-pigmented, Gram-negative anaero-
bic bacterium. Originally known as Bacteroides endodon-
talis, P. endodontalis is highly sensitive to oxygen and is
therefore difficult to cultivate from clinical samples (9).
This species, along with other black-pigmented anaerobic
rods, has been implicated in the etiology of infected root
canals and periodontitis (4). However, additional studies
are required to determine the role of P. endodontalis in
patients with chronic periodontitis but without periapical
lesions, as well as the contribution of this microorganism
to the pathogenesis of periodontitis (10).

Recent advances in diagnostic methods using molecular
biology techniques that are more sensitive than bacterial
culture assays have led to a better understanding of the
roles that previously unidentified microbial species play in
the pathogenesis of periodontitis. Most conventional
microbiological tests, such as standard bacterial culture,
do not distinguish between P. endodontalis and other
closely related black-pigmented pathogens. However, mo-
lecular techniques, such as polymerase chain reaction
(PCR), allow for the specific identification of P. endodon-
talis and other Gram-negative anaerobic bacteria found in
the oral cavity (6, 11). Therefore, the purpose of this study
was to use quantitative PCR (qPCR) to detect and quantify
P. endodontalis in patients with chronic periodontitis but
without infected root canals, and to investigate how these
data correlate with data on pathogens that have been
previously shown to be related to chronic periodontitis, i.e.
P. gingivalis and T. forsythia. In addition, the levels of
P. endodontalis, P. gingivalis and T. forsythia following a
mechanical periodontal treatment were determined.

Material and methods

Subject population
This study was designed as a double-blind, controlled
trial with a two-month duration to quantify pathogens in

chronic periodontitis before and after basic periodontal
treatment. The study was approved by the Ethics
Committee in Human Research (Protocol # 26/08), and
all study participants signed a free and informed consent
form. The sample size calculation was based on previous
studies using qPCR for the detection of periodontal
pathogens
this calculation, we used
the following criteria: 90% test power, 5% significance
level and 1.0 mm detection difference in probing depth
(PD). The standardized difference of 0.95 in study power
(1b0.95) and a confidence level of a0.05 necessi-
tated a sample size of at least 17 patients that needed to
receive periodontal treatment.

(12, 13). For

This study comprised 20 randomly selected patients
(8 men and 12 women of 3555 years of age) with
moderate chronic periodontitis according to the general
criteria established by the American Academy of Period-
ontology (14). Inclusion criteria were as follows: the
presence of at least 20 teeth; a minimum of three non-
adjacent teeth with bleeding on probing (BOP), a clinical
attachment level (CAL)]5 mm and a probing depth
(PD) between 5 and 7 mm; and three healthy teeth with
no BOP and a PD53 mm. Radiographic analyses were
performed to complement the periodontal diagnosis and
to exclude teeth with periapical lesions. No patients had
a history of systemic disease or antibiotic therapy in the
6 months prior to the study.

Study design
We selected 30 non-adjacent posterior sites from 20
patients with a PD of 57 mm, positivity for BOP and
a CAL]5 mm as well as 30 healthy non-adjacent
anterior sites with no clinical attachment loss or BOP
and a PD53 mm. The selected teeth had no dysfunctions
in relation to occlusion and had no prostheses.

Alginate molds of the dental arches were made to
prepare acetate stents for standardizing the position of
the manual probe (Williams†, Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil) of sites
selected for microbiological analyzes. All of the period-
ontal clinical measurements were performed by a single
trained examiner, while another oral health professional
performed the basic periodontal treatment followed by
oral hygiene instruction and microbiological assessment.
The clinical measurements and the sample plaque collec-
tions were performed at baseline and at 60 days after the
periodontal treatment.

Oral hygiene program
Forty-five days before beginning the periodontal treat-
ment, patients received oral hygiene instructions every
week according to the individual needs of each patient.
After 30 days of oral hygiene instruction, periodontal
examination was performed for patients with a visible
plaque index of less than 30%.

2

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 10123 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.10123

Porphyromonas endodontalis in periodontitis

Clinical parameters
Clinical examination was performed by a trained, cali-
brated examiner whose intra-examiner repeatability was
determined at baseline (Kappa score0.91). The clinical
parameters assessed included the Visible Plaque Index
(VPI, 01) and Marginal Bleeding Index (MBI, 01) (15)
determined at four points per tooth (mesial, distal, buccal
and lingual), and the Probing Depth (PD), Clinical
Attachment Level
(CAL) and Bleeding on Probing
(BOP, 01) (16) determined at six different sites per tooth
(mesiobuccal, buccal, distobuccal, distolingual,
lingual
and mesiolingual) using a periodontal probe (Williams†,
Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil).

DNA extraction
The extraction of DNA from subgingival fluid samples
and from bacterial reference cultures was performed
using standard methods. Briefly, cells were lysed by
boiling, and DNA was extracted with phenol:chlorofor-
m:iso-amyl alcohol (25:24:1). After the addition of 3 M
NaCl, the DNA was precipitated with ethanol (99%) and
re-suspended in TE buffer. The DNA concentration was
determined by UV spectrophotometry (Biomate 3 Spec-
trophotometer, Thermo Electron Corporation), and the
relationships between the absorbances at 260 and 280 nm
were analyzed. As a quality parameter, A260/A280 values
between 1.8 and 2.0 were considered appropriate.

Subgingival sample collection
Samples for microbiological analysis were collected seven
days after the initial clinical examination and 60 days
after completion of the basic periodontal treatment.
After removal of the supragingival biofilm, the selected
sites were isolated with cotton rolls and gently air-dried.
Subgingival fluid was collected using two sterile paper
points (no. 30; Dentsply, Maillefer, Petro´ polis, RJ, Brazil)
that were inserted in the gingival pocket up to the
apical portion for 30 seconds. The paper points were
immediately placed in sterile Eppendorf vials containing
500 mL of TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 mM
EDTA, pH 8.0) and stored at 208C until DNA was
extracted for microbial analysis by qPCR.

Basic periodontal treatment
Seven days after the microbiological sample collection,
patients underwent a non-surgical periodontal treatment
including scaling and root planing (SRP) followed by oral
hygiene instruction; the treatment was performed under
local anesthesia and with manual instruments (McCall
and Gracey Curettes and Hirschfeld File Scaler  Hu
Friday†). Polishing was performed immediately after
each session of SRP with rubber cups and paste. After
SRP, supragingival biofilm control (maintenance phase)
was performed via prophylaxis and oral hygiene instruc-
tion was conducted weekly for 60 days, at which time the
second collection of crevicular fluid and periodontal
examination occurred.

Bacterial strains and growth conditions
The bacterial species P. endodontalis (E203), P. gingivalis
(ATCC 33277) and T. forsythia (ATCC 43037) were grown
anaerobically on Tryptone soy blood agar plates supple-
mented with hemin (5 mg/l) and menadione (1 mg/l) for
715 days at 378C in 85% N2, 5% CO2 and 10% H2 in an
anaerobic chamber (Plas Labs, Lansing, MI, USA).
Escherichia coli strain DH5-alpha was used as the host
for plasmids and was grown aerobically at 378C in LB
medium (17).

Quantitative PCR reactions
For the quantitative analysis, plasmids containing the
target genes were used as standards. PCR amplification
was initially performed for the 16S rRNA of P. endodon-
talis, P. gingivalis and T. forsythia. The amplicons were
cloned using the TOPO TA Cloning Kit (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions and plasmids were transformed into E. coli.
After growth of the transformants, the plasmids were
extracted using a PureLink Quick sHRNA Miniprep kit
(Invitrogen) and then sequenced. The plasmid solutions
were diluted in sterile water to a concentration of 108
copies/mL and then serially diluted (final concentrations
from 104 to 101 copies/mL). The dilutions were then used
as template DNA in the qPCR reactions. In each
reaction, data obtained from the standard curve were
used to convert the CT scores (cycle threshold) obtained
with patient samples into the exact numbers of DNA
copies (18, 19).

The detection and quantification by qPCR was
performed using universal (20) and specific primers for
P. endodontalis (5?-GCT GCA GCT CAA CTG TAG TCT
TG-3?, 5?-TCA GTG TCA GAC GGA GCC TAG TAC-
3?-110 pb) (21), P. gingivalis (5?-ACC TTA CCC GGG
ATT GAA ATG-3?, 5?-CAA CCA TGC AGC ACCT AC
ATA GAA-3?- 83 pb) (22), and T. forsythia (5?-AGC GAT
GGT AGC AAT ACC TGT C-3?, 5?-TTC GCC GGG
TTA TCC CTC-3?- 88 pb) (22) (Applied Biosystems†).
The species-specific primer sets were designed based on
the variable regions of each target gene. The specificities
of the primers were confirmed by multiple alignments of
relevant sequences from closely related species and by a
Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) homology
search (1).

The qPCR reactions were performed with the use of a
Step OneTM qPCR System (Applied Biosystems†). All
reactions were performed in duplicate, and average values
were used to calculate the bacterial
load. The total
volume of each reaction was 10 mL containing 5 mL of
SYBR Green ER qPCR SuperMix Universal (Invitrogen
Tech-LineSM), 0.1 mM of each primer pair (Applied

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 10123 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.10123

(page number not for citation purpose)

3

Telma Blanca Lombardo Bedran et al.

Biosystems†) and 50 ng/uL template DNA. The thermo-
cycling program included an incubation at 958C for 10
minutes, 40 cycles of 958C for 15 seconds and an
incubation at 608C for 1 minute. After the qPCR
reaction,
the dissociation curve (melting curve) was
obtained using temperatures between 608C and 958C to
determine primer specificity. Melting curve analysis
revealed only one peak of amplification. All reactions
were performed in 48-well MicroAmp optical plates
covered with optical adhesive (Applied Biosystems).
Data were analyzed by Step OneTM software (Applied
Biosystems†).

Statistical analysis
The clinical and microbiological data were statistically
analyzed using the software GraphPad Prism 5†. Inter-
and intra-group analyses were conducted for the various
periods. The variables age, PD, CAL and BOP of all
individuals were analyzed using the paired t-test. Quan-
titative variables (PD and CAL) were subjected to the
normality test (D’Agostino-Pearson Test). PD and CAL
data were analyzed by the Wilcoxon test for comparisons
between groups and between periods. To analyze the BOP
categorical variable,
the Cochran test was used. To
identify statistically significant results, we used the exact
McNemar test. Bacterial quantification data were sub-
jected to a normality test (D’Agostino-Pearson Test) and
showed a non-normal distribution. Thus, the Mann-
Whitney test was applied. For bacterial correlation
analysis,
the Spearman rank correlation was used.
pB0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Results

Clinical parameters
The general characteristics of the sampled population are
summarized in Table 1. Since no statistically significant
differences in age or number of teeth were observed in the
sample set, it was considered homogeneous. The average
CAL was divided into three CAL scores (12 mm, 34
mm and ]5 mm), and the average PD was divided into
three PD scores (13 mm; 45 mm; ]6 mm). After
treatment, there was a statistically significant improve-
ment of both parameters (pB0.001).

The collection sites for the microbiological analysis had
a prevalence of bleeding on probing of 100% at baseline
that decreased to 13.33% after treatment in the disease
group (pB0.0001). In addition, PD (5.3390.54 mm,
baseline) and CAL (5.490.62 mm, baseline) showed
statistically significant reductions (pB0.0001) after per-
iodontal therapy in the diseased group (3.6390.76 mm
and 3.8390.95 mm for PD and CAL, respectively). In the
healthy sites, PD (1.690.56 mm) and CAL (1.6390.56)
showed no significant reduction (p0.035) over the
60-day period.

Table 1. Mean (9 SD) clinical parameters of full mouth of
subjects in the study

N20 subjects

Age (years)

Gender (M/F)

Average number of teeth

BASELINE

60 DAYS

4697.49

8/12

23.5592.95

% of sites with

Probing depth (13 mm)
Probing depth (45 mm)
Probing depth (]6 mm)
Clinical attachment level (12 mm)
Clinical attachment level (34 mm)
Clinical attachment level (]5 mm)
Bleeding on probing

86%

10%

4%

60%

28.5%

11.5%
47%

94%

5.3%

0.7%

78%

20%

2%
10%

Detection of microorganisms by qPCR
The standard curve for each microorganism was obtained
with the use of specific primers and four serial dilutions
(101104) of
the genomic DNA of P. endodontalis,
P. gingivalis and T. forsythia. The reaction efficiencies
for each organism were 97.1 (P. endodontalis), 96.3
(P. gingivalis) and 97.8 (T. forsythia). The correlation
coefficient for the mean CT values was R2]0.99. All 3
Sybr Green assays were highly specific and amplified only
DNA extracted from periodontopathogens.

The average numbers of P. endodontalis, P. gingivalis and
T. forsythia detected in the patient group were 1.7.104,
1.72.104 and 1.5.104 cells, respectively. There were no
statistically significant differences among the three patho-
gens tested. However, after periodontal treatment, we
observed significant reductions of these pathogens to 1.3.
102, 6.33.102 and 1.6.102, respectively, for P. endodontalis
P. gingivalis and T. forsythia. P. gingivalis remained in
higher concentrations after periodontal treatment (Fig. 1).
In the healthy sites, we detected average numbers of 70,
160 and 58 cells for P. endodontalis, P. gingivalis and
T. forsythia, respectively. After periodontal treatment,
there were significant reductions of all bacteria tested
(Fig. 1). These data suggest that even in the healthy sites,
P. gingivalis is present at higher levels than T. forsythia
and P. endodontalis.

Correlations in the detection of analyzed bacteria
When the correlations between the three bacterial species
were assessed, we observed statistically significant corre-
lations between P. gingivalis and T. forsythia (r0.624,
p50.001) and between T. forsythia and P. endodontalis
(r0.756, p50.01) in the diseased group (baseline).
However, there was only a moderate correlation between
P. gingivalis and P. endodontalis (r0.385, p50.05). We
found similar patterns of correlation in the diseased

4

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 10123 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.10123

Porphyromonas endodontalis in periodontitis

Fig. 1. Quantiﬁcation of P. endodontalis, P. gingivalis and T. forsythia in subgingival plaque of patients with chronic
periodontitis by qPCR. Letters represented the evaluating of each bacterium separately before and after periodontal treatment.
So those bacteria that had statistically signiﬁcant reduction after periodontal treatment were represented with different letters.

group after 60 days of periodontal treatment, although
the correlation values were less significant. The correla-
tions between T. forsythia and P. gingivalis (r0.390, p5
0.05) and between T. forsythia and P. endodontalis (r
0.483, p50.01) were statistically significant, but
the
correlation was not significant between P. gingivalis and
P. endodontalis. The healthy group showed no correla-
tions between the analyzed bacteria between both periods
(baseline and 60 days) possibly due to low levels of
detection (data not shown).

Discussion
The primary goal of this study was to detect and quantify
the pathogen P. endodontalis in patients with chronic
periodontitis without periapical lesions and to determine
a possible correlation with the pathogens that are already
related to chronic periodontitis,
i.e. P. gingivalis and
T. forsythia. Microorganisms and their products are the
initiators of periodontal
lesions. The main pathogens
associated with periodontal disease include P. gingivalis,
T. forsythia and T. denticola. However, Kumar et al. (5),
Tran et al. (6) and Dahle´n and Leonhardt (7) suggested
that other poorly characterized microorganisms (e.g.
P. endodontalis) might also be associated with chronic
periodontitis.

P. endodontalis was initially found in endodontic infec-
tions by Sundqvist et al. (23) and Van Winkelhoff et al. (8).
This pathogen has already been identified as a member of
the subgingival microbiota in humans; however,
its
association with periodontal disease is not well estab-
lished. Few studies have reported the prevalence of this
microorganism in diseased periodontal sites in patients

without periapical lesions or the effect of a periodontal
treatment in reducing the levels of P. endodontalis (6, 24).
Our study showed a high prevalence of P. endodontalis
in addition to P. gingivalis and T. forsythia, in diseased
periodontal sites when compared to healthy sites, with a
statistically significant reduction after periodontal ther-
apy. A previous study also has shown that P. endodontalis
can be found in diseased sites in higher proportions than
in healthy sites and in proportions similar to those of
other pathogens already associated with periodontitis,
such as P. gingivalis (13). On the other hand, Tran et al.
(6) reported the presence of P. endodontalis in periodontal
pockets but only at a low concentration.

Similar reports have shown that putative pathogens
may be present in healthy periodontal sites but at lower
levels than in diseased sites. This would explain why the
pathogenicity of the microbiota differs from area to area
and also from one individual to another (25). Haffajee
et al. (25) demonstrated that the presence of pathogenic
species is essential during the development of periodontal
disease, but often they are not sufficient in numbers to
establish disease and the onset of periodontitis depends
on the presence of other predisposing factors (25).

The similarity between P. endodontalis and P. gingivalis,
one of the main bacterial species found in diseased
periodontal sites, is well known. However, the micro-
organisms
no
cross-reactions between them have been detected using
molecular techniques. Thus, the results obtained in this
study could not be related to the detection of P. gingivalis,
as specific primers for P. endodontalis were used (7).

phenotypes,

distinct

possess

and

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 10123 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.10123

(page number not for citation purpose)

5

Telma Blanca Lombardo Bedran et al.

As noted in our results, P. gingivalis showed the
smallest reduction after periodontal treatment among
the microorganisms studied. At the end of the 60-day
period between collections, it remained present at higher
concentrations than the other bacteria. Reports in the
literature indicated that P. gingivalis have fimbriae, which
are potent virulence factors involved in bacterial adhe-
sion to oral tissues, allowing the microorganism to invade
the periodontal tissue more easily and increasing its
survival in the gingival tissue (26).

The adhesion of P. endodontalis to the epithelial cells
of
the gingival sulcus differs from the adhesion of
P. gingivalis. P. endodontalis is less able to adhere to
gingival cells compared to P. gingivalis because it does
not have fimbriae (27). P. endodontalis also does not
produce a trypsin-like enzyme that other pathogens
use for the destruction of periodontal tissue and does
not exhibit hemagglutination activity (6). However,
P. endodontalis has collagenases and proteases, enzymes
that can also aid in the destruction of supporting tissues
(27). T. forsythia also does not have fimbriae, reducing
its capacity to colonize and invade periodontal tissue.
However, it expresses a protein, BspA, that has a domain
similar to a domain present in the fimbriae protein of
P. gingivalis and induces inflammatory cytokine produc-
tion in mammalian cells. These characteristics may
contribute to the greater correlation between P. endodon-
talis and T. forsythia when compared to the correlation
between P. endodontalis and P. gingivalis (3).

The present study demonstrated significant correlations
between the numbers of bacterial cells of the three
pathogens tested in the diseased group. The diseased sites
had increased numbers of pathogens compared to the
healthy sites. Therefore, the presence and amounts of
P. endodontalis, P. gingivalis and T. forsythia in the
subgingival environment may influence the local develop-
ment of periodontal disease. Our data support the study of
Dahle´n and Leonhardt (7) that proposed the addition of
P. endodontalis to the list of microorganisms that are used
in the microbiological diagnosis of periodontal disease.

Thus, through a sensitive and specific qPCR method
that is routinely used as a diagnostic tool for period-
ontitis, the association of P. gingivalis and T. forsythia was
confirmed; these pathogens were found in higher propor-
tions in affected sites than in healthy sites. We also noted
a higher incidence of P. endodontalis in sites with period-
ontal disease than in healthy sites.

Despite the short term evaluation and small number
of patients in this study, our results suggest that P.
endodontalis, in addition to P. gingivalis and T. forsythia,
can be found at high levels in diseased periodontal sites
of periodontitis patients without periapical lesions when
compared to healthy sites. Furthermore, a significant
reduction in the numbers of P. endodontalis, P. gingivalis,

and T. forsythia after mechanical periodontal therapy
was observed.

Longitudinal studies with longer evaluation periods of
6 months to 1 year after periodontal treatment and
controlled studies involving higher numbers of patients
should be conducted to confirm our data and to clearly
assess the pathogenic potential of P. endodontalis during
the course of periodontal disease.

Acknowledgements

The authors thank the ﬁnancial support from FAPESP (Fundac¸a˜o
de Amparo a` Pesquisa do Estado de Sa˜o Paulo, grants 2009/53308-
7; Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil).

Conflicts of interest and funding
This manuscript does not have any kind of conflicts of
interest and funding came from support by the FAPESP
(Fundac¸a˜o de Amparo a` Pesquisa do Estado de Sa˜o
Paulo)  Grant 2009/53308-7.

References

1. Mineoka T, Awano S, Rikimaru T, Kurata H, Yoshida A, Ansai
T, et al. Site speciﬁc development of periodontal disease is
associated with increased levels of Porphyromonas gingivalis,
Treponema denticola, and Tannerella forsythia in subgingival
plaque. J Periodontol 2008; 79: 6706.

2. Jarvensivu A, Hietanen J, Rautemaa R, Sorsa T, Richardson
M. Candida yeast in chronic periodontitis tissues and subgingi-
val microbial bioﬁlms in vivo. Oral Dis 2004; 10: 10612.

3. Holt SC, Ebersole JL. Porphyromonas gingivalis, Treponema
denticola, and Tannerella forsythia: The ‘red complex’, a
prototype polybacterial pathogenic consortium in periodontitis.
Periodontol 2000 2005; 38: 72122.

4. Siqueira JF Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN. Diversity of endodontic microbiota

revisited. J Dent Res 2009; 88: 96981.

5. Kumar PS, Griffen AL, Barton JA, Paster BJ, Moeschberger
ML, Leys EJ. New bacterial species associated with chronic
periodontitis. J Dent Res 2003; 82: 33844.

6. Tran T, Flynn MJ, Chen C, Slots J. Porphyromonas endodontalis

in subgingival plaque. Clin Infect Dis 1997; 25: 2223.

7. Dahle´n G, Leonhardt A. A new checkerboard panel for testing
bacterial markers in periodontal disease. Oral Microbiol Im-
munol 2006; 21: 611.

8. Van Winkelhoff AJ, Carlee AW, de Graaff J. Bacteroides
endodontalis and other black-pigmented bacteroides species in
odontogenic abscesses. Infect Immun 1985; 49: 49449.

9. Van Winkelhoff AJ, Van Steenbergen TJM, de Graaff J. Oxygen
tolerance of oral and non-oral black-pigmented Bacteroides
species. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1986; 33: 2158.

10. Pereira CV, Stipp RN, Fonseca DC, Pereira LJ, Ho¨ ﬂing JF.
Detection and clonal analysis of anaerobic bacteria associated
to endodontic-periodontal
lesions. J Periodontol 2011; 82:
176775.

11. Ashimoto A, Chen C, Bakker I, Slots J. Polymerase chain
reaction detection of 8 putative periodontal pathogens in
subgingival plaque of gingivitis and advanced periodontitis
lesions. Oral Microbiol Immunol 1996; 1: 26673.

12. Huse SM, Dethlefsen L, Huber JA, Mark Welch D, Relman
DA, Sogin ML. Exploring microbial diversity and taxonomy

6

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 10123 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.10123

using SSU rRNA hypervariable tag sequencing. PLoS Genet
2008; 4: e1000255.

13. Verner C, Lemaitre P, Daniel A, Giumelli B, Lakhssassi N,
Sixou M. Carpegen real-time polymerase chain reaction vs.
anaerobic culture for periodontal pathogen identiﬁcation. Oral
Microbiol Immunol 2006; 21: 3416.

14. Armitage GC. Development of a classiﬁcation system for
periodontal diseases and conditions. Ann Periodontol 1999; 4:
16.

15. Ainamo J, Bay I. Problems and proposals for recording

gingivitis and plaque. Int Dent J 1975; 25: 22935.

16. Muhlemann HR, Son S. Gingival sulcus bleeding  a leading
symptom in initial gingivitis. Helv Odontolol Acta 1971; 10713.
17. Umeda JE, Missailidis C, Longo PL, Anzai D, Wikstro¨ m M,
Mayer MP. Adhesion and invasion to epithelial cells by ﬁmA
genotypes of Porphyromonas gingivalis. Oral Microbiol Immu-
nol 2006; 21: 4159.

18. Persson GR, Hitti J, Paul K, Hirschi R, Weibel M, Rothen M,
et al. Tannerella forsythia and Pseudomonas aeruginosa in
subgingival bacterial samples from parous women. J Period-
ontol 2008; 79: 50816.

19. Teixeira SR, Mattarazo F, Feres M, Figueiredo LC, de Faveri
M, Simionato MR, et al. Quantiﬁcation of Porphyromonas
gingivalis and ﬁmA genotypes in smoker chronic periodontitis.
J Clin Periodontol 2009; 36: 4827.

20. Nonnenmacher C, Dalpke A, Rochon J, Flores-de-Jacoby L,
Mutters R, Heeg K. Real-time polymerase chain reaction for
detection and quantiﬁcation of bacteria in periodontal patients.
J Periodontol 2005; 76: 15429.

21. Martin EF, Nadkarni MA, Jacques NA, Hunter N. Quantitative
microbiological study of human carious dentine by culture and

Porphyromonas endodontalis in periodontitis

Real-Time PCR: association of anaerobes with histopathological
changes in chronic pulpitis. J Clin Microbiol 2002; 40: 1698704.
22. Kuboniwa M, Amano A, Kimura RK, Sekine S, Kato S,
Yamamoto Y, et al. Quantitative detection of periodontal
pathogens using real-time polymerase chain reaction with
TaqMan probes. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2004; 19: 16876.

23. Sundqvist GK, Eckerbom MI, Larsson AP, Sjo¨gren UT.
Capacity of anaerobic bacteria from necrotic dental pulps to
induce purulent infections. Infect Immun 1979; 25: 6859.

24. Hutter G, Schlagenhauf U, Valenza G, Horn M, Burgemeister S,
Claus H, et al. Molecular analysis of bacteria in periodontitis:
evaluation of clone libraries, novel phylotypes and putative
pathogens. Microbiology 2003; 149: 6775.

25. Haffajee AD, Cugini MA, Dibart S, Smith C, Kent Jr RL,
Socransky SS. The effect of SRP on the clinical and micro-
biological parameters of periodontal diseases. J Clin Periodontol
1997; 24: 32434.

26. Hiramine H, Watanabe K, Hamada N, Umemoto T. Porphyr-
omonas gingivalis 67-kDa ﬁmbriae induced cytokine production
and osteoclast differentiation utilizing TLR2. FEMS Microbiol
Lett 2003; 229: 4955.

27. Kon A. Pathogenic factors of Porphyromonas endodontalis. Dent

J Iwate Med Univ 2002; 27: 18796.

*Telma Blanca Lombardo Bedran
Departament of Phisiology and Patology
Rua Humaita´ , 1680
14801-903 Araraquara
SP  Brazil 55-16-33016402.
Email: telmabedran@hotmail.com

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 10123 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.10123

(page number not for citation purpose)

7

