æINVITED REVIEW ARTICLE

Review of osteoimmunology and the
host response in endodontic and
periodontal lesions
Dana T. Graves1*, Thomas Oates2 and Gustavo P. Garlet3
1Department of Periodontics, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA, USA; 2Department of Periodontics, UTHSC, San Antonio, TX, USA; 3Department of Biological
Sciences, School of Dentistry of Bauru, Bauru, Brazil

Both lesions of endodontic origin and periodontal diseases involve the host response to bacteria and the
formation of osteolytic lesions. Important for both is the upregulation of inflammatory cytokines that initiate
and sustain the inflammatory response. Also important are chemokines that induce recruitment of leukocyte
subsets and bone-resorptive factors that are largely produced by recruited inflammatory cells. However,
there are differences also. Lesions of endodontic origin pose a particular challenge since that bacteria persist in
a protected reservoir that is not readily accessible to the immune defenses. Thus, experiments in which the host
response is inhibited in endodontic lesions tend to aggravate the formation of osteolytic lesions. In contrast,
bacteria that invade the periodontium appear to be less problematic so that blocking arms of the host response
tend to reduce the disease process. Interestingly, both lesions of endodontic origin and periodontitis exhibit
inflammation that appears to inhibit bone formation. In periodontitis, the spatial location of the inflammation
is likely to be important so that a host response that is restricted to a subepithelial space is associated with
gingivitis, while a host response closer to bone is linked to bone resorption and periodontitis. However, the
persistence of inflammation is also thought to be important in periodontitis since inflammation present during
coupled bone formation may limit the capacity to repair the resorbed bone.

Keywords: bacteria; bone; chemokine; cytokine; endodontic lesion; gingivitis; periodontitis; inﬂammation

Received: 15 May 2010; Revised: 17 October 2010; Accepted: 18 October 2010; Published: 17 January 2011

(3)

Periapical lesions of endodontic origin and period-

ontitis are two common conditions found in the
oral cavity that share pathologic mechanisms
involving interactions between immune cells and bone.
Lesions of endodontic origin are associated with bacterial
contamination and necrosis of the dental pulp, which
typically progress through four stages: (1) exposure of the
dental pulp to the oral cavity with subsequent bacterial
colonization, (2) inflammation and necrosis of the dental
pulp,
inflammation in the
periapical area, and (4) periapical resorption of bone
and formation of granulomas or cysts. Osteolytic lesions
in periodontitis are initiated by bacterial plaque in the
gingival sulcus and on the tooth surface. Periodontitis
similarly occurs in four stages: (1) bacterial accumulation
of a biofilm and presence in the gingival sulcus (coloniza-
tion),
epithelium and
connective tissue in the gingiva adjacent to tooth surface
(invasion), (3) stimulation of a host response that involves
activation of the acquired and innate immune response

(2) bacterial penetration of

the development of

to the tooth surface and bone that

(inflammation), and (4) destruction of connective tissue
attachment
is
irreversible (irreversible tissue loss). Both oral diseases
demonstrate similar patterns of development, bone
resorption associated with bacteria that adhere to and
invade soft tissue stimulating an inflammatory response
and subsequent osteoclastogenesis.

Lesions of endodontic origin
Endodontic lesions typically develop from exposure of
the pulpal tissue to oral bacteria as a result of deficiencies
in the integrity of a tooth. This may result from carious
lesions that dissolve the mineralized dental tissue, frac-
tures of the tooth structure, as well as iatrogenic and
other circumstances that allow bacteria to penetrate into
the pulpal tissues. In most cases, these events lead to
infection within the dental pulp, which causes the
development of
inflammation that spreads from the
exposed area. The inflammation is often followed by
pulpal tissue necrosis, leading to chronic infection, the

Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011. # 2011 Dana T. Graves et al. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 Unported License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), permitting all non-commercial use, distribution, and
Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

1

(page number not for citation purpose)

Dana T. Graves et al.

spread of inflammation to the tooth apex, and bone
resorption. The inflammatory response involves the
recruitment and activation of leukocytes of both the
innate and adaptive immune responses, with resultant
osteoclastogenesis and formation of an osteolytic lesion
at the apex of the tooth.

Inflammation and resorption of bone at the tooth
apex, in most cases, is a consequence of the interaction
between microbial infection and the host response. The
critical role of bacteria in the development of periapical
lesions has been demonstrated by mechanical exposure of
the dental pulp to the oral cavity in germ-free animals. In
these germ-free animals, pulp exposure heals with an
initial or transitory inflammatory response within the
pulpal tissue, followed by a reparative response from
pulpal cells, and leading to the formation of a new dentin-
like matrix bridging the exposed site. In contrast,
mechanical pulp exposure in animals with normal oral
bacteria causes an infection of the dental pulp, with
pulpal tissue necrosis and chronic infection that prevents
the repair process (1). The infection persists as the
necrotic tissue of
the dental pulp is inaccessible to
leukocytes and, hence, represents a protected reservoir
of bacteria (2, 3). The chronic inflammation stimulated
by bacteria and their products in the periapical area of
the tooth leads to localized bone resorption that is
‘uncoupled’ so there is no reparative bone formation
without treatment. The result is formation and expansion
of granulomas or cysts in the apical tissues (4).

Understanding the pathogenic mechanisms underlying
the development of endodontic lesions is confounded by
the persistence of a ‘bacterial reservoir’ that exists in the
pulp canal and necrotic tissue. The bacterial presence
stimulates an inflammatory response to resist infection.
During this response a number of cell types present
release cytokines, chemokines, leukotrienes, and prosta-
glandins into the area. These inflammatory mediators
reinforce the recruitment of polymorphonuclear leuko-
cytes (PMNs) and other leukocytes, creating an interest-
ing dichotomy of activity and consequences as to the
essential protective or destructive roles mediated (3). As
would be expected, the host response plays a critical and
protective role in lesions of endodontic origin in limiting
the spread of infection into the fascial planes. Consistent
with this expectation, specific inhibitors of inflammatory
cytokines tend to cause the formation of larger osteolytic
lesions since they compromise the ability of the host to
protect itself from the reservoir of bacteria in the necrotic
pulp. This increase in lesion dimensions occurs even
though the blocked inflammatory cytokines also play an
important role in osteoclastogenesis. The use of inhibitors
or mice with targeted genetic deletions may not necessa-
rily reveal the role of a particular cytokine or cell type
that plays an important role in activating osteoclastogen-
esis since its inhibition or knockout may also increase

susceptibility to bacterial
infection. If the impact on
resistant infection is greater, the larger lesion will be
produced even though direct effect on deletion or
inhibition should reduce osteoclast formation. The re-
verse is also true. For example, an enhanced host
response in an animal model for periapical endodontic
lesions demonstrates increased numbers of PMNs and
monocytes with a reduction in the extent of apical bone
resorption, even though the host response may contribute
to the bone resorption (5). In another example, the
deletion of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) or IL-1 receptor
signaling causes larger osteoclast lesion formation even
though both cytokines stimulate bone resorption. This
occurs because deletion of TNF or IL-1 signaling impairs
the antibacterial activity of the host response that is
critical in lesions of endodontic origin (6). In particular,
IL-1 receptor signaling is needed to prevent the spread of
infection from necrotic pulp into fascial planes and to
protect the host from significant morbidity and mortality
that would result (6). Thus, there is considerable complex-
ity in examining the impact of cytokine signaling since
cytokines have both destructive roles as well as an
important protective function in antibacterial defense (6).
The control of the periapical infection seems to be a
critical aspect of this process, since the absence of the
pleiotropic enzyme inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)
also results in larger lesions with the recruitment of a
greater number of inflammatory cells and frequently
associated with periapical abscesses development (7).
This contrasts with periodontal disease,
in which a
protected bacterial reservoir does not exist and the use
of inhibitors or mice with targeted deletions of the host
response typically do not compromise the antibacterial
defenses sufficiently to complicate the analysis. Thus,
lesions of endodontic origin appear to be at an increased
susceptibility to bacterial infection with inhibition of the
host response in contrast to periodontal disease.

Leukocytes and endodontic lesions
The initiation of an inflammatory cascade in lesions of
endodontic origin includes the complex interplay of
multiple cell types involving the activation of endothelial
cells, PMNs, macrophages, lymphocytes, and osteoclasts
leading to rapid bone destruction. The complex host
response involves cells of both the innate and adaptive
immune response. The rapid destruction of bone found
with endodontic lesions is initiated by multiple bacteria
or their products including lipopolysaccharides (LPSs)
(3). Bacteria are thought to stimulate resorption through
the induction of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-
1b, IL-1a, receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B
ligand (RANKL), or TNF-a (8, 9). The initial activation
of the host response occurs through stimulation of toll-
like receptors (TLRs) and nucleotide-binding oligomer-
ization domain (NOD) receptors (10). Both TLRs and

2

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

NODs are highly expressed on multiple cell
types
associated with the endodontic lesions including mono-
cytes/macrophages, granulocytes, pulp fibroblasts, osteo-
clast precursors, and mesenchymal
(10, 11).
Activation of these receptors leads to the stimulation of
multiple proinflammatory cytokines,
including IL-1,
TNF-a, and IL-6, and has been associated with enhanced
RANKL production, osteoclastogenesis, and bone re-
sorption (10, 11).

cells

Multiple studies have reinforced the concept that the
development of bone resorption in lesions of endodontic
origin involves the adaptive immune response. The
predominant cell types in endodontic lesions in a rat
model were shown to be T-cells followed by B-cells and
monocytes/macrophages (12). Multiple T-cell responses
have been associated with endodontic lesions, including
Th1 (IL-2 and IFN-g), Th2 (IL-4 and IL-5), T-regulatory
cells (Tregs; IL-10 and TGF-b), and Th17 (IL-17A)
lymphocytes (1315). In fact,
the key transcription
factors essential for Th1, Th2, and Tregs differentiation,
T-bet, GATA-3, and FOXp3, respectively, have been
found in periapical lesions (14) as well as IL-17A, the
prototypical cytokine produced by Th17 cells (13).

The importance of the adaptive immune response in
protecting the host during formation of endodontic
lesions has been demonstrated in numerous studies. The
exposure of the dental pulp in severe combined immu-
nodeficient (SCID) mice showed periapical
lesions of
similar size to that found in normal control mice (16).
However, approximately one-third of the immunodefi-
cient mice with endodontic lesions developed orofacial
abscesses. Interestingly, two studies identified contrasting
results utilizing nu/nu rats with a deficient T-cell response.
While one study showed greater bone resorption follow-
ing endodontic infections, suggesting a critical protective
role, the other study failed to identify a difference in the
amount of bone resorption (17, 18). Evidence of a
protective role for IFN-g, the prototypical Th1-cytokine,
was demonstrated as the absence of IFN-g resulted in
increased bone resorption compared to wild-type mice
(19). Emerging evidence suggests that the majority of
Th17 cells also express IFN-g, supporting a role for both
Th1 and Th17 proinflammatory responses in the patho-
genesis of periapical periodontitis (13). An examination
of the Th2 response with genetic deletion of IL-4 failed to
identify an effect, suggesting more complex redundancies
or that Th2 responses are not critical in protection or
bone resorption (19). However, the anti-inflammatory
cytokine IL-10 has been demonstrated to be a protective
factor against periapical bone resorption. Periapical
lesions in mice with genetic ablation of IL-10 were
increased in size compared with wild-type mice, consis-
tent with a protective role for IL-10 (19). Furthermore,
IL-10 mRNA levels in human periapical granulomas have
been positively correlated with the expression of proteins,

Review of osteoimmunology

SOCS1 and SOCS3, which act as negative regulators of
the inflammatory signaling (20). Interestingly, Tregs, as a
potential source of IL-10, were found in the periapical
lesions following endodontic infection consistent with a
regulatory role in lesion development (15, 21).

Cytokines
The initial rapid destruction of bone in the apical area of
the root has been associated with the production of
prostaglandins, in particular PGE2, through the cycloox-
ygenase pathway (22). These findings provide clarifica-
tion to an earlier report that indomethacin reduces the
extent of bone resorption in endodontic lesions (23).
Endodontic lesions have been associated with multiple
proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Cytokines
that participate in the formation of osteolytic lesions are
shown in Figs. 1 and 2. Interleukins (IL), particularly IL-
1a and IL-b are produced in periapical lesions by several
types of cells including macrophages, osteoclasts, PMNs,
and fibroblasts (24, 25). The role for IL-1 in stimulating
periapical bone destruction was demonstrated using
interleukin-1 receptor antagonists to show a 60% reduc-
tion in lesion development (26). It appears that much of
the induced osteoclastogenic activity in periapical lesions
is specifically related to the formation of interleukin-1a
(27). However, when IL-1 receptor signaling is completely
deleted there is increased lesion size and systemic
morbidity (5). In addition, TNF-a expression has been
identified in lesions of endodontic origin by cells such as
PMNs, monocytes/macrophages, and fibroblasts and
may contribute to lesion formation (3). The IL-6 has
been observed in exudates from human periapical lesions,
with osteoblasts, fibroblasts, macrophages, PMNs, and
T lymphocytes identified as expressing IL-6 protein (28,
29). IL-6 has been shown to play a protective role since
endodontic lesions in IL-6 deficient animals are increased
in size compared with control mice (30). The role of
cytokines in formation of endodontic and periodontal
osteolytic lesions is shown in Tables 1 and 2.

Neutrophils are active in the development of bone loss
associated with endodontic lesions. This has been demon-
strated in animals with some neutropenia having a
considerable decrease in periapical
lesion formation
(31). The recruitment of PMNs with chemokines has
also been implicated in the pathogenesis of periapical
lesions. IL-8/CXCL8 chemokine expression is prominent
in periapical lesions, consistent with heavy infiltration by
PMNs (32).

is critical

The recruitment of monocytes

in the
antimicrobial defense in lesions of endodontic origin.
Chemokines and chemokine receptors stimulate innate
and adaptive immunity in the periapical environment and
in the development of granulomas associated with these
lesions (33). Genetic deletion of MCP-1/CCL2, identified
in monocytes/macrophages and bone lining cells in

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

(page number not for citation purpose)

3

Dana T. Graves et al.

Fig. 1. RANKL/OPG balance is an important factor in regulating bone resorption in periodontal and periapical environments.
Osteoclast differentiation and activation are driven by the interaction of RANK (receptor activator of nuclear factor-kB) with
its ligand, RANKL. Osteoprotegerin, OPG, is a decoy receptor of RANKL that inhibits RANK-RANKL engagement. In
homeostatic conditions (left side), RANKL and OPG levels are thought to be in balance so that there is limited
osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption. With an inﬂammatory stimulus, the RANKL/OPG ratio increases in periodontal
and periapical tissues and leads to stimulation of osteoclast activity and pathologic bone resorption.

lesions,

significantly reduces monocytic
endodontic
infiltrate while increasing the amount of bone resorption
(34, 35). Similarly, the absence of the MCP-1 receptor

(CCR2) or genetic ablation of CC chemokine receptor
five (CCR5) results in an increased amount of apical
bone resorption and is associated with higher levels of the

Fig. 2. Cytokine regulation of matrix degradation and bone resorption in periodontal and periapical environments. The
presence of microbial pathogens in periodontal and periapical environments trigger an initial production of proinﬂammatory
cytokines, such as TNF-a and IL1b, which stimulate expression and activation of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) that
degrade extracellular connective tissue matrix. Cytokines such as TNF-a can stimulate osteoclastogenesis independently while
other cytokines stimulate RANKL expression that leads to formation of osteoclasts and osteoclast activity. The combined
innate and adaptive immune responses are likely to lead to the high levels of inﬂammation and bone resorption. These
proinﬂammatory cytokines are thought to generate an ampliﬁcation loop that contributes to periodontal and periapical lesion
progression. Conversely, cytokines produced by Th2 cells and Tregs, such as IL-4 and IL-10 have the opposite effect, in part,
through stimulating production of tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs) and OPG as well as restrain
inﬂammatory cytokine production.

4

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

Review of osteoimmunology

Table 1. Cytokine effects on bone lesions associated with endodontic or periapical lesions

Cytokine

Effect of deletion or

inhibition

Effect of cytokine on osteoclasts

Other effects of cytokine

IL-1a

IL-1b

Reduction in lesion size

Increase in immature osteoclasts and

Increased levels of MMP’s 1, 3, 9, and 13

Increase in lesion size

Increased levels of immature osteoclasts

Increased expression of RANK, RANKL,

increase resorption by osteoclasts

IL-1 receptor

Increased lesion size

and increase resorption by osteoclasts

IL-2

IL-4

TNF-a

Increase in lesion size

Unknown

No effect on lesion size

Suppresses osteoclast differentiation and

No effect on lesion size

Induces osteoclast differentiation,

osteoclast bone resorption

osteoclastogenesis, and bone resorption

TNF receptor

Increased lesion size

and MMP-9
Increased morbidity and mortality from

endodontic infection

Promotes T-cell growth and expansion

and CMI
Promotes differentiation of CD4 T-cells
into TH2s
Proinflammatory effects, promotes CMI

Greater osteoclast activity and formation

when deleted due to lack of protection

IL-6

Increase in lesion size

Increase in number of osteoclasts and

Anti-inflammatory effects, stimulates

increase resorption

release of acute phase proteins

IL-/CXCL8

Unknown

Increases osteoclast motility and

Stimulates PMN/monocyte, basophil,

IL-10

Deletion results in

No effect on osteoclast number, inhibits

Promotes PMN infiltration

decreases resorption

and T-cell recruitment

MCP-1

IL-17

INF-g

IL-12

IL-18

increase in lesion size
Increase in lesion size

osteoclastogenesis
Stimulates recruitment of precursors

Stimulates protective monocyte/

lymphocyte recruitment

Reduced lesion size

Increased levels associated with

Stimulates monocyte/lymphocyte

No effect on lesion size

Decreases osteoclastogenesis

Promotes CMI

decreased numbers of osteoclasts

recruitment

Reduced levels of IL-6, IL-10,
IL-12, TNF-a
No effect on lesion size

No effect on lesion size

Decreases TNF-a and RANKL induced
osteoclastogenesis
Decreases TNF-a induced
osteoclastogenesis

Increases IL-18

Increases IL-12

Nitric Oxide

Increase in lesion size

Unknown

Induces IL-8, RANK production,

macrophage, and osteoblast apoptosis

osteolytic factors, such as RANKL and cathepsin K (19,
36). Interestingly, activation of the MCP-1/CCL2-CCR2
axis appears to play an active role in mediating the
migration of monocytes/macrophages while limiting the
infiltration of PMNs (36).

The RANKL and osteoprotegerin (OPG) expression
demonstrate a heterogeneous pattern in periapical gran-
ulomas, ranging from a high ratio of RANKL to OPG
consistent with bone resorption to a low ratio seen in sites
with minimal bone resorption (37). These disparate
findings in levels of RANKL/OPG ratio may be indica-
tive of an expanding lesion with active bone resorption or
a stable lesion with minimal bone resorption (37, 38). A
description of
the RANK-OPG axis in

the role of

stimulating osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption is
shown in Fig. 1.

Periodontal diseases
The periodontium is a complex set of tissues that are in
close proximity with a complex biofilm harboring diverse
and numerous bacterial species (39, 40). Periodontal
diseases include gingivitis and periodontitis. While it is
a consensus that periodontal diseases are stimulated
by bacterial adherence to the tooth surface, there is
controversy about which bacteria stimulate the irrever-
sible breakdown of periodontal tissues in periodontitis
(40, 41). Recent evidences from studies that do not rely
upon bacterial culture techniques suggest that there are

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

(page number not for citation purpose)

5

Dana T. Graves et al.

Table 2. Comparison of inﬂammatory component roles in
bone resorption

Deletion/inhibition effects on bone

resorption (lesion size)a

Inflammatory component

Endodontic

Periodontal

IL-1

IL-1 receptor

TNF-a

TNF receptor

Reduced
Increasedb
No effect

Increased

Increased
Reduced

IL-6
Prostaglandins
IFN-g
Increased
Reducedb
PMNs/monocytes
B- and T-cell (SCID mice) No effectb
No effect
IL-17

Reduced

Not tested

Reduced

Reduced

Reduced
Reduced

Reduced
Increasedc
Reduced

Increased

aIncreased bone resorption is consistent with protective effects;
reduced resorption consistent with a net destructive effect.
bWith increased morbidity/mortality noted.
cBased on clinical findings of immunodeficiencies.

approximately 700 bacterial species in the oral cavity (39).
As a general rule, the bacteria that might cause period-
ontitis have classically been identified as gram-negative
anaerobic bacteria that survive in the gingival sulcus, the
space between the tooth surface and the adjacent gingival
epithelium (42). Much attention has been spent on
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans and Porphyromo-
nas gingivalis, which have been linked to localized
aggressive ‘juvenile periodontitis’ and ‘adult periodonti-
tis’, respectively (42, 43). However, recent approaches to
bacterial identification have suggested that a reevaluation
of pathogenic species is warranted.

The presence of periodontal pathogens is required but
not sufficient for disease initiation. In fact, studies clearly
demonstrate that cytokines induced by the host response
play a critical role in periodontal tissue breakdown (44
47). Host-microbe interactions start
in the gingival
epithelium and stimulate an inflammatory response that
confers efficient protection against bacteria (i.e.
the
systemic consequences of acute infection are rare).
However, the host mediator release results in a clinical
outcome represented by the onset of gingivitis. Because
the gingival epithelium and underlying connective tissue
are chronically exposed to bacteria or their products,
both the innate and the acquired immune response are
chronically activated in connective tissue adjacent to
epithelium lining the gingiva. In most cases,
tissue
destruction caused by activation of the host response is
reversible and associated with gingivitis. On the other
hand, under certain conditions that are not fully under-
stood, the disease can progress and cause destruction of
the underlying connective tissue attachment of
the

gingiva toward the tooth surface and from tooth to
bone. Indeed, periodontitis is distinguished from gingivi-
tis by the irreversible nature of the attachment loss. One
of the most important uncertainties regarding period-
ontitis is its chronic nature. Periodontitis may represent a
series of brief insults, or ‘bursts’, which accumulate and
appear to be chronic over time with extended periods of
remission. However, the length of time of the ‘burst’ is
unknown. Alternatively, there may be relative constant
stimulation over time, but it is not known how long the
chronic destructive period lasts in the chronic model. In
spite of evidences for both models (4850), the nature of
periodontal disease progression remains uncertain. This
problem has plagued human studies since it is difficult to
know whether an individual is undergoing active period-
ontal breakdown at any given point in time. Furthermore,
the relative absence of longitudinal studies has made the
interpretation of results with human patients difficult
since relationships between a given variable and irrever-
sible periodontal breakdown are difficult to establish in
cross-section studies.

Animal models have established a clear causal relation-
ship between bacteria and periodontitis. In an animal
model, a ligature is tied around the teeth allowing plaque
accumulation and bacterial penetration, which leads to
subsequent inflammation and alveolar bone resorption
(51). In fact, gnotobiotic rats treated identically do not
exhibit periodontal bone loss (52), demonstrating the
essential role of bacteria in this model. Additional
evidence is provided by the treatment with antibiotics
or topical application of antimicrobial agents, which
reduce bone resorption in the ligature model, while
increased colonization by gram negative bacteria en-
hances bone resorption (51). In other animal models,
the inoculation of periodontal pathogens into the oral
cavity of rodents induces bone loss. In several studies, the
introduction of P. gingivalis by oral
lavage stimulates
alveolar bone resorption (51). Similarly, introduction of
A. actinomycetemcomitans in rodents leads to coloniza-
tion and loss of
the alveolar bone (43, 51). Thus,
experiments with animal models support human studies
demonstrating the role of bacteria in inflammation onset
and periodontitis.

Since the presence of bacteria is required, but not
sufficient to trigger periodontitis development, the re-
cognition of microbial components as ‘danger signals’ by
host cells and the subsequent production of inflamma-
tory mediators is an essential step in periodontitis
pathogenesis. Indeed, one of the critical components of
the host response to bacteria or their products is a family
of receptors called the toll-like receptors (TLRs). The
TLRs activate the innate immune response binding to
various microbial components (i.e. diacyl lipopeptides,
peptidoglycan, LPS, flagellin, bacterial DNA, etc.) (53).
After TLR activation, an intracellular signaling cascade

6

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

various

leads to the activation of transcription factors, such as
nuclear factor-k B (NF-kB), activator protein-1 (AP-1),
and subsequent production of
cytokines
and chemokines (53). Recent studies describe a role
for both TLR-2 and TLR-4 in the recognition of
A. actinomycetemcomitans, whose impact range from
stimulating inflammatory cytokine expression and in-
flammatory cell migration to inducing osteoclastogenesis
and alveolar bone loss (54, 55). Besides TLRs, the
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD) re-
ceptors and the inflammasome system have been pointed
out as potential accessory molecules that trigger the host
response against periodontal pathogens (56).

Animal models also provided the initial clear evidences
for the role of some host immune inflammatory factors in
the progression of periodontal diseases. When the host
response is altered by treatment with specific inflamma-
tory inhibitors or genetic manipulation, the severity of
periodontal connective tissue and bone loss stimulated by
periodontal bacteria is clearly reduced. The first concrete
evidence that inhibition of an inflammatory response
reduces periodontal diseases was carried out in a dog
model (57) in which the inhibition of prostaglandins
significantly reduced alveolar bone loss. Subsequent
studies have used a number of techniques to demonstrate
that cytokines play an important role in periodontitis.
Non-human primates treated with inhibitors to two
major proinflammatory cytokines, IL-1 and TNF, exhibit
reduced periodontal bone loss and loss of attachment
compared to control animals (44, 45, 58). Similarly,
RANKL inhibition decreases alveolar bone loss in
several models of periodontal disease (46, 59, 60). It is
hypothesized that periodontal disease progression is due
to a combination of several
including the
presence of periodontopathic bacteria, high levels
of proinflammatory cytokines and prostaglandins, the
production and activation of MMPs and RANKL, and
relatively low levels of interleukin-10 (IL-10), transform-
ing growth factor-b (TGF-b), tissue inhibitors of metal-
loproteinase (TIMPs), and osteoprotegerin (OPG) (61).
A description of inflammatory cytokines and cell types
that participate in bone resorption and destruction of
connective tissue matrix is shown in Fig. 2.

factors,

Inflammatory mediators
The cyclooxygenase enzymes, COX-1 and COX-2, cata-
lyze the conversion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandins.
COX-1 is constitutively expressed and leads to the
generation of prostaglandins that are particularly im-
portant in homeostasis. COX-2 is inducible and leads to
the formation of prostaglandins involved in inflammatory
processes. Prostaglandins (PGs), potent stimulators of
bone formation and resorption, are produced by bone
cells, fibroblasts, gingival epithelial cells, endothelial cells,
and inflammatory cells (62). Prostaglandin E2 produc-

Review of osteoimmunology

tion is elevated in individuals with periodontitis com-
pared with healthy subjects (63). When applied topically
to the gingival sulcus, prostaglandin E2 induces a marked
increase in osteoclasts. Moreover, it is synergistic with
lipopolysaccharide stimulating osteoclastogenesis (64).

Both PGE-2 and leukotriene B-4 were found in
gingival crevicular fluid of individuals with localized
aggressive periodontitis. Furthermore, P. gingivalis
stimulates increased PGE-2 levels and increased COX-2
expression by infiltrated leukocytes in vivo (65). In an
animal ligature induced periodontitis model, both a non-
selective COX inhibitor and a selective COX-2 inhibitor
reduced osteoclast numbers and alveolar bone loss when
compared to non-treatment (66). Many clinical trials
have explored the use of a COX-2 inhibitor as an adjunct
to periodontal therapy. These inhibitors improved the
clinical outcome after periodontal therapy compared to
periodontal therapy alone (67). However, they are not
clinically used in the treatment of human patients due to
side effects. Lipoxins and resolvins, products of omega-3
fatty acids, induce resolution of inflammation, and to
protect against periodontal bone loss stimulated by
bacteria in animal models (68).

The induction of experimental periodontitis is asso-
ciated with the expression of innate immune cytokines
(69). IL-1 stimulates the expression of proresorptive
cytokines, such as RANKL and TNF-a and proteinases
that participate in periodontal connective tissue destruc-
tion and bone resorption. In the periodontium, IL-1 is
produced by several types of cells including PMNs,
monocytes, and macrophages (70, 71). In patients with
periodontitis, IL-1b expression is elevated in gingival
crevicular fluid at sites of recent bone and attachment
loss (71, 72). The IL-1b is also found to be higher in
gingiva from individuals with a history of periodontitis
than in samples from healthy individuals (72).

In a different approach,

Using a non-human primate model, Delima et al.
showed that IL-1 inhibition significantly reduced inflam-
mation, connective tissue attachment loss, and bone
resorption induced by periodontal pathogens when
compared to controls (45). In other studies, IL-1 receptor
deficient mice had less P. gingivalis LPS-induced osteo-
clastogenesis compared to similarly treated wild-type
mice (73).
the exogenous
application of recombinant human IL-1b in a rat model
of experimental periodontitis accelerated alveolar bone
destruction and inflammation over a 2-week period (74).
In addition, transgenic mice overexpressing IL-1a in
gingival epithelium developed a periodontitis-like syn-
drome, leading to the loss of attachment and destruction
of periodontal bone (75). Taken together, these studies
strongly support the role of IL-1 in promoting alveolar
bone destruction in periodontitis.

The TNF refers to two associated proteins, TNF-a and
TNF-b. TNF-a levels are upregulated in gingival crevi-

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

(page number not for citation purpose)

7

Dana T. Graves et al.

cular fluid at sites where bone and attachment loss have
recently occurred (71, 7678). TNF-a was also found to
be higher in diseased periodontal tissue samples than in
tissue samples from healthy individuals (72). A cause and
effect relationship between TNF-a and periodontal bone
loss has been demonstrated. Administration of recombi-
nant TNF-a accelerates periodontal destruction in a rat
periodontitis model (79). On the other hand, P. gingivalis
induced osteoclastogenesis is reduced in TNF receptor-
deficient mice compared to wild-type controls, indicating
that osteoclast formation is dependent on TNF-a regu-
lated pathway as part of the host response to bacterial
challenge (80). Garlet et al. recently showed that TNFR-1
knockout mice developed significantly less inflammation,
indicated by chemokine and chemokine receptors down-
regulation, and less alveolar bone loss in association with
RANKL downregulation in response to A. Actinomyce-
temcomitans oral inoculation (81). Furthermore, mRNA
levels of IL-1b, IFN-g, and RANKL in gingival tissues
were significantly lower in TNFR-1 knockout mice than
in wild-type infected mice. In contrast, A. actinomyce-
temcomitans levels quantified by real-time PCR were
significantly greater in TNF receptor ablated mice than
in wild-type controls and were associated with lower
levels of the PMN-related antimicrobial mediator mye-
loperoxidase in experimental mice (81). Thus, the absence
of TNFR-1 resulted in a lower production of cytokines in
response to A. actinomycetemcomitans infection even in
the presence of higher levels of periodontal pathogens.
Based on similar studies, it can be implied that the local
production of TNF-a plays a role in upregulating the

host response to bacteria and stimulating bone resorption
during periodontitis. It is also possible that oral bacteria
in addition to causing local pathology may contribute to
systemic conditions by enhancing cytokine production
subsequent to bacteremias. Interestingly, P gingivalis LPS
stimulates a strong local inflammatory response but a
weak systemic inflammatory response (82). Inhibition of
IL-1 and TNF-a together
significantly reduces the
progression of inflammation toward bone, osteoclasto-
genesis, and periodontal tissue destruction (44). In the
gingiva, a higher expression of IL-6 is found in gingival
crevicular fluid and in the gingiva in mononuclear cells
and T-cells from periodontitis patients than in healthy
controls (83, 84). The LPS from the periodontal pathogen
IL-6 expression,
A. actinomycetemcomitans
osteoclastogenesis, and bone loss (85). Oral inoculation
of P. gingivalis in mice with genetically deleted IL-6 have
decreased bone loss compared to wild-type mice, suggest-
ing that IL-6 contributes to the progression of bacteria-
induced bone loss (47).

induces

After a host response triggered by microbial recogni-
tion, the spatial orientation of the subsequent leukocyte
infiltration into periodontal tissues is likely to contribute
to periodontal disease. Histologically, the inflammatory
infiltrate is observed even in the presence of minimal
clinical signs of inflammation, but when inflammation is
restricted to the connective tissue closest to the gingival
epithelium, gingivitis is present (86). However, in animal
models, when the inflammatory infiltrate moves closer to
bone, osteoclastogenesis is induced and periodontal bone
loss takes place (44). This suggests that the periodontal

Fig. 3. Spatial relationship between an inﬂammatory inﬁltrate and periodontal bone loss. In periodontitis, bacteria attach to the
tooth surface and invade the adjacent epithelium and connective tissue. This causes formation of an inﬂammatory inﬁltrate
indicated by the black arrows. If the inﬂammatory inﬁltrate is at a distance from bone (left panel), osteoclastogenesis is not
stimulated. However, if the inﬁltrate moves closer to bone (right panel), osteoclasts are induced and bone resorption occurs.

8

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

disease development might be determined by the progres-
sion of the inflammatory infiltrate toward bone. The
impact of spatial location of the inflammatory infiltrate
on bone resorption is shown in Fig. 3.

Among the mediators potentially involved in leukocyte
diapedesis and subsequent spatial localization in period-
ontal environment, chemokines have been investigated
with special interest in the last decade. Chemokines are
small chemotactic cytokines that stimulate the recruit-
ment of inflammatory cells (33, 87). They are divided into
two major families based on their structure, CC and CXC
chemokines, which basically bind to the two major classes
of receptors, CC chemokine receptors (CCR) and CXC
chemokine receptors (CXCR). Chemokines are produced
by several resident and inflammatory cell types in the
periodontium (33). Some chemokines can stimulate one
or more steps of bone resorption, including the recruit-
ment, differentiation, or fusion of precursor cells to form
osteoclasts or enhance osteoclast survival (33, 87). They
could also affect periodontal bone loss by recruiting cells,
such as neutrophils, which protect against bacterial
invasion.

Chemokines are found in gingival tissue and crevicular
fluid. The IL-8/CXCL8, a chemoattractant of PMNs, is
found at higher levels in gingival crevicular fluid prior to
clinical
inflammation following cessation
of tooth brushing. Moreover, in subjects with a history
of periodontitis, IL-8/CXCL8 in gingiva and gingival
crevicular fluid are increased and correlated with disease
severity (88).

signs of

One of the most abundant expressed chemokines is
macrophage inflammatory protein-1a (MIP-1a/CCL3),
which is localized in the connective tissue subjacent to
gingival epithelium (89). MIP-1a/CCL3-positive cells
increase with increasing severity of periodontal disease.
It is a ligand for the chemokine receptors CCR1 and
CCR5 and is associated with the recruitment of mono-
cytes/macrophages and dendritic cells via CCR1 and
lymphocytes polarized into Th1 phenotype by CCR5
(90). Thus, MIP-1a/CCL3 has a potential
role in
stimulating bone resorption through effects on macro-
phages and Th1 cells. Moreover, CCR1 and CCR5
cell populations may affect resorption since they include
osteoclast precursors (91, 92). This is consistent with
findings that MIP-1a/CCL3 directly stimulates osteo-
clasts differentiation (93) and stromal-cell derived factor-
1 (SDF1/CXCL12) regulates osteoclast function and is
found in the periodontium (94).

normal T-cell

A number of chemokines have been detected in gingiva
or in gingival crevicular fluid including regulated upon
activation
secreted
(RANTES/CCL5). RANTES/CCL5 is found in greater
levels in active periodontal lesions compared to inactive
sites (89, 95). That RANTES/CCL5 may be involved in
periodontal bone resorption is supported by findings that

expressed

and

Review of osteoimmunology

it binds to CCR1 and CCR5 (91, 96). Monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1/CCL2) may also
contribute to periodontitis. MCP-1/CCL2 levels are
directly correlated with gingival inflammation (97, 98).
It
stimulates monocyte/macrophage recruitment and
activity and has been implicated as a chemoattractant
for osteoclast precursors (91, 96).

RANKL stimulates osteoclastogenesis and bone
resorption. A number of studies have established that
RANKL inhibition decreases periodontal bone resorp-
tion (46, 59, 60) and establishes a role for RANKL in
periodontitis. Osteoprotegerin (OPG) is a molecule that is
also upregulated by inflammatory conditions and blocks
RANKL by binding to it. A high ratio of RANKL/OPG
creates proresorptive conditions while a low RANKL to
OPG ratio is antiresorptive. During bacteria stimulated
periodontal bone loss there is an initial increase in the
ratio of RANKL/OPG (69). After the initial bone loss,
antiresorptive factors are produced including OPG, as
well as IL-4 and IL-10, reducing the RANKL/OPG ratio
(69). This relationship is shown in Fig. 2. The RANKL/
OPG ratio has been examined in gingival tissues or
gingival crevicular fluid. It has been shown that period-
ontitis is associated with an increase in RANKL. The
RANKL/OPG ratio greater than 1 predominates in
chronic periodontitis lesions while a ratio of 0.5 or less
is found in chronic gingivitis lesions (37).

RANKL is upregulated in both pathologic and phy-
siologic bone resorption. In pathologic inflammatory
bone disease, RANKL expression has been shown to
have the highest level in B-cells, followed by T-cells, and
then monocytes (99). This indicates that activated T- and
B-cells can be the cellular source of RANKL for bone
resorption in diseased gingival tissue. In physiologic
bone, remodeling bone-lining cells such as osteoblasts
or their precursors appear to be an important source of
RANKL.

The IFN-g is a lymphokine, produced by lymphocytes
and natural killer cells that has been implicated in
periodontal bone loss. Its expression is associated with
Th1 lymphocytes. Mice with a genetic ablation of IFN-g
have less P. gingivalis induced bone loss compared to
wild-type controls (47). T-cells are an important source of
IFN-g in periodontitis (84) and have been linked to
increased RANKL expression (100).

Lymphocytes also produce cytokines that are anti-
inflammatory, such as IL-4 and IL-10 (101). These
cytokines are associated with a Th2 response and reduce
the severity of experimental periodontitis (102). However,
a direct link between Th1 lymphocytes enhancing period-
ontal disease and Th2 lymphocytes reducing it is not
necessarily straightforward since there are components of
a Th2 response that are also prodestructive (103).

Innate immune cells have been shown to play an
important role in periodontal bone resorption (61, 104).

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

(page number not for citation purpose)

9

Dana T. Graves et al.

Monocytes and macrophages produce several cytokines
and lytic enzymes that stimulate the breakdown of
connective tissue and bone resorption (61). PMNs have
been shown to have both protective and destructive
effects (105). A protective role is inferred from findings
that neutrophil disorders including cyclic neutropenia,
syndrome, and leukocyte adhesion
Che´diak-Higashi
deficiency
syndrome promote periodontal diseases
(105). The production of reactive oxygen species and
cytokines implicates them in the destructive phase.
Monocytes and PMNs produce a respiratory burst that
generates superoxides, hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radi-
cals, hypochlorous acid, and chloramines. These products
contribute to bacterial killing based on evidence that
impaired production of iNOS and MPO are associated
with increased levels of periodontal pathogens (81, 106).
In addition, PMNs and monocytes/macrophages release
elastases and collagenases that break down connective
tissue (107) and are linked to the development of
periodontal lesions (107).

Dendritic cells of monocytic lineage are another group
of innate immune cells that function to present antigen to
lymphocytes and also promote inflammation by the
production of chemokines and cytokines (108). They
have been implicated in periodontal disease (108111).
Oral bacteria induce dendritic cells to produce cytokines
such as IL-1b, IL-12, IFN-g, TNF-a, and TNF-b (109,
110). Dendritic cells can form to osteoclasts (112). For
example, A. actinomycetemcomitans stimulates dendritic
cells in vitro to form osteoclasts in a RANKL dependent
manner (113).

Oral bacteria stimulate cells of the adaptive immune
response as shown by the presence of activated T- and B-
lymphocytes in periodontal disease tissues (61). As
discussed above,
lymphocytes produce cytokines that
promote bone resorption directly through RANKL or
indirectly through IFN-g. There is evidence to suggest
that lymphocytes are involved in mediating bacteria
stimulated periodontal bone resorption. When severe

combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice that lack B-
and T-lymphocytes are challenged with P. gingivalis, there
is considerably less bone resorption than in wild-type
normal mice (114). Moreover, (SCID) mice engrafted with
human CD4() T-cells from individuals with aggressive
early onset periodontal disease and subsequently chal-
lenged with A. actinomycetemcomitans exhibit enhanced
periodontal bone loss (46). This bone loss is mediated by
RANKL. Similarly, the adoptive transfer of B-cells from
A. actinomycetemcomitans immunized rats followed by an
injection of A. actinomycetemcomitans into the gingiva,
stimulates greater alveolar bone resorption than control
mice that have received B-cells from non-immunized mice
(59). The increased resorption was shown to be RANKL
mediated (59). The results of these experiments indicate
that cells of the adaptive immune response significantly
contribute to periodontitis.

In addition to Th1 and Th2 CD4 lymphocytes, there
are two other T-cell subsets that have been identified, Th17
and Tregs (regulatory T-cells). The Th17 lymphocytes
produce IL-17, which in turn stimulate RANKL-mediated
osteoclastogenesis (115). They have been implicated in
rheumatoid arthritis, periodontal disease, and loosening
of joint prostheses (115). Under experimental conditions,
IL-17 appears to have an important protective function
since genetic deletion of IL-17 receptors enhance period-
ontal bone loss stimulated by P. gingivalis in vivo (116).
This may be due to the role of IL-17 in stimulating
chemokines that induce recruitment of neutrophils. How-
ever, humans with periodontitis have increased levels of
Th17 cells and IL-17 mRNA, compared to healthy tissues
suggesting but not proving that IL-17 contributes to
the destructive process (117). The Tregs modulate activa-
tion, proliferation, and effector function of conventional
T-cells (118) and have been identified in periodontal
tissues (119121). Because they are associated with
the production of IL-10, TGF-b, and the inhibitory
molecule CTLA-4, Tregs may reduce periodontal disease
progression (119).

Osteoclast
formation

Osteoclast

activity

Osteoblasts

Coupled bone 
formation

Uncoupled bone 
formation

Fig. 4. The role of coupling in periodontal lesion development. Bone formation occurs after bone resorption so that the two
processes are coupled. Thus, the resorption pit is occupied by osteoblasts that form new bone. In a normal healthy individual,
the amount of bone formed equals the amount resorbed. In pathologic bone resorption, the amount of bone that forms is less
than that resorbed so that there is net bone loss. This may be due to the impact of inﬂammation on bone formation.
Inﬂammation could potentially interfere with coupling by reducing proliferation of osteoblast precursors,
inhibiting
differentiation of osteoblasts, decreasing osteoblast numbers by stimulating apoptosis, or by interfering with the production
of bone matrix.

10

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

Review of osteoimmunology

Uncoupled bone formation and periodontitis
Bone remodeling involves a process of bone resorption
followed by bone formation, a process referred to as
coupling (122). Bacteria induced bone resorption in a
healthy adult should be followed by an equivalent
amount of bone formation. In periodontitis, there is a
failure to form an adequate amount of new bone
following resorption resulting in net bone loss. Thus, a
critical aspect of periodontitis is uncoupling so that
bacteria induced bone loss is not
followed by an
equivalent amount of new bone formation resulting in
net bone loss. The impact of uncoupling on creating net
bone loss is shown in Fig. 4.

ontal lesions. Cytokines generated that induce osteolytic
lesions are shown in Fig. 2 and a comparison of the effect
of cytokine deletion or inhibition in the formation of
lesions of endodontic origin and in periodontitis is shown
in Table 2. It is also possible that the inflammation
associated with periodontal bone resorption affects
coupled bone formation contributing to net bone loss
(see Fig. 4).

Conflict of interest and funding
Funding for this work was provided in part by the
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research.

the

immune

response,

The same process that stimulates bone resorption,
inflammation, may be responsible for uncoupling. It is
possible that under conditions where inflammation is in
close proximity to and along the bone,
it will affect
osteoblast numbers or function and interfere with the
coupling process. In an experimental model, the injection
of P. gingivalis into connective tissue induces bone
resorption followed by bone formation (123, 124). If
the inflammation is prolonged by induction of
the
adaptive
capacity to form
new bone is diminished and uncoupling occurs (123).
Similarly, prolonged inflammation in diabetic animals
interferes with bone formation in the periodontium
following bacteria stimulated bone resorption (124).
This interpretation is additionally supported by evidence
that the application of cytokines in vivo stimulates bone
resorption but also limits bone formation. Therefore,
several
the
concept that inflammation uncouples bone formation
from bone resorption. Thus, inflammation may not only
stimulate the formation of osteoclasts and bone resorp-
tion, but also affect bone by altering the function of
osteoblasts and limiting reparative bone formation.

lines of animal experimentation support

Conclusions
Polymicrobial infection in lesions of endodontic origin
stimulates bone resorption by interacting with the
leukocytes of the innate and adaptive immune responses.
In endodontic lesions, the presence of inflammation
suppresses bone formation so that
lesion resolution
does not occur until the causal bacteria are entombed
by treatment and the inflammation subsides. Period-
ontitis is caused by a host response to the presence of
bacteria or their products that invade connective tissue.
The host defense, including innate and adaptive immu-
nity, is responsible for combating bacteria invading the
periodontal
tissue. In humans, plaque accumulation
occurs even in health so that there is a continuous state
of inflammation in gingival tissue adjacent to teeth. By
using animal models and specific inhibitors, both the
innate and adaptive immune response have been conclu-
sively shown to participate in the formation of period-

References

1. Kakehashi S, Stanley HR, Fitzgerald RJ. The effects of surgical
exposures of dental pulps in germ-free and conventional
laboratory rats. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1965; 20:
3409.

2. Ricucci D, Siqueira JF Jr, Bate AL, Pitt Ford TR. Histologic
investigation of root canal-treated teeth with apical period-
ontitis: a retrospective study from twenty-four patients. J
Endod 2009; 35: 493502.

3. Nair PN. Pathogenesis of apical periodontitis and the causes of
endodontic failures. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 2004; 15: 34881.
4. Liapatas S, Nakou M, Rontogianni D. Inﬂammatory inﬁltrate
of chronic periradicular lesions: an immunohistochemical
study. Int Endod J 2003; 36: 46471.

5. Stashenko P, Wang C, Riley E, Wu Y, Ostroff G, Niederman R.
Reduction of infection-stimulated peripical bone resorption by
the biological response modiﬁer PGG glucan. J Dent Res 1995;
74: 32330.

6. Graves D, Chen C, Douville C, Jiang Y. Interleukin-1 receptor
signaling rather than that of tumor necrosis factor is critical in
protecting the host from the severe consequences of a polymic-
robe anaerobic infection. Infect Immun 2000; 8: 474651.

7. Fukada SY, Silva TA, Saconato IF, Garlet GP, Avila-Campos
iNOS-derived nitric oxide modulates

MJ, Silva JS, et al.
infection-stimulated bone loss. J Dent Res 2008; 87: 11559.

8. Jiang Y, Mehta C, Hsu T, Alsulaimani F. Bacteria induce
osteoclastogenesis via an osteoblast-independent pathway.
Infect Immun 2002; 70: 31438.

9. Gilles J, Carnes D, Dallas M, Holt S, Bonewald L. Oral bone
loss is increased in ovariectomized rats. J Endodon 1997; 23:
41922.

10. Hirao K, Yumoto H, Takahashi K, Mukai K, Nakanishi T,
Matsuo T. Roles of TLR2, TLR4, NOD2, and NOD1 in pulp
ﬁbroblasts. J Dent Res 2009; 88: 7627.

11. Bar-Shavit Z. Taking a toll on the bones: regulation of bone
metabolism by innate immune regulators. Autoimmunity 2008;
41: 195203.

12. Stashenko P, Yu SM, Wang CY. Kinetics of immune cell and
bone resorptive responses to endodontic infections. J Endod
1992; 18: 4226.

13. Colic M, Gazivoda D, Vucevic D, Vasilijic S, Rudolf R, Lukic
A. Proinﬂammatory and immunoregulatory mechanisms in
periapical lesions. Mol Immunol 2009; 47: 10113.

14. Fukada SY, Silva TA, Garlet GP, Rosa AL, da Silva JS, Cunha
FQ. Factors involved in the T helper type 1 and type 2 cell
commitment and osteoclast regulation in inﬂammatory apical
diseases. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2009; 24: 2531.

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

(page number not for citation purpose)

11

Dana T. Graves et al.

15. Colic M, Gazivoda D, Vucevic D, Majstorovic I, Vasilijic S,
Rudolf R, et al. Regulatory T-cells in periapical lesions. J Dent
Res 2009; 88: 9971002.

16. Teles R, Wang CY, Stashenko P. Increased susceptibility of
RAG-2 SCID mice to dissemination of endodontic infections.
Infect Immun 1997; 65: 37817.

17. Tani N, Kuchiba K, Osada T, Watanabe Y, Umemoto T. Effect
lesions
of T-cell deﬁciency on the formation of periapical
in mice: histological comparison between periapical
lesion
formation in BALB/c and BALB/c nu/nu mice. J Endod 1995;
21: 1959.

18. Wallstrom JB, Torabinejad M, Kettering J, McMillan P. Role
of T cells in the pathogenesis of periapical
lesions. A
preliminary report. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1993;
76: 2138.

19. De Rossi A, Rocha LB, Rossi MA. Interferon-gamma,
interleukin-10, intercellular adhesion molecule-1, and chemo-
kine receptor 5, but not interleukin-4, attenuate the develop-
ment of periapical lesions. J Endod 2008; 34: 318.

20. Menezes R, Garlet TP, Trombone AP, Repeke CE, Letra A,
Granjeiro JM, et al. The potential role of suppressors of
cytokine signaling in the attenuation of inﬂammatory reaction
and alveolar bone loss associated with apical periodontitis. J
Endod 2008; 34: 14804.

21. Alshwaimi E, Purcell P, Kawai T, Sasaki H, Oukka M,
Campos-Neto A, et al. Regulatory T cells in mouse periapical
lesions. J Endod 2009; 35: 122933.

22. McNicholas S, Torabinejad M, Blankenship J, Bakland L. The
concentration of prostaglandin E2 in human periradicular
lesions. J Endod 1991; 17: 97100.

23. Torbinejad M, Clagett J, Engel D. A cat model for the
evaluation of mechanisms of bone resorption: induction of
bone loss by simulated immune complexes and inhibition by
indomethacin. Calcif Tissue Int 1979; 29: 20714.

24. Fouad AF. IL-1 alpha and TNF-alpha expression in early
periapical lesions of normal and immunodeﬁcient mice. J Dent
Res 1997; 76: 154854.

25. Tani-Ishii N, Wang CY, Stashenko P. Immunolocalization of
bone-resorptive cytokines in rat pulp and periapical lesions
following surgical pulp exposure. Oral Microbiol Immunol
1995; 10: 2139.

26. Stashenko P, Wang CY, Tani-Ishii N, Yu SM. Pathogenesis of
induced rat periapical lesions. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
1994; 78: 494502.

27. Wang C, Stashenko P. The role of interleukin-1 alpha in the
pathogenesis of periapical bone destruction in a rat model
system. Oral Microbiol Immunol 1993; 8: 506.

28. Takeichi O, Saito I, Tsurumachi T, Moro I, Saito T. Expression
of inﬂammatory cytokine genes in vivo by human alveolar
bone-derived polymorphonuclear leukocytes isolated from
chronically inﬂamed sites of bone resorption. Calcif Tissue
Int 1996; 58: 2448.

29. Walker KF, Lappin DF, Takahashi K, Hope J, Macdonald
DG, Kinane DF. Cytokine expression in periapical granulation
tissue as assessed by immunohistochemistry. Eur J Oral Sci
2000; 108: 195201.

30. Huang GT, Do M, Wingard M, Park JS, Chugal N. Effect of
interleukin-6 deﬁciency on the formation of periapical lesions
after pulp exposure in mice. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
Oral Radiol Endod 2001; 92: 838.

31. Yamasaki M, Kumazawa M, Kohsaka T, Nakamura H. Effect
of methodtrexate-induced neutropenia on rat periapical lesion.
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1994; 77: 65561.

32. Huang GT, Potente AP, Kim JW, Chugal N, Zhang X.
Increased interleukin-8 expression in inﬂamed human dental

pulps. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
1999; 88: 21420.

33. Silva TA, Garlet GP, Fukada SY, Silva JS, Cunha FQ.
Chemokines in oral inﬂammatory diseases: apical periodontitis
and periodontal disease. J Dent Res 2007; 86: 30619.

34. Rahimi P, Wang C, Stashenko P, Lee S, Lorenzo J, Graves D.
Monocyte chemoattractant prtein-1 expression and monocyte
recruitment in osseous inﬂammation in the mouse. Endocri-
nology 1995; 136: 27529.

35. Chae P,

Im M, Gibson F, Jiang Y, Graves D. Mice
lacking monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 have enhanced
susceptibility to an interstitial polymicrobial infection due to
impaired monocyte recruitment. Infect Immun 2002; 70: 3164
9.

36. Garlet TP, Fukada SY, Saconato IF, Avila-Campos MJ, Silva
TAD, Garlet GP, et al. CCR2 deﬁciency results in increased
osteolysis
in mice. J
Endod 2010; 36: 24450.

in experimental periapical

lesions

37. Menezes R, Garlet TP, Letra A, Bramante CM, Campanelli
AP, Figueira Rde C, et al. Differential patterns of receptor
activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand/osteoprotegerin
expression in human periapical granulomas: possible associa-
tion with progressive or stable nature of the lesions. J Endod
2008; 34: 9328.

38. Kawashima N, Suzuki N, Yang G, Ohi C, Okuhara S, Nakano-
Kawanishi H, et al. Kinetics of RANKL, RANK and OPG
expressions in experimentally induced rat periapical lesions.
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2007; 103:
70711.

39. Paster BJ, Olsen I, Aas JA, Dewhirst FE. The breadth of
bacterial diversity in the human periodontal pocket and other
oral sites. Periodontol 2000 2006; 42: 807.

40. Pihlstrom BL, Michalowicz BS, Johnson NW. Periodontal

diseases. Lancet 2005; 366: 180920.

41. Sakamoto M, Umeda M, Benno Y. Molecular analysis of

human oral microbiota. J Periodontal Res 2005; 40: 27785.

42. Haffajee AD, Teles RP, Socransky SS. The effect of period-
ontal therapy on the composition of the subgingival micro-
biota. Periodontol 2000 2006; 42: 21958.

43. Fine DH, Kaplan JB, Kachlany SC, Schreiner HC. How we
got attached to Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans: a model
for infectious diseases. Periodontol 2000 2006; 42: 11457.

44. Assuma R, Oates T, Cochran D, Amar S, Graves D. IL-1 and
TNF antagonists inhibit the inﬂammatory response and bone
loss in experimental periodontitis. J Immunol 1998; 160:
4039.

45. Delima A, Spyros K, Amar S, Graves DT. Inﬂammation and
tissue loss caused by periodontal pathogens is reduced by IL-1
antagonists. J Infect Dis 2002; 186: 5116.

46. Teng Y, Nguyen H, Gao X, Kong Y, Gorczynski R, Singh B
et al. Functional human T-cell immunity and osteoprotegerin
ligand control alveolar bone destruction in periodontal infec-
tion. J Clin Invest 2000; 106: R5967.

47. Baker P, Dixon M, Evans R, Dufour L, Johnson E, Roopenian
D. CD4() T cells and the proinﬂammatory cytokines gamma
interferon and interleukin-6 contribute to alveolar bone loss in
mice. Infect Immun 1999; 67: 28049.

48. Socransky SS, Haffajee AD, Goodson JM, Lindhe J. New
concepts of destructive periodontal disease. J Clin Periodontol
1984; 11: 2132.

49. Cohen ME, Ralls SA. Distributions of periodontal attachment
levels. Mathematical models and implications. J Periodontol
1988; 59: 2548.

50. Gilthorpe MS, Zamzuri AT, Grifﬁths GS, Maddick IH, Eaton
KA, Johnson NW. Uniﬁcation of the ‘‘burst’’ and ‘‘linear’’
theories of periodontal disease progression: a multilevel

12

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

manifestation of the same phenomenon. J Dent Res 2003; 82:
2005.

51. Graves DT, Fine D, Teng YT, Van Dyke TE, Hajishengallis G.
The use of rodent models to investigate host-bacteria interac-
tions related to periodontal diseases. J Clin Periodontol 2008;
35: 89105.

52. Rovin S, Costich ER, Gordon HA. The inﬂuence of bacteria
and irritation in the initiation of periodontal disease in
germfree and conventional rats. J Periodontal Res 1966; 1:
193204.

53. Mahanonda R, Pichyangkul S. Toll-like receptors and their
role in periodontal health and disease. Periodontol 2000 2007;
43: 4155.

54. Gelani V, Fernandes AP, Gasparoto TH, Garlet TP, Cestari
TM, Lima HR, et al. The role of toll-like receptor 2 in the
recognition of Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans. J Per-
iodontol 2009; 80: 20109.

55. Lima HR, Gelani V, Fernandes AP, Gasparoto TH, Torres SA,
Santos CF, et al. The essential role of TLR4 in the control of
infection in mice.
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans
J Clin Periodontol 2010; 37: 24854.

56. Uehara A, Takada H. Functional TLRs and NODs in human

gingival ﬁbroblasts. J Dent Res 2007; 86: 24954.

57. Williams R, Jeffcoat M, Kaplan M, Goldhaber P, Johnson H,
Wechter W. Flurbiprofen: a potent inhibitor of alveolar bone
resorption in beagles. Science 1985; 227: 6402.

58. Delima A, Oates T, Assuma R, Schwartz Z, Cochran D, Amar
S, et al. Soluble antagonists to interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)
tissue attachment
in experimental periodontitis. J Clin Periodontol 2001; 28:
23340.

inhibits loss of

59. Han X, Kawai T, Eastcott JW, Taubman MA. Bacterial-
responsive B lymphocytes induce periodontal bone resorption.
J Immunol 2006; 176: 62531.

60. Jin Q, Cirelli JA, Park CH, Sugai JV, Taba M Jr, Kostenuik PJ,
et al. RANKL inhibition through osteoprotegerin blocks bone
loss in experimental periodontitis. J Periodontol 2007; 78:
13008.

61. Graves D. Cytokines that promote periodontal tissue destruc-

tion. J Periodontol 2008; 79: 158591.

62. Fracon RN, Teoﬁlo JM, Satin RB, Lamano T. Prostaglandins
and bone: potential risks and beneﬁts related to the use of
nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs in clinical dentistry. J
Oral Sci 2008; 50: 24752.

63. Noguchi K, Ishikawa I. The roles of cyclooxygenase-2 and
prostaglandin E2 in periodontal disease. Periodontol 2000
2007; 43: 85101.

64. Miyauchi M, Ijuhin N, Nikai H, Takata T, Ito H, Ogawa I.
Effect of exogenously applied prostaglandin E2 on alveolar
bone loss*histometric analysis. J Periodontol 1992; 63:
40511.

leukocyte recruitment

65. Pouliot M, Clish CB, Petasis NA, Van Dyke TE, Serhan CN.
Lipoxin A(4) analogues inhibit
to
Porphyromonas gingivalis: a role for cyclooxygenase-2 and
lipoxins in periodontal disease. Biochemistry 2000; 39: 47618.
66. Bezerra MM, de Lima V, Alencar VB, Vieira IB, Brito GA,
Ribeiro RA, et al. Selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition
prevents alveolar bone loss in experimental periodontitis in
rats. J Periodontol 2000; 71: 100914.

67. Pinho Mde N, Pereira LB, de Souza SL, Palioto DB, Grisi MF,
Novaes AB Jr, et al. Short-term effect of COX-2 selective
inhibitor as an adjunct for the treatment of periodontal
disease: a clinical double-blind study in humans. Braz Dent J
2008; 19: 3238.

68. Hasturk H, Kantarci A, Ohira T, Arita M, Ebrahimi N,
Chiang N, et al. RvE1 protects from local inﬂammation and

Review of osteoimmunology

osteoclast-mediated bone destruction in periodontitis. FASEB
J 2006; 20: 4013.

69. Garlet GP, Cardoso CR, Silva TA, Ferreira BR, Avila-Campos
MJ, Cunha FQ, et al. Cytokine pattern determines the
progression of experimental periodontal disease induced by
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans through the modulation
of MMPs, RANKL, and their physiological inhibitors. Oral
Microbiol Immunol 2006; 21: 1220.

70. Hou LT, Liu CM, Liu BY, Lin SJ, Liao CS, Rossomando EF.
Interleukin-1beta, clinical parameters and matched cellular-
histopathologic changes of biopsied gingival
tissue from
periodontitis patients. J Periodontal Res 2003; 38: 24754.

71. Salvi GE, Brown CE, Fujihashi K, Kiyono H, Smith FW, Beck
JD, et al. Inﬂammatory mediators of the terminal dentition in
adult and early onset periodontitis. J Periodontal Res 1998; 33:
21225.

72. Stashenko P, Jandinski J, Fujiyoshi P, Rynar J, Socransky S.
Tissue levels of bone resorptive cytokines in periodontal
disease. J Perio 1991; 62: 5049.

73. Chiang C, Kyritsis G, Graves D, Amar S. Interleukin-1 and
tumor necrosis factor activities partially account for calvarial
bone resorption induced by local injection of lipopolysacchar-
ide. Infect Immun 1999; 67: 42316.

74. Koide M, Suda S, Saitoh S, Ofuji Y, Suzuki T, Yoshie H, et al.
In vivo administration of IL-1 beta accelerates silk ligature-
induced alveolar bone resorption in rats. J Oral Pathol Med
1995; 24: 42034.

75. Dayan S, Stashenko P, Niederman R, Kupper TS. Oral
epithelial overexpression of IL-1alpha causes periodontal
disease. J Dent Res 2004; 83: 78690.

76. Kurtis B, Tuter G, Serdar M, Akdemir P, Uygur C, Firatli E
et al. Gingival crevicular ﬂuid levels of monocyte chemoat-
tractant protein-1 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in patients
with chronic and aggressive periodontitis. J Periodontol 2005;
76: 184955.

77. Bostrom L, Linder L, Bergstrom J. Clinical expression of TNF-
alpha in smoking-associated periodontal disease. J Clin Period-
ontol 1998; 25: 76773.

78. Lee HJ, Kang IK, Chung CP, Choi SM. The subgingival
microﬂora and gingival crevicular ﬂuid cytokines in refractory
periodontitis. J Clin Periodontol 1995; 22: 88590.

79. Gaspersic R, Stiblar-Martincic D, Osredkar J, Skaleric U.
Inﬂuence of subcutaneous administration of recombinant
TNF-alpha on ligature-induced periodontitis in rats. J Period-
ontal Res 2003; 38: 198203.

80. Graves D, Oskoui M, Volejnikova S, Naguib G, Cai S, Desta T,
et al. Tumor necrosis factor modulates ﬁbroblast apoptosis,
PMN recruitment, and osteoclast formation in response to
P. gingivalis infection. J Dent Res 2001; 80: 18759.

81. Garlet GP, Cardoso CR, Campanelli AP, Ferreira BR, Avila-
Campos MJ, Cunha FQ, et al. The dual role of p55 tumour
necrosis factor-alpha receptor in Actinobacillus actinomycetem-
comitans-induced experimental periodontitis: host protection
and tissue destruction. Clin Exp Immunol 2007; 147: 12838.
82. Liu R, Desta T, Raptis M, Darveau RP, Graves DT.
P. gingivalis and E. coli lipopolysaccharides exhibit different
systemic but similar local induction of inﬂammatory markers.
J Periodontol 2008; 79: 12417.

83. Graves D, Liu R, Alikhani M, Al-Mashat H, Trackman P.
Diabetes-enhanced inﬂammation and apoptosis  impact on
periodontal pathology. J Dent Res 2006; 85f: 1521.

84. Takeichi O, Haber J, Kawai T, Smith DJ, Moro I, Taubman
MA. Cytokine proﬁles of T-lymphocytes from gingival tissues
with pathological pocketing. J Dent Res 2000; 79: 154855.

85. Rogers JE, Li F, Coatney DD, Rossa C, Bronson P, Krieder
JM, et al. Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans lipopolysac-

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

(page number not for citation purpose)

13

Dana T. Graves et al.

charide-mediated experimental bone loss model for aggressive
periodontitis. J Periodontol 2007; 78: 5508.

86. Page R, Schroeder H. Pathogenesis of inﬂammatory period-
ontal disease. A summary of current work. Lab Invest 1976; 34:
23549.

87. Aggarwal R, Ghobrial IM, Roodman GD. Chemokines in

multiple myeloma. Exp Hematol 2006; 34: 128995.

88. Tsai CC, Ho YP, Chen CC. Levels of interleukin-1 beta and
interleukin-8 in gingival crevicular ﬂuids in adult periodontitis.
J Periodontol 1995; 66: 8529.

89. Gemmell E, Carter CL, Seymour GJ. Chemokines in human
periodontal disease tissues. Clin Exp Immunol 2001; 125:
13441.

90. Alnaeeli M, Park J, Mahamed D, Penninger JM, Teng YT.
Dendritic cells at the osteo-immune interface: implications for
inﬂammation-induced bone loss. J Bone Miner Res 2007; 22:
77580.

91. Bonecchi R, Galliera E, Borroni EM, Corsi MM, Locati M,
Mantovani A. Chemokines and chemokine receptors: an
overview. Front Biosci 2009; 14: 54051.

92. Zhang X, Teng YT. Interleukin-10 inhibits gram-negative-
microbe-speciﬁc human receptor activator of NF-kappaB
ligand-positive CD4-Th1-cell-associated alveolar bone loss
in vivo. Infect Immun 2006; 74: 492731.

93. Watanabe T, Kukita T, Kukita A, Wada N, Toh K, Nagata K,
et al. Direct stimulation of osteoclastogenesis by MIP-1alpha:
evidence obtained from studies using RAW264 cell clone highly
responsive to RANKL. J Endocrinol 2004; 180: 193201.

94. Hosokawa Y, Hosokawa I, Ozaki K, Nakae H, Murakami K,
Miyake Y, et al. CXCL12 and CXCR4 expression by human
gingival ﬁbroblasts in periodontal disease. Clin Exp Immunol
2005; 141: 46774.

95. Gamonal J, Acevedo A, Bascones A, Jorge O, Silva A.
Characterization of cellular inﬁltrate, detection of chemokine
receptor CCR5 and interleukin-8 and RANTES chemokines in
adult periodontitis. J Periodontal Res 2001; 36: 194203.

96. Garlet G, Martins W Jr, Ferreira B, Milanezi C, Silva J.
Patterns of chemokine and chemokine receptors expression in
different forms of human periodontal disease. J Periodontal
Res 2003; 38: 2107.

97. Hanazawa S, Kawata Y, Takeshita A, Kumada H, Okithu M,
Tanaka S, et al. Expression of monocyte chemoattractant
protein 1 (MCP-1) in adult periodontal disease:
increased
monocyte chemotactic activity in crevicular ﬂuids and induc-
tion of MCP-1 expression in gingival tissues. Infect Immun
1993; 61: 521924.

98. Yu X, Graves D. Fibroblasts, mononuclear phagocytes and
endothelial cells express MCP-1 in inﬂamed human gingiva. J
Periodontol 1995; 66: 808.

99. Kawai T, Matsuyama T, Hosokawa Y, Makihira S, Seki M,
Karimbux NY, et al. B and T lymphocytes are the primary
sources of RANKL in the bone resorptive lesion of period-
ontal disease. Am J Pathol 2006; 169: 98798.

100. Teng YT, Mahamed D, Singh B. Gamma interferon positively
modulates
actinomycetemcomitans-speciﬁc
RANKL CD4 Th-cell-mediated alveolar bone destruction
in vivo. Infect Immun 2005; 73: 345361.

Actinobacillus

101. Agnello D, Lankford CS, Bream J, Morinobu A, Gadina M,
O’Shea JJ, et al. Cytokines and transcription factors that
regulate T helper cell differentiation: new players and new
insights. J Clin Immunol 2003; 23: 14761.

102. Eastcott JW, Yamashita K, Taubman MA, Harada Y, Smith
DJ. Adoptive transfer of cloned T helper cells ameliorates
periodontal disease in nude rats. Oral Microbiol Immunol
1994; 9: 2849.

103. Gemmell E, Seymour GJ. Immunoregulatory control of Th1/
Th2 cytokine proﬁles in periodontal disease. Periodontol 2000
2004; 35: 2141.

104. Kantarci A, Oyaizu K, Van Dyke TE. Neutrophil-mediated
tissue injury in periodontal disease pathogenesis: ﬁndings
from localized aggressive periodontitis. J Periodontol 2003;
74: 6675.

105. Dennison DK, Van Dyke TE. The acute inﬂammatory
response and the role of phagocytic cells in periodontal health
and disease. Periodontol 2000 1997; 14: 5478.

106. Garlet GP, Cardoso CR, Campanelli AP, Garlet TP,
Avila-Campos MJ, Cunha FQ, et al. The essential role
of IFN-gamma in the control of
lethal Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans infection in mice. Microbes Infect
2008; 10: 48996.

107. Lee W, Aitken S, Sodek J, McCulloch CA. Evidence of a direct
relationship between neutrophil collagenase activity and peri-
odontal tissue destruction in vivo: role of active enzyme in
human periodontitis. J Periodontal Res 1995; 30: 2333.

108. Strober W. The multifaceted inﬂuence of the mucosal micro-
ﬂora on mucosal dendritic cell responses. Immunity 2009; 31:
37788.

109. Vernal R, Leon R, Herrera D, Garcia-Sanz JA, Silva A,
Sanz M. Variability in the response of human dendritic cells
stimulated with Porphyromonas gingivalis or Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans. J Periodontal Res 2008; 43: 68997.

110. Jotwani R, Cutler CW. Fimbriated Porphyromonas gingivalis is
more efﬁcient than ﬁmbria-deﬁcient P. gingivalis in entering
human dendritic cells in vitro and induces an inﬂammatory
Th1 effector response. Infect Immun 2004; 72: 172532.

111. Madianos PN, Bobetsis YA, Kinane DF. Generation of
inﬂammatory stimuli: how bacteria set up inﬂammatory
responses in the gingiva. J Clin Periodontol 2005; 32: 5771.
112. Leibbrandt A, Penninger JM. RANK/RANKL: regulators of
immune responses and bone physiology. Ann NY Acad Sci
2008; 1143: 12350.

113. Alnaeeli M, Penninger JM, Teng YT. Immune interactions
with CD4 T cells promote the development of functional
osteoclasts from murine CD11c dendritic cells. J Immunol
2006; 177: 331426.

114. Baker P, Evans R, Roopenian D. Oral infection with Porphyr-
omonas gingivalis and induced alveolar bone loss in immuno-
competent and severe combined immunodeﬁcient mice. Arch
Oral Biol 1994; 39: 103540.

115. Miossec P, Korn T, Kuchroo VK. Interleukin-17 and type 17

helper T cells. N Engl J Med 2009; 361: 88898.

116. Yu JJ, Ruddy MJ, Wong GC, Sﬁntescu C, Baker PJ, Smith JB,
et al. An essential role for IL-17 in preventing pathogen-
initiated bone destruction: recruitment of neutrophils to
inﬂamed bone requires IL-17 receptor-dependent signals.
Blood 2007; 109: 3794802.

117. Cardoso CR, Garlet GP, Crippa GE, Rosa AL, Junior WM,
Rossi MA, et al. Evidence of the presence of T helper type 17
cells in chronic lesions of human periodontal disease. Oral
Microbiol Immunol 2009; 24: 16.

118. Vignali DA, Collison LW, Workman CJ. How regulatory T cells

work. Nat Rev Immunol 2008; 8: 52332.

119. Cardoso CR, Garlet GP, Moreira AP, Junior WM, Rossi MA,
Silva JS. Characterization of CD4 CD25 natural regula-
tory T cells in the inﬂammatory inﬁltrate of human chronic
periodontitis. J Leukoc Biol 2008; 84: 3118.

120. Ernst CW, Lee JE, Nakanishi T, Karimbux NY, Rezende TM,
Stashenko P, et al. Diminished forkhead box P3/CD25 double-
positive T regulatory cells are associated with the increased
nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL) T cells in bone

14

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

resorption lesion of periodontal disease. Clin Exp Immunol
2007; 148: 27180.

121. Nakajima T, Ueki-Maruyama K, Oda T, Ohsawa Y, Ito H,
Seymour GJ, et al. Regulatory T-cells inﬁltrate periodontal
disease tissues. J Dent Res 2005; 84: 63943.

122. Parﬁtt A. The coupling of bone formation to bone resorption:
a critical analysis of the concept and of its relevance to the
pathogenesis of osteoporosis. Metab Bone Dis Relat Res 1982;
4: 16.

123. Behl Y, Siqueira M, Ortiz J, Li J, Desta T, Faibish D, et al.
Activation of the acquired immune response reduces coupled
bone formation in response to a periodontal pathogen. J
Immunol 2008; 181: 87118.

Review of osteoimmunology

124. Liu R, Bal HS, Desta T, Krothapalli N, Alyassi M, Luan Q, et
al. Diabetes enhances periodontal bone loss through enhanced
resorption and diminished bone formation. J Dent Res 2006;
85: 5104.

*Dana T. Graves
Department of Periodontics
School of Dental Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Tel: 1 215 898 9068
Email: dtgraves@dental.upenn.edu

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2011, 3: 5304 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v3i0.5304

(page number not for citation purpose)

15

