æREVIEW ARTICLE

Distinctive features of the microbiota
associated with different forms of
apical periodontitis

Jose´ F. Siqueira Jr* and Isabela N. Roˆ c¸ as

Department of Endodontics and Molecular Microbiology Laboratory, School of Dentistry, Esta´ cio de
Sa´ University, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil

Microorganisms infecting the dental root canal system play an unequivocal role as causative agents of apical
periodontitis. Although fungi, archaea, and viruses have been found in association with some forms of apical
periodontitis, bacteria are the main microbial etiologic agents of this disease. Bacteria colonizing the root
canal are usually organized in communities similar to biofilm structures. Culture and molecular biology
technologies have demonstrated that the endodontic bacterial communities vary in species richness and
abundance depending on the different types of infection and different forms of apical periodontitis. This
review paper highlights the distinctive features of the endodontic microbiota associated with diverse clinical
conditions.

Keywords: endodontic infection; acute apical abscess; endodontic pathogens; bioﬁlm

Received: 2 June 2009; Revised: 8 July 2009; Accepted: 9 July 2009; Published: 10 August 2009

Apical periodontitis is an inflammatory disease

that affects the tissues surrounding the apical
portion of the dental root and is primarily caused
by microorganisms infecting the root canal (13). The
disease can manifest clinically in distinct ways and the
root canal microbiota may vary accordingly. Actually, the
structure of the microbiota may be responsible for the
different clinical presentations of apical periodontitis.
Fungi and most recently archaea and viruses have been
found in association with endodontic infections (48), but
bacteria are unarguably the major microorganisms im-
plicated in the pathogenesis of apical periodontitis.
Endodontic infections are for the most part endogenous
infections that arise from the normal oral microbiota
under predisposing conditions (pulp necrosis or pulp
removal
the
infectious process, bacterial organizations resembling
biofilms can be observed adhered to the dentinal root
canal walls (911) (Fig. 1). Therefore, there is a current
trend to include apical periodontitis in the group of
human infectious diseases caused by bacterial biofilms.

for treatment). In advanced stages of

Inevitably, the concept of endodontic infections as
biofilm-arranged communities brings a more holistic
view as to the causation of apical periodontitis (12).
Mounting evidence indicates that while there is little
specificity as to the involvement of single named species
in disease etiology, specificity becomes more evident

when bacterial community profiles are taken into ac-
count. In other words, while associations of any specific
species with any form of apical periodontitis is seldom, if
ever, observed, the bacterial community profiles seem to
follow some patterns related to the different presentations
of apical periodontitis (12). Community profiles are
essentially determined by species richness and abundance.
This review paper focuses on the distinctive features
of the microbiota associated with different types of
endodontic infections and different
forms of apical
periodontitis.

Teamwork is what counts  bacterial

endodontic communities
The last years have witnessed a trend toward a more
holistic concept of the etiology of human endogenous
infections that considers the bacterial community as the
unit of pathogenicity (12). This concept is applicable to
all three major oral infectious diseases  caries, marginal
periodontitis, and apical periodontitis (1315).

Molecular methods have been largely used for profiling
bacterial communities in diverse environments (16), and
one of their greatest advantages in this regard reside in
the ability of including as-yet-uncultivated bacteria in the
analysis (17). Community profiling analyses of
the
endodontic microbiota have disclosed some interesting
findings: (a) the different types of endodontic infections

Journal of Oral Microbiology 2009. # 2009 Jose´ F. Siqueira Jr and Isabela N. Roˆ c¸ as. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 Unported License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), permitting all non-commercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2009. DOI: 10.3402/jom.v1i0.2009

1

(page number not for citation purpose)

Jose´ F. Siqueira Jr and Isabela N. Roˆ c¸ as

Fig. 1. Bacterial bioﬁlm formed on the
canal
wall (scanning electron microscopy, original magniﬁcation
1,900).

root

were confirmed as being composed of mixed communities
(18, 19), including persistent/secondary infections asso-
ciated with treated teeth (20); (b) some underrepresented
uncultivated bacteria may be commonly found in infected
root canals (21, 22); (c) bacterial communities may follow
a specific pattern according to the clinical condition
(chronic apical periodontitis, acute apical abscesses, and
treated teeth) (19, 20); (d) there is a great interindividual
variability in endodontic communities associated with the
same clinical disease (19), i.e. each individual harbors a
unique endodontic microbiota in terms of species rich-
ness and abundance; and (e) this interindividual varia-
bility is still more pronounced when individuals from
different geographical locations are analyzed (1820, 23).
the endodontic
microbiota differs consistently between individuals suf-
fering from the same disease (1820) denotes a hetero-
geneous etiology for apical periodontitis, where multiple
species combinations can lead to similar disease out-
comes. Identification of the community members can
reveal the presence of some species or group of species
that may be important for the causation of some forms of
disease. It is reasonable to realize that disease severity,
based on intensity of signs and symptoms, or response to
treatment may be related to the bacterial community
composition. Therefore, specificity in causation of apical
periodontitis appears to be stronger at the community
level.

the composition of

The fact

that

Features of the microbiota in different
conditions
Microbial diversity in endodontic infections has been
consistently assessed by anaerobic culturing and culture-
independent molecular biology methods. Collectively,
more than 400 different microbial
taxa have been
identified in endodontic samples from teeth with different

2

(page number not for citation purpose)

forms of apical periodontitis. These taxa are usually
found in combinations involving many species in primary
infections and a few ones in secondary/persistent infec-
tions (24). Endodontic bacteria fall into nine of the 13
phyla that have oral representatives, namely Firmicutes,
Bacteroidetes, Actinobacteria, Fusobacteria, Proteobac-
teria, Spirochaetes, Synergistes, TM7, and Sulphur River
1 (SR1) (2530). In addition to bacteria, fungi and
archaea have been only occasionally found in intraradi-
cular infections (5, 31, 32), while herpesviruses and HIV
have been detected in apical periodontitis lesions (4, 33
38). However, given the recognized importance of bac-
teria in causing apical periodontitis and the much
broader species richness of bacteria when compared to
fungi and archaea, this paper will limit its focus hereafter
exclusively on bacteria.

Endodontic infections develop in a previously sterile
place which as such does not contain a normal micro-
biota. Therefore, any species found in the canal has the
potential to be an endodontic pathogen or at least to play
a role in the ecology of the microbial community. So far,
virtually all studies involved with phenotypic or genoty-
pic identification of endodontic bacteria have followed a
cross-sectional design, for obvious ethical reasons. Thus,
species prevalence and consequently only species associa-
tion with disease can be inferred from these studies. In
addition to frequency of detection, causation may be
strengthened on the basis of potential pathogenicity (in
animal models or deduced from association with other
human diseases). Based on cross-sectional studies, several
species have emerged as candidate or putative endodontic
pathogens, and the labels candidate or putative should be
preserved while a definite role in disease causation is not
determined. Table 1 summarizes the main features of the
endodontic microbiota in different clinical conditions.

Primary infections
Primary infections are caused by microorganisms that
colonize the necrotic pulp tissue. It can also be regarded
as the initial or ‘wild’ infection, in the sense that there has
not been any professional intervention yet. Participating
microorganisms may have been involved in the earlier
stages of pulp invasion (usually via caries), which
culminated in inflammation and further necrosis, or
they can be latecomers that took advantage of the
environmental conditions in the root canal after pulp
necrosis. Primary infections are the cause of primary
apical periodontitis, which can manifest itself as a chronic
or acute disease. Some acute conditions may evolve to an
abscess, which in some cases can spread to head and neck
spaces to establish a life-threatening condition.

Chronic apical periodontitis
Primary infections are conspicuously dominated by
anaerobic bacteria organized in a mixed community.

The endodontic microbiota

Table 1. Distinctive features of the microbiota associated with different types of endodontic infections

Primary infections

Persistent infections

Persistent/secondary infections

Chronic apical

Acute apical abscess

Filling stage

Treated teeth

periodontitis

Community

No. taxa/case

Mixed
1020

No. of cells/case

Uncultivated bacteria

103108
4055%

Mixed
1020

104109
40%

Mixed, sometimes single Mixed, sometimes single
15

ØAdequate treatment: 15
ØInadequate treatment: 230
103107
55%

102105
42%

Most prevalent groups Gram-negative/Gram-

Gram-negative anaerobes Gram-positive

Gram-positive facultatives

positive

anaerobes

facultatives/anaerobes

Most frequent taxa

Treponema spp.

Treponema spp.

Streptococcus mitis

Enterococcus faecalis

Tannerela forsythia

Tannerela forsythia

Other streptococci

Candida albicans (yeast)

Porphyromonas spp.

Porphyromonas spp.

Propionibacterium spp.

Streptococcus spp.

Dialister spp.

Fusobacterium nucleatum Pseudoramibacter alactolyticus

Fusobacterium nucleatum Prevotella spp.

Propionibacterium propionicum

Dialister spp.

Filifactor alocis

Pseudoramibacter
alactolyticus

Fusobacterium

nucleatum

Eikenella corrodens
Synergistes spp.

Prevotella spp.

Olsenella spp.

Synergistes spp.

Parvimonas micra

Eikenella corrodens

Prevotella spp.

Olsenella spp.

Parvimonas micra
Peptostreptococcus

spp.

Campylobacter spp

Filifactor alocis
Dialister spp.

Actinomyces spp.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

Enteric rods

Pseudoramibacter
alactolyticus

Parvimonas micra

Lactobacilli

Olsenella spp.

Actinomyces spp.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa

Enteric rods

Overall, the bacterial density per canal varies from 103 to
108 (2, 29, 3941). The largest counts may be more related
to large lesions and/or symptomatic cases (2). As for
species richness, a mean of 1020 species/phylotypes have
been found per canal of
teeth with chronic apical
periodontitis as revealed by molecular biology studies
(19, 24, 27, 30). Root canals of
teeth with apical

radiolucency associated with a draining sinus tract
(chronic apical abscess or suppurative apical period-
ontitis) have been reported to harbor a mean number of
17 species (30). The size of the apical periodontitis lesion
has been shown to be proportional to the number of
bacterial species and cells in the root canal (2, 30, 42). In
a molecular study using the reverse-capture checkerboard

(page number not for citation purpose)

3

Jose´ F. Siqueira Jr and Isabela N. Roˆ c¸ as

approach to assess the microbiota of teeth with chronic
apical periodontitis (30), we demonstrated that the mean
number of bacterial taxa per canal was in direct propor-
tion to the lesion size  12 taxa in teeth with small lesions
(B5 mm), 16 taxa in lesions from 5 to B10 mm, 20 taxa
in teeth with lesions larger than 10 mm in diameter. Some
canals of teeth with large lesions were found to harbor
even more than 40 taxa (30).

Bacterial named species frequently detected in primary
infections,
including both acute and chronic apical
periodontitis, belong to diverse genera of gram-negative
(Fusobacterium, Dialister, Porphyromonas, Prevotella,
Tannerella, Treponema, Campylobacter, and Veillonella)
and gram-positive (Parvimonas, Filifactor, Pseudorami-
bacter, Olsenella, Actinomyces, Peptostreptococcus, Strep-
tococcus, Propionibacterium, and Eubacterium) bacteria
(2, 2427, 30, 32, 4252).

Molecular biology methods have caused a great impact
in the knowledge of the bacterial diversity in endodontic
infections (53). Several culture-difficult species have been
consistently included in the set of candidate endodontic
pathogens only after the advent of molecular techniques
identification. The main examples are
for bacterial
Tannerella forsythia, Dialister species (D.
invisus and
D. pneumosintes), Filifactor alocis, Prevotella baroniae,
Olsenella uli, and Treponema species (27, 30, 5052, 54
60). Strengthening of the association with apical period-
ontitis of some species previously recognized as candidate
pathogens has also become evident by molecular findings.
Examples include Fusobacterium nucleatum, Parvimonas
micra (formerly Peptostreptococcus micros), Porphyromo-
nas species (P. endodontalis and P. gingivalis), Prevotella
species (P. intermedia and P. nigrescens), and Pseudor-
amibacter alactolyticus, all of which have been detected in
higher prevalence values than previously reported by
culturing studies (30, 4850, 52, 6164).

It is noteworthy that the most prevalent species in
primary infections may vary from study to study, which
can be explained by several
factors: sensitivity and
specificity of the identification method, sampling techni-
que, geographic location, and accuracy or divergence in
clinical diagnosis, and disease classification. Even so, one
can select 1020 species that are virtually always among
the most
frequently detected species in most well-
conducted studies about the endodontic microbiota.

Although several known species have been associated
with primary infections, the breadth of bacterial diversity
has been substantially expanded by culture-independent
molecular approaches to include many as-yet-uncultivated
and uncharacterized bacteria. Clone library analyses of
primary endodontic infections reveal that a significant
proportion of the detected taxa consist of phylotypes that
remain to be cultivated and phenotypically characterized
(26, 27). These as-yet-uncultivated phylotypes account for
approximately 55% of the taxa found in root canals of

4

(page number not for citation purpose)

teeth with chronic apical periodontitis and in terms of
abundance represent more than 38% of
the clones
sequenced (26). Corresponding figures for primary infec-
tions associated with acute apical abscesses are shown in
the next section. Uncultivated phylotypes from several
genera have been identified, including Dialister, Prevotella,
Synergistes, Solobacterium, Olsenella, Fusobacterium, Eu-
bacterium, Megasphaera, Veillonella, and Selenomonas, as
well as phylotypes related to the family Lachnospiraceae or
the TM7 phylum (22, 2528, 6567). Spirochetes comprise
another bacterial group that has been shown to have as-
yet-uncultivated representatives in primary infections.
Sakamoto et al. (58) examined the diversity of spirochetes
in primary endodontic infections and revealed that 64% of
the Treponema species found have not yet been cultivated.
Synergistes clone BA121 and Bacteroidetes clone X083
are possibly the most prevalent as-yet-uncultivated phy-
lotypes found in endodontic infections (22, 28, 30, 66,
68). There is a growing need to have these phylotypes
cultivated in the laboratory in order to disclose some of
their relevant phenotypic features, such as pathogenicity
and susceptibility to topical and systemic antimicrobials.

Acute apical periodontitis and abscesses
Acute apical periodontitis and acute apical abscesses are
typical acute forms of apical periodontitis. While an acute
abscess is usually preceded by acute apical periodontitis,
the latter does not necessarily evolves to the former.
Therefore, the acute abscess can be regarded as an
advanced stage of
the acute disease. Although the
transition from acute apical periodontitis to abscess can
to clinically distinguish these two
make it difficult
conditions,
in later stages of the disease process the
diagnosis of acute abscesses usually does not represent a
difficult task, mostly because of swelling. In symptomatic
cases, the infection is located in the root canal but it may
also have reached the periradicular tissues and,
in
abscessed cases, it has the potential to spread to other
anatomical spaces of head and neck to form a cellulitis.
The microbiota involved with abscesses is mixed and
dominated by anaerobic bacteria (19, 26, 46, 69, 70).
Bacterial counts per abscess case have been reported to
range from 104 to 109 colony forming units (46, 71, 72).
The mean number of species is comparatively higher in
abscesses than in canals of teeth with chronic apical
periodontitis, with molecular studies revealing an average
of 1218 taxa/case in abscesses as compared to 712 taxa
present in chronic cases (19, 26). It has been shown that
as-yet-uncultivated phylotypes encompass approximately
40% of the taxa found in abscesses and collectively
represent more than 30% of the clones sequenced (26).

Thus far, there is no strong evidence reporting on the
specific involvement of a single species with any particular
sign or symptom of apical periodontitis. Some gram-
negative anaerobic bacteria have been suggested to be

involved with symptomatic lesions (2, 26, 45, 7376), but
the same species may also be present in somewhat similar
frequencies in asymptomatic cases (43, 4750, 63). There-
fore, factors other than the mere presence of a given
putative pathogenic species may play a role in the etiology
of symptomatic endodontic infections (77, 78). These
factors possibly include: (a) differences in virulence ability
among strains of the same species; (b) bacterial interac-
tions resulting in additive or synergistic effects among
species in mixed communities; (c) bacterial population
density; (d) environment-regulated expression of virulence
factors; and (e) host resistance, which may be modulated
by diverse aspects including systemic diseases, concomi-
tant virus infection, environmental factors (stress, smok-
ing), and genetic patterns (77, 78).

The diversity of the bacterial communities has been
found to differ significantly when the microbiota of
chronic apical periodontitis and acute apical abscesses
are compared (19). Differences are essentially represented
by different dominant species in the communities and
larger number of species in abscesses. A shift in the
community structure is then suspected to precede the
emergence of symptoms. Differences in species richness
and abundance, and the resulting interactions among
community members may affect virulence of the whole
consortium. This is in agreement with the community-as-
pathogen concept already discussed.

The apical root canal microbiota
Bacteria settled in the apical root canal are in a strategic
position to induce damage to the periradicular tissues.
Products released from the bacterial biofilm in the canal
accumulate and reach the periradicular tissues to give rise
to an inflammatory response that ultimately leads to
destruction of the periodontal ligament and bone. As
early as in 1894, Miller (79) emphasized the different
morphology of the apical microbiota in comparison to
the most coronal microbiota. Actually, the apical micro-
biota has been demonstrated to differ significantly from
that occurring in the more coronal aspects of the canal
(intraindividual analysis) in terms of predominant mor-
photypes (80), bacterial community profile (81), and
anaerobe:facultative ratio (82). The apical root canal
microbiota is predominantly anaerobic and the time of
infection can influence this dominance, i.e. at late stages
of infection, anaerobes comprise the large majority of
isolates (82, 83).

Baumgartner and Falkler (83) investigated the cultiva-
ble microbiota of the apical 5 mm of root canals of 10
teeth with apical periodontitis and reported that the most
prevalent species were P. intermedia/nigrescens, Prevotella
buccae, Peptostreptococcus anaerobius, and Veillonella
parvula. The total number of colony forming units in
the apical 5 mm of root canals ranged from 5.6104 to
4.3106. Dougherty et al. (84) surveyed the apical and

The endodontic microbiota

species,

coronal segments of infected root canals for the occur-
rence of black-pigmented anaerobic bacteria and found
that P. nigrescens was the most prevalent species in both
coronal and apical samples. Siqueira et al. (85) evaluated
samples taken from the apical segment of infected root
canals associated with apical periodontitis lesions for the
presence of 11 anaerobic bacterial species using species-
specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and detected
bacterial DNA in all cases. P. alactolyticus was the most
prevalent
followed by Treponema denticola,
F. nucleatum, P. endodontalis, and F. alocis. In another
study, Siqueira et al. (86) surveyed the same samples for
the presence and levels of 28 bacterial species/phylotypes
using a reverse-capture checkerboard hybridization assay.
Detected taxa included P. alactolyticus (32%), Bacteroi-
detes clone X083 (26%), Streptococcus species (21%),
clone BA121 (10.5%),
O. uli
F. nucleatum (10.5%), P. endodontalis (10.5%), Dialister
clone BS016 (5%), F. alocis
(5%), P. micra (5%),
and T. denticola (5%). Of these, only Bacteroidetes clone
X083 and Synergistes clone BA121 were found at levels
above 105.

(10.5%), Synergistes

A recent community profiling study compared the
bacterial communities established at
the apical and
middle/coronal segments of infected root canals of teeth
with apical periodontitis (81). Root
fragments were
cryogenically ground and used for analysis. Although
the mean number of taxa in both apical and middle/
coronal samples was 28, the mean of shared taxa was only
54%, ranging from 279%. Thus, the profile of bacterial
community colonizing the apical segment of infected root
canals was shown to be as diverse as that occurring at the
middle/coronal segments. A high variability was observed
for both interindividual (samples from the same root
region but from different patients) and intraindividual
(samples
the same root)
comparisons. The latter can be explained by the different
physico-chemical conditions and type of nutrient avail-
ability in the different regions of the canal.

from different

regions of

Persistent and secondary infections
Secondary infections are caused by microorganisms that
were not present in the primary infection, but that were
introduced in the root canal at some time after profes-
sional intervention. Persistent infections are caused by
microorganisms that were members of a primary or
secondary infection and that persisted in the canal after
antimicrobial treatment and managed to adapt to the
harsh ecological conditions in instrumented and filled
root canals. Persistent and secondary infections are
responsible for several problems in endodontic practice,
including persistent exudation, persistent
symptoms,
flare-ups, and treatment failure. Except for treatment
failure, there are no studies in the endodontic literature
that have consistently evaluated the microorganisms

(page number not for citation purpose)

5

Jose´ F. Siqueira Jr and Isabela N. Roˆ c¸ as

associated with these clinical conditions. Indeed, there are
some reports that show that non-oral bacteria may be
involved with secondary infections to cause persistent
exudation and/or symptoms (8790). As for flare-ups, the
evidence of specificity is even weaker, although there are
some reports of involvement of gram-negative anaerobes,
such as black-pigmented rods and F. nucleatum (2, 91).

On the other hand, the microbiota involved with
treatment failure has been extensively studied in the last
decade. Microbial involvement with treatment failures is
supported by two strong evidence-based arguments.
First, there seems to be an increased risk of adverse
treatment outcome when bacteria are present in the canal
at the time of filling (9294). Second, most (if not all) root
canal-treated teeth evincing persistent apical periodonti-
tis lesions have been demonstrated to harbor an intrar-
adicular infection (95102). Based on these arguments,
studies have attempted to identify the microorganisms
found at the root canal-filling stage, which are ‘short-
term survivors’ that may put the treatment outcome at
risk, and the microorganisms in root canal-treated teeth
with apical periodontitis, which are ‘long-term survivors’
that are arguably the cause of post-treatment disease.

Short-term survivors: bacteria persisting immediately
after treatment
Even after diligent chemomechanical preparation fol-
lowed or not by intracanal medication, some canals may
harbor detectable levels of cultivable bacteria. In these
cases, 15 species can be detected per canal, with counts
reaching 102105 cells per sample (29, 41, 93, 103105).
This indicates that, even if total bacterial elimination is
not the case, at least a substantial reduction in species
richness and abundance is attained. No single species has
been significantly found to persist after treatment proce-
dures. Although gram-negative bacteria are common
members of primary infections, they are not commonly
found in post-instrumentation or post-medication sam-
ples. Gram-positive bacteria are more frequently present
and include Streptococcus species, P. micra, Actinomyces
species, Propionibacterium species, P. alactolyticus, Lac-
tobacillus species, Enterococcus faecalis, and O. uli (29, 93,
103111). Some as-yet-uncultivated phylotypes have also
been found to persist after instrumentation or intracanal
medication (29). Actually, approximately 40% of the taxa
found in post-treatment samples are as-yet-uncultivated
phylotypes (29).

Long-term survivors: bacteria in treated root canals
The microbiota in root canal-treated teeth with post-
treatment apical periodontitis also exhibits a decreased
diversity (both richness and abundance) in comparison to
primary infections. Root canals with apparently adequate
treatment usually contain 15 species, while the number
of species in canals with inadequate treatment can reach

6

(page number not for citation purpose)

up to 30 species, which is very similar to primary
infections (20, 98100). In terms of bacterial density, a
treated canal associated with post-treatment disease can
harbor 103107 cells (39, 107, 112).

Regardless of the identification method, E. faecalis is
the most frequently detected species in root canal-treated
teeth, with prevalence values reaching up to 90% of the
cases (97100, 112115). Root canal-treated teeth are
about nine times more likely to harbor E. faecalis than
cases of primary infections (115). The fact that E. faecalis
has been commonly recovered from cases treated in
multiple visits and/or in teeth left open for drainage
(88) suggests that this species may be a secondary invader
that succeeds in colonizing the canal and resist treatment.
In other words, E.
faecalis may cause a secondary
infection that then becomes persistent. This species has
been considered as transient in the oral cavity and its
source might be food (116).

While association of E. faecalis with post-treatment
disease is suggested by epidemiological studies and
supported by the species attributes that allow it to survive
under unfavorable environmental conditions, causation
still remains unproven. The status of E. faecalis as the
main causative agent of endodontic treatment failures
has been recently put into question by the following
arguments:

(1) E. faecalis has not been detected in all studies
evaluating the microbiota of root canal-treated teeth
with post-treatment lesions (65, 117);
even when present in treated canals, E. faecalis is
rarely one of the most dominant species in the
bacterial community (20); and

(2)

(3) E. faecalis is not more prevalent in root canal-
treated teeth with lesions when compared to root
canal-treated teeth with no lesions (114, 118).

Other bacteria found in root canal-treated teeth with
apical periodontitis include Streptococcus species and
some fastidious anaerobic species  P. alactolyticus,
Propionibacterium propionicum, F. alocis, D. pneumo-
invisus (20, 28, 98100, 113). As-yet-
sintes, and D.
uncultivated phylotypes correspond to 55% of the taxa
detected in treated canals (119), which confirms their
importance in disease etiology. Bacterial community
profiles in treated cases vary from individual to indivi-
dual, suggesting that distinct bacterial combinations can
play a role in treatment failures (20). All these findings
indicate that the microbiota of root canal-treated teeth
with apical periodontitis is more complex than previously
anticipated by culture studies. However, it is proportion-
ally less complex than primary infections.

Fungi are only occasionally found in primary infec-
tions, but Candida species, particularly C. albicans, have

been detected in root canal-treated teeth in up to 18% of
the cases (98100, 107, 113, 117, 120, 121).

Molecular methods have strengthened the association
of persistent/secondary intraradicular infections with
treatment failures,
i.e. bacteria have been detected in
virtually all treated cases with apical periodontitis (20, 39,
97, 98). On the other hand, previous culture and
microscopic studies have failed to detect microorganisms
in some cases of root canal-treated teeth with persistent
disease (99, 100, 113, 122). This discrepancy is better
explained by the low sensitivies of culture and micro-
scopic methods and the occurrence of as-yet-uncultivated
phylotypes and strains. However, a recent study using a
histobacteriologic technique managed to detect bacteria
in virtually all cases of post-treatment disease (101).

Beyond the border: extraradicular infections
Apical periodontitis lesions usually represent an effective
immunological barrier against spread of the infection
from the root canal to the alveolar bone and other body
sites. However,
in some specific circumstances, micro-
organisms may overcome this defense barrier and estab-
lish an extraradicular infection, which can be conceivably
dependent on or independent of
the intraradicular
infection (123).

The question as to whether the extraradicular infection
is dependent on or independent of the intraradicular
infections assumes special relevance from a therapeutic
standpoint. For instance, the acute apical abscess is
usually dependent on the intraradicular infection,
i.e.
once the intraradicular infection is properly controlled by
root canal treatment or tooth extraction and drainage of
pus is achieved, the extraradicular infection is handled by
the host defenses and usually subsides.

Apical actinomycosis, which is caused by Actinomyces
species or P. propionicum, has been claimed to be a form
of extraradicular infection independent of the intraradi-
cular infection in the sense that even if the treatment
succeeds in eradicating intraradicular bacteria, the lesion
may not heal because the causative agents are already
beyond the reaches of intracanal procedures (123125).
However, clear direct evidence is lacking as to whether or
not apical actinomycosis actually comprises an indepen-
dent form of extraradicular infection (126).

The extraradicular occurrence of several anaerobic
bacteria has also been reported in post-treatment apical
periodontitis lesions (127131). Examples include Trepo-
nema species, P. endodontalis, P. gingivalis, T. forsythia,
Prevotella species, and F. nucleatum, which have been
detected by culture, immunological, or molecular studies
(128134). Recent molecular studies using broad-range
PCR and clone library analysis have revealed an un-
anticipated bacterial diversity in extraradicular infections
in association with post-treatment apical periodontitis
(130, 131). One study found bacteria in 85% of the lesions

The endodontic microbiota

the majority of

obtained by apicoectomy and 36% of the taxa identified
were as-yet-uncultivated phylotypes (130). Another study
evaluated both the resected root ends and the apical
periodontitis lesions from treated teeth and reported that
54% of the taxa identified were uncultivated phylotypes
(131). However,
(69%)
belonged to cultivated or named species. As for bacterial
counts, the root ends harbored significantly more bacter-
ial cell equivalents than the lesions (mean numbers, 1
108 and 4107, respectively) (131). Of 33 paired samples
of resected root ends and apical periodontitis specimens,
bacteria were always detected in the former, except for
one case. In that case, bacteria were found in the
associated lesion. As for the lesion specimens, bacteria
were not detected in six cases (131).

the clones

Most of the cultivable named species found in extra-
radicular infections possess an array of virulence traits
that may allow them to avoid or circumvent the host
defenses in the inflamed periradicular tissues (135138).
However,
there is no direct evidence showing that
extraradicular bacteria were actually established as an
extradicular infection independent of the intraradicular
infection. Actually, findings from the Subramanian and
Mickel’s study (131) indicate that the large majority of
cases of extraradicular infections are maintained by a
concomitant apical root canal infection.

Future perspectives and challenges in
endodontic microbiology research
A substantial expansion in knowledge of the diversity of
the endodontic microorganisms involved with different
clinical conditions has occurred over the last decade. As
this knowledge is refined and incorporated ‘into the
context of community as the unit of pathogenicity (12),
identification of different microbial community patterns
associated with specific disease manifestations has the
potential to reveal idiosyncrasies that may be used as the
foundation for the establishment of evidence-based anti-
bacterial treatment protocols. In this regard, further
studies exploring a holistic view of endodontic infections
are made necessary, where the species colonizing the
untreated or treated canal should be seen as part of an
ecosystem,
in which they live in communities whose
outcome of physiology and function will determine the
outcome of
i.e. emergence and
severity of disease.

the tissue response,

High-throughput methods have been used in environ-
mental microbiology and more recently used in medical
microbiology to provide massive information as to micro-
bial identification, significantly increasing coverage of the
community members. Examples include open-ended tech-
niques, such as pyrosequencing and metagenomic ap-
proaches (139142), and closed-ended techniques, such as
DNA microarrays using hundreds to even thousands of
taxon-specific probes (143145). In addition to allowing

(page number not for citation purpose)

7

Jose´ F. Siqueira Jr and Isabela N. Roˆ c¸ as

for a more comprehensive analysis of
the bacterial
diversity in endodontic infections,
the information
brought about by these techniques has the potential to
guide the development of a panel of well-selected putative
pathogens to be included in closed-ended identification
techniques, such as checkerboard and microarrays. This
panel of selected pathogens can then be used against large
numbers of clinical samples with reduced cost and time to
identify associations with specific disease forms, signs, and
symptoms.

Interpretation of

the community behavior can be
inferred by global gene expression (transcriptomics) or
by comprehensive inventories of released proteins (pro-
teomics) and metabolites (metabolomics). Information
provided by these methods has the potential to disclose
patterns of molecules associated with diverse clinical
conditions, helping establish outcome predictors based
not only in specific species combinations or communities,
but perhaps even more importantly on the resultant
products of these consortia. This might restrict the focus
to some microbial product combinations instead of
species combinations, considering the very likely possibi-
lity that the latter may reach a broader spectrum of
variability than the former. This is because different
species may apparently occupy the same niche in different
communities as suggested by studies showing a high
interindividual variability in the endodontic bacterial
communities associated with the same disease condition
(18, 146). Recognition of molecular patterns has the
potential to allow development of chairside tests to
predict outcome of the disease or treatment.

that

infections of

Rapid, accurate, and highly sensitive molecular assays
now provide microbial identification results in a matter
of minutes to a few hours. Cost reduction of devices and
reagents has resulted in propagation of these methodol-
ogies to several clinical laboratories. In the rare circum-
stances
endodontic origin are
life-threatening, such as rapidly disseminating abscess/
cellulitis with systemic involvement, both the clinician
and the patient can significantly benefit from rapid
microbiological diagnosis to adhere to proper therapy.
Rapid diagnosis of bacteria involved in abscesses/cellulitis
as well as of antibiotic resistance genes will allow
clinicians
to manage infectious diseases proactively.
Unfortunately, open-ended molecular approaches for
identification of bacteria in polymicrobial infections are
still time-consuming but further technological advances
have the potential to expedite bacterial identification by
these techniques. Alternatively, identification of pathogen
patterns related to disease may allow development of tests
for rapid diagnosis of selected target species.

avoid that crass errors from the past century be repeated.
However, while there is no reason based on solid scientific
evidence to consider an infected canal as a focus of
infection to distant body sites, except for systemically
compromised patients,
the opposite should not be
disregarded either, as there is no clear evidence to
consider endodontic infections as segregate events with
no effect on the rest of the body. The systemic involve-
ment ‘of endodontic bacteria as part of the total oral
infectious burden or through bacteremia following treat-
ment or acute disease remains to be investigated in the
light of current scientific concepts and technology. This is
an important area of
future research that has the
potential to shape the future of the clinical discipline of
endodontics.

The recognition that the microbiota associated with the
same endodontic disease significantly differs in species
richness and abundance between individuals living in
different geographic locations (18, 146) raises the inevi-
table question as to whether the same treatment proto-
cols, especially systemic antibiotic therapy, can be used in
one-size-fits-all terms. Therefore,
it is a challenge for
researchers to apply sophisticated technology to identify
community patterns related to geography and establish
whether or not treatment protocols should be customized
accordingly.

Root canal treatment approaches that predictably yield
negative cultures are expected to offer a better outcome in
terms of healing of apical periodontitis (93, 99, 147).
Therefore, culture results have been considered as surro-
gate endpoints for long-term treatment outcome. How-
ever, limitations in culturing techniques, including low
sensitivity and inability to detect as-yet-uncultivated
bacteria, put the validity of its use as outcome predictor
in question. Quantitative open-ended molecular methods
that are more sensitive than culture have the potential to
establish more reliable standards to predict outcome.
Again, identification of specific pathogen or molecular
patterns related to treatment outcome may probably be
the best way to establish tests to serve as a more accurate
surrogate outcome.

As one can see, many issues related to the basic and
applied science of endodontic microbiology remain to be
addressed. Advances in knowledge and technology open
the perspectives for many questions to be answered and
consequently many others to be raised in the near future.
Quality of the new information and the speed of advances
in science will fundamentally depend on the spread of the
use of state-of-the-art technology and the ability to
continually recruit qualified manpower to the research
of microbiology associated with apical periodontitis.

Fortunately, non-sense attitudes and absurd clinical
decision-making based on the ‘focal infection theory’ are
now part of the past and must not be feared in days like
these, but should always be remembered as a warning to

Conflict of interest and funding
There is no conflict of interest in the present study for any
of the authors.

8

(page number not for citation purpose)

References

1. Kakehashi S, Stanley HR, Fitzgerald RJ. The effects of surgical
exposures of dental pulps in germ-free and conventional
laboratory rats. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1965; 20:
3409.

2. Sundqvist G. Bacteriological studies of necrotic dental pulps.
Odontological Dissertation no.7, University of Umea, Umea,
Sweden, 1976.

3. Bergenholtz G. Micro-organisms from necrotic pulp of trau-

matized teeth. Odontol Revy 1974; 25: 34758.

4. Saboia-Dantas CJ, Coutrin de Toledo LF, Sampaio-Filho HR,
Siqueira JF, Jr. Herpesviruses in asymptomatic apical period-
ontitis lesions: an immunohistochemical approach. Oral Mi-
crobiol Immunol 2007; 22: 3205.

5. Vianna ME, Conrads G, Gomes BPFA, Horz HP. Identiﬁca-
tion and quantiﬁcation of archaea involved in primary
endodontic infections. J Clin Microbiol 2006; 44: 127482.

6. Siqueira JF, Jr, Sen BH. Fungi in endodontic infections. Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2004; 97: 632
41.

7. Slots J, Sabeti M, Simon JH. Herpesviruses in periapical
pathosis: an etiopathogenic relationship? Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2003; 96: 32731.

8. Waltimo TM, Sen BH, Meurman JH, Orstavik D, Haapasalo
MP. Yeasts in apical periodontitis. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med
2003; 14: 12837.

9. Nair PNR. Light and electron microscopic studies of root

canal ﬂora and periapical lesions. J Endod 1987; 13: 2939.

10. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Lopes HP. Patterns of microbial
colonization in primary root canal infections. Oral Surg Oral
Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2002; 93: 1748.

12. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as

11. Molven O, Olsen I, Kerekes K. Scanning electron microscopy
of bacteria in the apical part of root canals in permanent teeth
with periapical lesions. Endod Dent Traumatol 1991; 7: 2269.
the unit of
pathogenicity: an emerging concept as to the microbial
pathogenesis of apical periodontitis. Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2009; 107: 8708.

IN. Community as

13. Marsh PD. Are dental diseases examples of ecological cata-

strophes? Microbiology 2003; 149: 27994.

14. Kuramitsu HK, He X, Lux R, Anderson MH, Shi W.
Interspecies interactions within oral microbial communities.
Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 2007; 71: 65370.

15. Costerton JW. The bioﬁlm primer. Berlin, Heidelberg:

Springer-Verlag; 2007.

16. Nocker A, Burr M, Camper AK. Genotypic microbial com-
munity proﬁling: a critical technical review. Microb Ecol 2007;
54: 27689.

17. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as

IN, Rosado AS. Application of
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) to the analysis
of endodontic infections. J Endod 2005; 31: 77582.

18. Machado de Oliveira JC, Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Baum-
gartner JC, Xia T, Peixoto RS, et al. Bacterial community
proﬁles of endodontic abscesses from Brazilian and USA
subjects as compared by denaturing gradient gel electrophor-
esis analysis. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2007; 22: 148.

19. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Rosado AS. Investigation of
bacterial communities associated with asymptomatic and
symptomatic endodontic infections by denaturing gradient
gel electrophoresis ﬁngerprinting approach. Oral Microbiol
Immunol 2004; 19: 36370.

20. Roˆ c¸as IN, Siqueira JF, Jr, Aboim MC, Rosado AS. Denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis analysis of bacterial communities

The endodontic microbiota

associated with failed endodontic treatment. Oral Surg Oral
Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2004; 98: 7419.

21. Machado de Oliveira JC, Gama TG, Siqueira JF, Jr, Rocas IN,
Peixoto RS, Rosado AS. On the use of denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis approach for bacterial identiﬁcation in endo-
dontic infections. Clin Oral Investig 2007; 11: 12732.

22. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Cunha CD, Rosado AS. Novel
bacterial phylotypes in endodontic infections. J Dent Res 2005;
84: 5659.

23. Siqueira JF, Jr., Roˆ c¸as IN, Debelian G, Carmo FL, Paiva SS,
Alves FR, et al. Proﬁling of root canal bacterial communities
associated with chronic apical periodontitis from Brazilian and
Norwegian subjects. J Endod 2008; 34: 145761.

24. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN. Exploiting molecular methods to
explore endodontic infections: part 2  redeﬁning the endo-
dontic microbiota. J Endod 2005; 31: 48898.

25. Saito D, de Toledo Leonardo R, Rodrigues JLM, Tsai SM,
Hoﬂing JF, Gonc¸alves RB. Identiﬁcation of bacteria in
endodontic infections by sequence analysis of 16S rDNA clone
libraries. J Med Microbiol 2006; 55: 1017.

26. Sakamoto M, Roˆ c¸as IN, Siqueira JF, Jr, Benno Y. Molecular
analysis of bacteria in asymptomatic and symptomatic en-
dodontic infections. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2006; 21: 11222.
27. Munson MA, Pitt-Ford T, Chong B, Weightman A, Wade WG.
Molecular and cultural analysis of the microﬂora associated
with endodontic infections. J Dent Res 2002; 81: 7616.

28. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN. Uncultivated phylotypes and newly
named species associated with primary and persistent endo-
dontic infections. J Clin Microbiol 2005; 43: 33149.

29. Sakamoto M, Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Benno Y. Bacterial
reduction and persistence after endodontic treatment proce-
dures. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2007; 22: 1923.

30. Roˆc¸as IN, Siqueira JF, Jr. Root canal microbiota of teeth with
chronic apical periodontitis. J Clin Microbiol 2008; 46: 3599606.
31. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Moraes SR, Santos KR. Direct
ampliﬁcation of rRNA gene sequences for identiﬁcation of
selected oral pathogens in root canal infections. Int Endod J
2002; 35: 34551.

32. Vickerman MM, Brossard KA, Funk DB, Jesionowski AM,
Gill SR. Phylogenetic analysis of bacterial and archaeal species
in symptomatic and asymptomatic endodontic infections. J
Med Microbiol 2007; 56: 1108.

33. Sabeti M, Simon JH, Slots J. Cytomegalovirus and Epstein-
Barr virus are associated with symptomatic periapical pathosis.
Oral Microbiol Immunol 2003; 18: 3278.

34. Sabeti M, Valles Y, Nowzari H, Simon JH, Kermani-Arab V,
Slots J. Cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus DNA tran-
scription in endodontic symptomatic lesions. Oral Microbiol
Immunol 2003; 18: 1048.

35. Elkins DA, Torabinejad M, Schmidt RE, Rossi JJ, Kettering
JD. Polymerase chain reaction detection of human immuno-
deﬁciency virus DNA in human periradicular lesions. J Endod
1994; 20: 3868.

36. Chen V, Chen Y, Li H, Kent K, Baumgartner JC, Machida
CA. Herpesviruses in abscesses and cellulitis of endodontic
origin. J Endod 2009; 35: 1828.

37. Li H, Chen V, Chen Y, Baumgartner JC, Machida CA.
Herpesviruses in endodontic pathoses: association of Epstein-
Barr virus with irreversible pulpitis and apical periodontitis.
J Endod 2009; 35: 239.

38. Sunde PT, Olsen I, Enersen M, Beiske K, Grinde B. Human
cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus in apical and marginal
periodontitis: a role in pathology? J Med Virol 2008; 80: 1007
11.

(page number not for citation purpose)

9

Jose´ F. Siqueira Jr and Isabela N. Roˆ c¸ as

39. Blome B, Braun A, Sobarzo V, Jepsen S. Molecular identiﬁca-
tion and quantiﬁcation of bacteria from endodontic infections
using real-time polymerase chain reaction. Oral Microbiol
Immunol 2008; 23: 38490.

40. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Paiva SS, Guimara˜es-Pinto T,
Magalha˜es KM, Lima KC. Bacteriologic investigation of the
effects of sodium hypochlorite and chlorhexidine during the
endodontic treatment of teeth with apical periodontitis. Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2007; 104: 122
30.

41. Vianna ME, Horz HP, Gomes BP, Conrads G. In vivo
evaluation of microbial reduction after chemo-mechanical
preparation of human root canals containing necrotic pulp
tissue. Int Endod J 2006; 39: 48492.

42. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Paiva SSM, Magalha˜es KM,
Guimara˜es-Pinto T. Cultivable bacteria in infected root canals
as identiﬁed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Oral Microbiol
Immunol 2007; 22: 26671.

43. Haapasalo M, Ranta H, Ranta K, Shah H. Black-pigmented
Bacteroides spp. in human apical periodontitis. Infect Immun
1986; 53: 14953.

44. Sundqvist G. Associations between microbial species in dental
infections. Oral Microbiol Immunol 1992; 7:

root canal
25762.

45. Gomes BP, Lilley JD, Drucker DB. Clinical signiﬁcance of

dental root canal microﬂora. J Dent 1996; 24: 4755.

46. Khemaleelakul S, Baumgartner JC, Pruksakorn S. Identiﬁca-
tion of bacteria in acute endodontic infections and their
antimicrobial susceptibility. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
Oral Radiol Endod 2002; 94: 74655.

47. Baumgartner JC, Watkins BJ, Bae KS, Xia T. Association of
black-pigmented bacteria with endodontic infections. J Endod
1999; 25: 4135.

48. Fouad AF, Barry J, Caimano M, Clawson M, Zhu Q, Carver
R, et al. PCR-based identiﬁcation of bacteria associated with
endodontic infections. J Clin Microbiol 2002; 40: 322331.

49. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Souto R, Uzeda M, Colombo AP.
Microbiological evaluation of acute periradicular abscesses by
DNA-DNA hybridization. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
Oral Radiol Endod 2001; 92: 4517.

50. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Souto R, de Uzeda M, Colombo AP.
Checkerboard DNA-DNA hybridization analysis of endodon-
tic infections. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol
Endod 2000; 89: 7448.

51. Foschi F, Cavrini F, Montebugnoli L, Stashenko P, Sambri V,
Prati C. Detection of bacteria in endodontic samples by
polymerase chain reaction assays and association with deﬁned
clinical signs in Italian patients. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2005;
20: 28995.

52. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN. The microbiota of acute apical

abscesses. J Dent Res 2009; 88: 615.

53. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN. Molecular analysis of endodontic
infections. In: Fouad AF, ed. Endodontic microbiology. Ames,
IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2009. p. 68107.

54. Conrads G, Gharbia SE, Gulabivala K, Lampert F, Shah HN.
The use of a 16S rDNA directed PCR for the detection of
endodontopathogenic bacteria. J Endod 1997; 23: 4338.

55. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN. Dialister pneumosintes can be a
suspected endodontic pathogen. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2002; 94: 4948.

56. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN. Detection of Filifactor alocis in
endodontic infections associated with different
forms of
periradicular diseases. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2003; 18:
2635.

57. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Favieri A, Santos KR. Detection of
Treponema denticola in endodontic infections by 16S rRNA

10

(page number not for citation purpose)

gene-directed polymerase chain reaction. Oral Microbiol Im-
munol 2000; 15: 3357.

58. Sakamoto M, Siqueira JF, Jr, Rocas IN, Benno Y. Diversity of
spirochetes in endodontic infections. J Clin Microbiol 2009; 47:
13527.

59. Gomes BP, Jacinto RC, Pinheiro ET, Sousa EL, Zaia AA,
Ferraz CC, et al. Molecular analysis of Filifactor alocis,
Tannerella forsythia, and Treponema denticola associated with
primary endodontic infections and failed endodontic treat-
ment. J Endod 2006; 32: 93740.

60. Baumgartner JC, Khemaleelakul SU, Xia T. Identiﬁcation of
spirochetes (treponemes) in endodontic infections. J Endod
2003; 29: 7947.

61. Roˆ c¸as IN, Baumgartner JC, Xia T, Siqueira JF, Jr. Prevalence
of selected bacterial named species and uncultivated phylo-
types in endodontic abscesses from two geographic locations.
J Endod 2006; 32: 11358.

62. Baumgartner JC, Siqueira JF, Jr, Xia T, Roˆ c¸as IN. Geogra-
phical differences in bacteria detected in endodontic infections
using polymerase chain reaction. J Endod 2004; 30: 1414.

63. Jung IY, Choi BK, Kum KY, Roh BD, Lee SJ, Lee CY, et al.
Molecular epidemiology and association of putative pathogens
in root canal infection. J Endod 2000; 26: 599604.

64. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN. Pseudoramibacter alactolyticus in

primary endodontic infections. J Endod 2003; 29: 7358.

65. Rolph HJ, Lennon A, Riggio MP, Saunders WP, MacKenzie
D, Coldero L, et al. Molecular identiﬁcation of microorgan-
isms from endodontic infections. J Clin Microbiol 2001; 39:
32829.

66. Roˆ c¸as IN, Siqueira JF, Jr. Detection of novel oral species and
phylotypes in symptomatic endodontic infections including
abscesses. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2005; 250: 27985.

67. Roˆ c¸as IN, Siqueira JF, Jr. Characterization of Dialister species

in infected root canals. J Endod 2006; 32: 105761.

68. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN. Molecular detection and identiﬁca-
tion of Synergistes phylotypes in primary endodontic infec-
tions. Oral Dis 2007; 13: 398401.

69. Kuriyama T, Karasawa T, Nakagawa K, Saiki Y, Yamamoto E,
Nakamura S. Bacteriologic features and antimicrobial suscept-
ibility in isolates from orofacial odontogenic infections. Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2000; 90:
6008.

70. de Sousa EL, Ferraz CC, Gomes BP, Pinheiro ET, Teixeira FB,
de Souza-Filho FJ. Bacteriological study of root canals
associated with periapical abscesses. Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2003; 96: 3329.

71. Lewis MA, MacFarlane TW, McGowan DA. Quantitative
bacteriology of acute dento-alveolar abscesses. J Med Micro-
biol 1986; 21: 1014.

72. Williams BL, McCann GF, Schoenknecht FD. Bacteriology of
dental abscesses of endodontic origin. J Clin Microbiol 1983;
18: 7704.

73. Griffee MB, Patterson SS, Miller CH, Kafrawy AH, Newton
CW. The relationship of Bacteroides melaninogenicus
to
symptoms associated with pulpal necrosis. Oral Surg Oral
Med Oral Pathol 1980; 50: 45761.

74. Yoshida M, Fukushima H, Yamamoto K, Ogawa K, Toda T,
Sagawa H. Correlation between clinical symptoms and micro-
organisms isolated from root canals of teeth with periapical
pathosis. J Endod 1987; 13: 248.

75. van Winkelhoff AJ, Carlee AW, de Graaff J. Bacteroides
endodontalis and others black-pigmented Bacteroides species
in odontogenic abscesses. Infect Immun 1985; 49: 4948.

76. Roˆ c¸as IN, Siqueira JF, Jr, Andrade AFB, Uzeda M. Identiﬁca-
tion of selected putative oral pathogens in primary root canal
infections associated with symptoms. Anaerobe 2002; 8: 2008.

77. Siqueira JF, Jr, Barnett F. Interappointment pain: mechanisms,

diagnosis, and treatment. Endod Topics 2004; 7: 93109.

78. Siqueira JF, Jr. Microbial causes of endodontic ﬂare-ups. Int

Endod J 2003; 36: 45363.

79. Miller WD. An introduction to the study of the bacterio-
pathology of the dental pulp. Dent Cosmos 1894; 36: 50528.
80. Thilo BE, Baehni P, Holz J. Dark-ﬁeld observation of the
bacterial distribution in root canals following pulp necrosis.
J Endod 1986; 12: 2025.

81. Alves FR, Siqueira JF, Jr, Carmo FL, Santos AL, Peixoto RS,
Rocas IN, et al. Bacterial community proﬁling of cryogenically
ground samples from the apical and coronal root segments of
teeth with apical periodontitis. J Endod 2009; 35: 48692.

82. Fabricius L, Dahle´n G, Ohman AE, Mo¨ ller AJR. Predominant
indigenous oral bacteria isolated from infected root canals
after varied times of closure. Scand J Dent Res 1982; 90:
13444.

83. Baumgartner JC, Falkler WA, Jr. Bacteria in the apical 5 mm

of infected root canals. J Endod 1991; 17: 3803.

84. Dougherty WJ, Bae KS, Watkins BJ, Baumgartner JC. Black-
pigmented bacteria in coronal and apical segments of infected
root canals. J Endod 1998; 24: 3568.

85. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Alves FR, Santos KR. Selected
endodontic pathogens in the apical third of infected root
canals: a molecular investigation. J Endod 2004; 30: 63843.

86. Siqueira JF, Jr, Rocas IN, Alves FR, Silva MG. Bacteria in the
apical root canal of teeth with primary apical periodontitis.
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 2009; 107:
7216.

87. Siqueira JF, Jr, Lima KC. Staphylococcus epidermidis and
Staphylococcus xylosus in a secondary root canal infection with
persistent symptoms: a case report. Aust Endod J 2002; 28:
613.

88. Siren EK, Haapasalo MP, Ranta K, Salmi P, Kerosuo EN.
Microbiological ﬁndings and clinical treatment procedures in
endodontic cases selected for microbiological investigation. Int
Endod J 1997; 30: 915.

89. Ranta K, Haapasalo M, Ranta H. Monoinfection of root canal
with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Endod Dent Traumatol 1988; 4:
26972.

90. Haapasalo M, Ranta H, Ranta KT. Facultative gram-negative
enteric rods in persistent periapical infections. Acta Odontol
Scand 1983; 41: 1922.

91. Chavez de Paz LE. Fusobacterium nucleatum in endodontic
ﬂare-ups. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
2002; 93: 17983.

92. Fabricius L, Dahle´n G, Sundqvist G, Happonen RP, Mo¨ ller
AJR. Inﬂuence of residual bacteria on periapical tissue healing
after chemomechanical treatment and root ﬁlling of experi-
mentally infected monkey teeth. Eur J Oral Sci 2006; 114:
27885.

93. Sjo¨gren U, Figdor D, Persson S, Sundqvist G. Inﬂuence of
infection at
the time of root ﬁlling on the outcome of
endodontic treatment of teeth with apical periodontitis. Int
Endod J 1997; 30: 297306.

94. Waltimo T, Trope M, Haapasalo M, Orstavik D. Clinical
efﬁcacy of
treatment procedures in endodontic infection
control and one year follow-up of periapical healing. J Endod
2005; 31: 8636.

95. Lin LM, Skribner JE, Gaengler P. Factors associated with

endodontic treatment failures. J Endod 1992; 18: 6257.

96. Lin LM, Pascon EA, Skribner J, Gangler P, Langeland K.
Clinical, radiographic, and histologic study of endodontic
treatment failures. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1991; 71:
60311.

The endodontic microbiota

97. Roˆ c¸as IN, Jung IY, Lee CY, Siqueira JF, Jr. Polymerase chain
reaction identiﬁcation of microorganisms in previously root-
ﬁlled teeth in a South Korean population. J Endod 2004; 30:
5048.

98. Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN. Polymerase chain reaction-based
analysis of microorganisms associated with failed endodontic
treatment. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
2004; 97: 8594.

99. Sundqvist G, Figdor D, Persson S, Sjogren U. Microbiologic
analysis of teeth with failed endodontic treatment and the
outcome of conservative re-treatment. Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 1998; 85: 8693.

100. Pinheiro ET, Gomes BP, Ferraz CC, Sousa EL, Teixeira FB,
Souza-Filho FJ. Microorganisms from canals of root-ﬁlled
teeth with periapical lesions. Int Endod J 2003; 36: 111.

101. Ricucci D, Siqueira JF, Jr, Bate AL, Pitt Ford TR. Histologic
investigation of root canal-treated teeth with apical period-
ontitis: a retrospective study from twenty-four patients.
J Endod 2009; 35: 493502.

102. Roˆ c¸as IN, Hulsmann M, Siqueira JF, Jr. Microorganisms in
root canal-treated teeth from a German population. J Endod
2008; 34: 92631.

103. Bystro¨ m A, Sundqvist G. The antibacterial action of sodium
hypochlorite and EDTA in 60 cases of endodontic therapy. Int
Endod J 1985; 18: 3540.

104. Siqueira JF, Jr, Paiva SS, Roˆ c¸as IN. Reduction in the cultivable
bacterial populations in infected root canals by a chlorhex-
idine-based antimicrobial protocol. J Endod 2007; 33: 5417.
105. Siqueira JF, Jr, Magalha˜es KM, Roˆ c¸as IN. Bacterial reduction
in infected root canals treated with 2.5% NaOCl as an irrigant
and calcium hydroxide/camphorated paramonochlorophenol
paste as an intracanal dressing. J Endod 2007; 33: 66772.

106. Gomes BP, Lilley JD, Drucker DB. Variations in the suscept-
the endodontic microﬂora to

ibilities of components of
biomechanical procedures. Int Endod J 1996; 29: 23541.

107. Peciuliene V, Reynaud AH, Balciuniene I, Haapasalo M.
Isolation of yeasts and enteric bacteria in root-ﬁlled teeth
with chronic apical periodontitis. Int Endod J 2001; 34:
42934.

108. Peters LB, van Winkelhoff AJ, Buijs JF, Wesselink PR. Effects
of
irrigation and dressing with calcium
hydroxide on infection in pulpless teeth with periapical bone
lesions. Int Endod J 2002; 35: 1321.

instrumentation,

109. Chavez de Paz LE. On bacteria persisting root canal treatment.
Identiﬁcation and potential mechanisms of resistance to
antimicrobial measures. PhD thesis, Go¨ teborg University,
Go¨ teborg, Sweden, 2005.

110. Chu FC, Leung WK, Tsang PC, Chow TW, Samaranayake LP.
Identiﬁcation of cultivable microorganisms from root canals
with apical periodontitis following two-visit endodontic treat-
ment with antibiotics/steroid or calcium hydroxide dressings. J
Endod 2006; 32: 1723.

111. Siqueira JF, Jr, Guimara˜es-Pinto T, Roˆ c¸as IN. Effects of
chemomechanical preparation with 2.5% sodium hypochlorite
and intracanal medication with calcium hydroxide on cultiva-
ble bacteria in infected root canals. J Endod 2007; 33: 8005.
112. Sedgley C, Nagel A, Dahlen G, Reit C, Molander A. Real-time
quantitative polymerase chain reaction and culture analyses of
Enterococcus faecalis in root canals. J Endod 2006; 32: 1737.
113. Molander A, Reit C, Dahlen G, Kvist T. Microbiological status
of root-ﬁlled teeth with apical periodontitis. Int Endod J 1998;
31: 17.

114. Zoletti GO, Siqueira JF, Jr, Santos KR. Identiﬁcation of
Enterococcus faecalis in root-ﬁlled teeth with or without
periradicular lesions by culture-dependent and -independent
approaches. J Endod 2006; 32: 7226.

(page number not for citation purpose)

11

Jose´ F. Siqueira Jr and Isabela N. Roˆ c¸ as

115. Roˆ c¸as

IN, Siqueira JF, Jr, Santos KR. Association of
Enterococcus faecalis with different forms of periradicular
diseases. J Endod 2004; 30: 31520.

116. Zehnder M, Guggenheim B. The mysterious appearance of
enterococci in ﬁlled root canals. Int Endod J 2009; 42: 27787.
117. Cheung GS, Ho MW. Microbial ﬂora of root canal-treated
teeth associated with asymptomatic periapical radiolucent
lesions. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2001; 16: 3327.

118. Kaufman B, Spangberg L, Barry J, Fouad AF. Enterococcus
spp. in endodontically treated teeth with and without perira-
dicular lesions. J Endod 2005; 31: 8516.

119. Sakamoto M, Siqueira JF, Jr, Roˆ c¸as IN, Benno Y. Molecular
analysis of the root canal microbiota associated with endo-
dontic treatment failures. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2008; 23:
27581.

120. Mo¨ ller AJR. Microbial examination of root canals and
periapical tissues of human teeth. Odontol Tidskr 1966; 74:
1380.

121. Egan MW, Spratt DA, Ng YL, Lam JM, Moles DR,
Gulabivala K. Prevalence of yeasts in saliva and root canals
of teeth associated with apical periodontitis. Int Endod J 2002;
35: 3219.

122. Nair PN, Sjogren U, Krey G, Kahnberg KE, Sundqvist G.
Intraradicular bacteria and fungi in root-ﬁlled, asymptomatic
human teeth with therapy-resistant periapical lesions: a long-
term light and electron microscopic follow-up study. J Endod
1990; 16: 5808.

123. Siqueira JF, Jr. Periapical actinomycosis and infection with
Propionibacterium propionicum. Endod Topics 2003; 6: 7895.
124. Happonen RP. Periapical actinomycosis: a follow-up study of
16 surgically treated cases. Endod Dent Traumatol 1986; 2:
2059.

125. Sjo¨gren U, Happonen RP, Kahnberg KE, Sundqvist G.
Survival of Arachnia propionica in periapical tissue. Int Endod
J 1988; 21: 27782.

126. Ricucci D, Siqueira JF, Jr. Apical actinomycosis as a con-
tinuum of intraradicular and extraradicular infection: case
report and critical review on its involvement with treatment
failure. J Endod 2008; 34: 11249.

127. Sunde PT, Olsen I, Gobel UB, Theegarten D, Winter S,
Debelian GJ, et al. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
for direct visualization of bacteria in periapical
lesions of
asymptomatic root-ﬁlled teeth. Microbiology 2003; 149: 1095
102.

128. Sunde PT, Tronstad L, Eribe ER, Lind PO, Olsen I. Assess-
ment of periradicular microbiota by DNA-DNA hybridization.
Endod Dent Traumatol 2000; 16: 1916.

129. Gatti JJ, Dobeck JM, Smith C, White RR, Socransky SS,
Skobe Z. Bacteria of asymptomatic periradicular endodontic
lesions identiﬁed by DNA-DNA hybridization. Endod Dent
Traumatol 2000; 16: 197204.

130. Handal T, Caugant DA, Olsen I, Sunde PT. Bacterial diversity
lesions on root-ﬁlled teeth. J Oral

in persistent periapical
Microbiol 2009; 1: 17.

131. Subramanian K, Mickel AK. Molecular analysis of persistent
periradicular lesions and root ends reveals a diverse microbial
proﬁle. J Endod 2009; 35: 9507.

132. Tronstad L, Barnett F, Riso K, Slots J. Extraradicular
endodontic infections. Endod Dent Traumatol 1987; 3: 8690.

12

(page number not for citation purpose)

133. Barnett F, Stevens R, Tronstad L. Demonstration of Bacteroides
intermedius in periapical tissue using indirect immunoﬂuores-
cence microscopy. Endod Dent Traumatol 1990; 6: 1536.

134. Sjo¨gren U, Hanstrom L, Happonen RP, Sundqvist G. Ex-
tensive bone loss associated with periapical
infection with
Bacteroides gingivalis: a case report. Int Endod J 1990; 23: 254
62.

135. van Winkelhoff AJ, van Steenbergen TJ, de Graaff J. Porphyr-
its role in endodontal

omonas (Bacteroides) endodontalis:
infections. J Endod 1992; 18: 4314.

136. Fenno JC, McBride BC. Virulence factors of oral treponemes.

Anaerobe 1998; 4: 117.

137. Bolstad AI, Jensen HB, Bakken V. Taxonomy, biology, and
periodontal aspects of Fusobacterium nucleatum. Clin Micro-
biol Rev 1996; 9: 5571.

138. Holt SC, Ebersole JL. Porphyromonas gingivalis, Treponema
the ‘‘red complex’’, a
denticola and Tannerella forsythia:
prototype polybacterial pathogenic consortium in periodonti-
tis. Periodontol 2000 2000; 38: 72122.

139. Al Masalma M, Armougom F, Scheld WM, Dufour H, Roche
PH, Drancourt M, et al. The expansion of the microbiological
spectrum of brain abscesses with use of multiple 16S ribosomal
DNA sequencing. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 48: 116978.

140. Dethlefsen L, Huse S, Sogin ML, Relman DA. The pervasive
effects of an antibiotic on the human gut microbiota, as
revealed by deep 16S rRNA sequencing. PLoS Biol 2008; 6:
e280.

141. Manichanh C, Rigottier-Gois L, Bonnaud E, Gloux K,
Pelletier E, Frangeul L, et al. Reduced diversity of faecal
microbiota in Crohn’s disease revealed by a metagenomic
approach. Gut 2006; 55: 20511.

142. Gill SR, Pop M, Deboy RT, Eckburg PB, Turnbaugh PJ,
Samuel BS, et al. Metagenomic analysis of the human distal
gut microbiome. Science 2006; 312: 13559.

143. Palmer C, Bik EM, Digiulio DB, Relman DA, Brown PO.
Development of the human infant intestinal microbiota. PLoS
Biol 2007; 5: e177.

144. Huyghe A, Francois P, Charbonnier Y, Tangomo-Bento M,
Bonetti EJ, Paster BJ, et al. Novel microarray design strategy to
study complex bacterial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol
2008; 74: 187685.

145. Palmer C, Bik EM, Eisen MB, Eckburg PB, Sana TR, Wolber
PK, et al. Rapid quantitative proﬁling of complex microbial
populations. Nucleic Acids Res 2006; 34: e5.

146. Siqueira JF, Jr, Rocas IN, Debelian GJ, Carmo FL, Paiva SS,
Alves FR, et al. Proﬁling of root canal bacterial communities
associated with chronic apical periodontitis from Brazilian and
Norwegian subjects. J Endod 2008; 34: 145761.

147. Molander A, Warfvinge J, Reit C, Kvist T. Clinical and
radiographic evaluation of one- and two-visit endodontic
treatment of asymptomatic necrotic teeth with apical period-
ontitis: a randomized clinical trial. J Endod 2007; 33: 11458.

*Jose´ F. Siqueira Jr
Faculty of Dentistry
Esta´ cio de Sa´ University
Av. Alfredo Baltazar da Silveira, 580/cobertura, Recreio
Rio de Janeiro
22790-710 RJ, Brazil
Email: jf_siqueira@yahoo.com; siqueira@estacio.br

