æSYSTEMIC DISEASE AND ORAL BACTERIA

Cardiovascular disease and the role
of oral bacteria
Shaneen J. Leishman1,2*, Hong Lien Do2 and Pauline J. Ford1
1School of Dentistry, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia; 2School of Medicine,
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia

In terms of the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease (CVD) the focus has traditionally been on
dyslipidemia. Over the decades our understanding of the pathogenesis of CVD has increased, and infections,
including those caused by oral bacteria, are more likely involved in CVD progression than previously
thought. While many studies have now shown an association between periodontal disease and CVD, the
mechanisms underpinning this relationship remain unclear. This review gives a brief overview of the host-
bacterial interactions in periodontal disease and virulence factors of oral bacteria before discussing the
proposed mechanisms by which oral bacterial may facilitate the progression of CVD.

Keywords: oral bacteria; cardiovascular disease; systemic inﬂammation; cross-reactivity; heat shock proteins

Published: 21 December 2010

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) refers to diseases of

the circulatory system, including outcomes such
as myocardial infarction and stroke (1). CVD,
along with cancer, is a leading cause of death in Western
societies. According to Queensland Health, CVD was the
second highest cause of disease burden in Queensland in
2003, accounting for 17.8% of the overall burden of
disease (number of lives lost due to premature mortality
and disability: DALY) with 77% of the cardiovascular
(CV) burden attributed to premature mortality. With
regard to specific conditions, coronary heart disease
(CHD) was the major contributor to the burden of
disease, accounting for 10.2 and 10% of the DALYs
in Queensland and Australia,
respectively (2). The
underlying cause of CVD in the majority of cases is
atherosclerosis (3). While great advances have been made
in the treatment of CVD, the prevalence of the disease
continues to rise. Up to 50% of individuals with CVD do
not have any of the traditional CV-risk factors such
as hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, smoking, and
obesity (4), indicating that other factors must contribute
to the disease. Identification of other risk factors for
CVD, along with their mechanisms of action, is essential
if morbidity and mortality from the disease are to be
reduced.

The roles of infection and inflammation in athero-
sclerosis have become increasingly apparent. Chronic
inflammatory periodontal diseases are among the most
common human infections with 1015% of the population

experiencing advanced forms of the disease (5, 6). In the
context of CVD,
individuals with periodontitis are
reported to have an increased risk of developing the disease,
including coronary artery disease, stroke, myocardial
infarction, and atherosclerosis even after adjusting for
classical CV-risk factors (711). Furthermore, adjusted
analysis showed that the bacterial burden of Porphyromo-
nas gingivalis, Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans,
Treponema denticola, and Tannerella forsythia in subgingi-
val plaque samples was associated with carotid intima-
media thickening (12).

While many studies have shown an association between
periodontal disease and CVD, some studies have shown a
weak or no association between the two diseases (1315).
The fact that periodontitis and CVD share common risk
factors also makes interpretation of the clinical studies
complex. Meta-analyses have been conducted, however,
and a small but significant association has been demon-
strated (1618). The atherosclerotic susceptible apolipo-
(apoE /) mouse model has
protein E deficient
provided further support for the role of oral bacteria in
atherosclerosis by demonstrating that inoculation with P.
gingivalis results in advanced atherosclerotic lesions
compared with control mice (1921).

The present review will discuss the current proposed
mechanisms linking oral bacteria with CVD, focusing
specifically on direct endothelial
systemic
inflammation, platelet aggregation, and cross-reactivity
between bacterial and host heat shock proteins.

invasion,

Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010. # 2010 Shaneen J. Leishman et al. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 Unported License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), permitting all non-commercial use, distribution, and
Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

1

(page number not for citation purpose)

Shaneen J. Leishman et al.

Hostbacterial interactions in periodontal

disease
P. gingivalis, T. denticola, and T. forsythia are part of a small
group of Gram-negative anaerobic bacteria that have been
found to be involved as pathogens in many periodontitis
lesions and have been nominated as the red complex (22).
These organisms reside in a complex biofilm that is the
dental plaque. While these bacteria are associated with
periodontal disease progression, their complex relation-
ships with each other and the many commensal bacteria
present in the biofilm must be considered when examining
the immune response occurring in periodontal disease.
There is considerable variation in the composition of this
biofilm that is determined by factors such as the individual,
the site examined, and the time of the examination. The
biofilm is formed by colonization of the enamel salivary
pellicle followed by secondary colonization that occurs by
interbacterial adhesion (23). Subgingival plaque, due to its
more protected location, is much more resistant to removal
than supragingival plaque. Successful colonization of the
biofilm by a microorganism can be enhanced by adhesins
including fimbriae, hemagglutinins, and proteases (24).

P. gingivalis binds via fimbrillin (fimA), the structural
subunit of the major fimbriae. It is an asaccharolytic
organism and produces hemagglutinins and proteases for
its hemin and peptide requirements. The hemagglutinins
are also involved in bacterial adherence and the proteases
lead to immune responses and tissue destruction (reviewed
in Gemmell and Seymour (25)). P. gingivalis is associated
with deep periodontal pockets and sites of active disease
(26). The pathogenicity of this organism is due to several
features including fimbriae, which enable its adherence to
and invasion of gingival tissues (27), a dense amorphous
capsule that allows resistance of phagocytosis, and pro-
duction of enzymes such as collagenase and trypsin-like
protease that facilitates tissue breakdown and degradation
of most serum proteins,
including immunoglobulins
and complement components. P. gingivalis also inhibits
neutrophil migration into the lesion by its failure to
stimulate the expression of
the neutrophil binding
adhesion molecule E-selectin on gingival endothelial cells
and by inhibition of epithelial cell production of inter-
leukin-8 (IL-8). Specific antibodies produced may be
ineffective, further inhibiting clearance by neutrophils
(reviewed in Gemmell et al. (28)).

A mouse model has been used to define the immune
response to P. gingivalis (29, 30) and variations in the
local T- and B-cell responses occurred with different
mouse strains. Interestingly, a study examining coinfec-
tion with P. gingivalis and Fusobacterium nucleatum
demonstrated inhibitory effects on antibody production
by both bacteria (31). F. nucleatum and P. gingivalis have
been shown to exert differential effects at the molecular
level on oral epithelial cells and their differences in
activating NK-kB nuclear translocation in oral epithelial

cells may at least in part be responsible for the change in
dynamics and kinetics of downstream gene expression
(32).

Cells of

the periodontium, particularly epithelial
cells and inflammatory cells
interact directly with
plaque bacteria and bacterial products. It is the result of
these interactions that ultimately determines whether the
inflammatory lesion will resolve, become stable, or lead
to progressive host tissue destruction. Studies using a
coculture model, therefore, have yielded useful information
regarding these interactions. A macrophage/epithelial cell
coculture model assessing the effect of exposure to mono
and mixed preparations of whole cells of red-complex
bacteria examined cytokine production at varying multi-
plicities of infection (MOI). Secretion of IL-1b, IL-6, IL-8,
and RANTES was increased and this varied with the
bacterial strain and MOI (33).

The ability of red-complex bacteria to suppress innate
immune responses of gingival epithelial cells has been
demonstrated in vitro. Orange-complex bacteria induced
strong responses while non-periodontopathic bacteria
elicited only weak responses from these cells (production
of human beta defensins, the cathelicidin LL-37, and the
neutrophil chemoattractant IL-8) (34). Interestingly, while
non-periodontopathic and orange-complex bacteria were
highly susceptible to the antimicrobial peptides produced
and to phagocytosis by neutrophils, red-complex bacteria
were resistant. Therefore, non-periodontopathic bacteria
may protect the host by activating the gingival epithelium
at low levels, orange-complex bacteria may be weakly
pathogenic (but have other roles in contributing to a
pathogenic biofilm) while red-complex bacteria can effec-
tively evade host immune mechanisms and establish
persistent infection.

In contrast to the results of in vitro models (33) in which
no synergistic effects were observed for mixed bacterial
stimulations,
there is evidence that periodontopathic
bacteria act cooperatively in terms of the development
of a pathogenic biofilm and also in causing disease in
animal models (35, 36). A number of studies have
described the pathogenic synergism between P. gingivalis
together with F. nucleatum (37, 38), T. denticola (39), or
T. forsythia (40). It has been suggested that bacterial cell
cell interactions may enhance both the survival of the
organisms in a hostile environment and also their
pathogenicity (38).

Virulence factors of oral bacteria

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
the
Lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)
outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. The LPS is
recognized by the innate immune system by means of toll-
like receptors (TLRs). TLRs allow recognition of structu-
rally conserved pathogen associated microbial products

is a component of

2

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781

(PAMPs), such as LPS (reviewed by Takeda and Akira
(41)). Bacterial LPS is usually recognized by TLR-4; an
exception to this is LPS from P. gingivalis that, due to a
structural change, is recognized by TLR-2 (42). Ligation of
TLRs triggers signal transduction pathways leading to a
rapid innate inflammatory response and facilitation of
antigen specific acquired immunity (reviewed in Takeda
and Akira (41)).

CD14 acts as coreceptor with TLR-4 for the detection
of bacterial LPS. Increased levels of soluble CD14 in
serum of periodontal patients (43) along with increased
serum levels of antibodies against LPS of periodonto-
pathogens has been demonstrated (44), suggesting that
chronic exposure to bacterial LPS in these patients results
in systemic effects. Activation of CD14 leads to the
secretion of many proinflammatory molecules including
IL-1, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a), and
prostaglandin E2 (45) that, in turn, promotes the release
of secondary inflammatory mediators such as platelet
activation factor, bradykinin, histamine, and prostaglan-
dins (43, 44, 46, 47).

Bacterial LPS is also known to activate the comple-
ment system, a group of more than 30 proteins that
participate in tissue destruction and the inflammatory
process (45). Activation of the complement system is one
of the earliest host immune responses in periodontal
infection (reviewed in Genco (48)), and the degree of
complement system activation is related to the severity of
periodontal inflammation (49). Some oral bacteria are
able to avoid opsonization as they exhibit proteolytic
activity on their cell surface for degrading components of
the complement system (50).

Proteases
Proteases cleave peptide bonds and are characterized
according to their catalytic activity. P. gingivalis is able
to secrete large amounts of proteolytic enzymes. Among
the extracellular endopeptidases of P. gingivalis, cysteine
proteases, termed gingipains (Lys-gingipain, Kgp; Arg-
gingipain, Rgp), are major virulence factors. Their
activities are essential
for bacterial survival but are
pathogenic to the host (reviewed in Imamura (51)).
Gingipains allow P. gingivalis to attach to host tissues by
facilitating fimbriae maturation and are also involved in
hemoglobin binding for collection of heme and host
amino acids, important nutrient sources for the bacteria
(reviewed in Potempa et al. (52)) These enzymes are able to
degrade a broad range of proteins including collagens
(a major component of periodontal connective tissue)
(53) and extracellular matrix proteins (fibronectin and
laminin) (54, 55), leading to destruction of periodontal
tissue (56). Rgp and Kgp also cleave and inactivate
immunoglobulins (53) and cytokines (57, 58) thereby
compromising host defense mechanisms (52, 59).

CVD and roles of oral bacteria

As reported by Imamura (51), gingipains also cause
decreased IL-6 levels in gingival tissues near the bacterial
biofilm, suppressing inflammatory reactions mediated by
IL-6 and, therefore, facilitating periodontal tissue de-
struction. This finding is also confirmed by Oleksy et al.
(60), who identified the proteolysis of IL-6 receptors in
vitro by gingipains from P. gingivalis. In addition, other
cytokines including IL-8 and IL-1b were found to be
cleaved by gingipains (51). Dysregulation of the coagula-
tion cascade (61) and activation of the kallikrein-kinin
cascade have also been shown to be caused by Rgp and
Kgp (62). Furthermore, Rgp causes increased vascular
permeability (51) and produces a chemotactic factor to
attract leukocytes to migrate into the periodontal tissues
(63). Kgp activates the kallikrein-kinin system in the
intrinsic pathway of coagulation leading to the release of
bradykinin and prostaglandin thereby promoting alveo-
lar bone resorption (64, 65). Gingipains can also degrade
the CD14 receptor for bacterial LPS on the surface of
monocytes and T-cells leading to decreased responsive-
ness to LPS (51, 66, 67). Gingipains have also been shown
to stimulate and activate matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs)
tissue (51). These
effects, which lead to enhanced tissue damage, may also
help bacteria to enter the blood stream.

that destroy periodontal

activities

A murine abscess model using a P. gingivalis strain with a
gingipain mutation showed reduced abscess size (40),
reduced proteolytic, hemagglutinating, and colonizing
activity (6870), as well as weakened polymorphonuclear
leukocyte-suppressive
(56). Additionally,
bacterial clearance was greater in mice injected with P.
gingivalis gingipain mutants (71). This may be due to the
fact that gingipains are important in the maturation of
fimA, an important component supporting bacterial
adhesion and invasion (59, 72). Additionally,
lack of
gingipains will prevent bacteria from obtaining heme, a
nutrition source required for their growth and develop-
ment (72, 73). Supporting this finding, P. gingivalis grown
in heme-limiting cultures has been reported to become
avirulent in a mouse model (74). Immunization with
gingipain in a mouse model protected against further
infection by P. gingivalis (75, 76).

Fimbriae
Fimbriae are hair-like protein structures protruding from
the cell surface of bacteria, particularly Gram-negative
bacteria. Fimbriae assist in the binding of bacteria to
host cells, as well as in colonization and resisting host
defenses (77). fimA of P. gingivalis has been the most
extensively studied and is a critical factor in supporting
the initial adhesion and invasion of bacteria to target cells
as well as for its colonization on gingival tissues (78, 79).
A strain of P. gingivalis with mutations in the fimA genes
showed loss or reduction in adherence or invasion of
host cells (80, 81). In vitro, P. gingivalis has been shown

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781

(page number not for citation purpose)

3

Shaneen J. Leishman et al.

to invade human epithelial, endothelial, fibroblastic, and
periodontal ligament cells (78, 82, 83).

Six genotypes of fimA from P. gingivalis (types IV and
Ib) have been classified according to their different
nucleotide sequence (8486). Type II fimA and type IV
fimA are believed to be more virulent and have been
found to be more prevalent in periodontitis patients with
CVD, while type I fimA was found mainly in period-
ontally healthy subjects (8789). In addition, type IV P.
gingivalis exhibited higher hemagglutination activity,
whereas type II P. gingivalis was lower in trypsin-like,
arginine-specific activity (BAPNA) (90). In particular,
type II fimA P. gingivalis was reported to cause impaired
host cellular function including adhesion, migration, and
proliferation as this bacterial strain is able to degrade
focal adhesion kinase, paxillin, and integrin-related
signaling molecules at significantly greater levels than
other strains (78). This strain of fimA P. gingivalis was
also detected more frequently in deeper periodontal
pockets (91) and was the most efficient invader of human
epithelial cells compared with other P. gingivalis strains
(78). Using a mouse abscess model, Nakano et al. (92)
showed that among the six strains, fimA type II caused
the most significant induction of acute general inflam-
mation. Deletion of type II fimbriae led to a depletion in
the infection capabilities of the bacterium.

Leukotoxins
Leukotoxins are a group of exotoxins that have primary
toxic effects against leukocytes, particularly polymorpho-
nuclear cells (PMNs). Leukotoxin from A. actinomycetem-
comitans forms pores in the lipid bilayer and is capable of
killing human leukocytes via a specific receptor on the
cell membrane (reviewed in Narayanan et al. (93)). In
human PMNs and macrophages, leukotoxins trigger the
translocation of cytoplasmic granules to the periphery,
releasing the lysosomal contents, and increasing the
oxidative activity leading to inflammation-mediated
injury to host tissues (94). Leukotoxin also promotes
programmed cell death (apoptosis) by activating endogen-
ous nuclease that leads to an enhanced breakdown of
chromosomal DNA; killing PMNs, macrophages, natural
killer (NK) cells, and T lymphocytes (95). Importantly,
leukotoxin also helps A. actinomycetemcomitans to evade
the host immune system, allowing the bacterium to
establish a local infection. Leukotoxin also acts as a bridge
to bind the bacterium to leukocytes, enabling the bacterium
to spread throughout host tissues unnoticed (reviewed in
Narayanan et al. (93)).

Capsule
Capsules protect bacteria from phagocytosis, aid in cell
attachment, and subsequent biofilm formation. Capsular
antigens are also targets of the immune system and are
involved in cell recognition (96). P. gingivalis strains with

a capsule are reported to be more virulent and invasive
compared with strains without a capsule (78).

Current evidence for the role of oral bacteria in
cardiovascular disease (CVD)
While many studies have shown an association between
oral infection and CVD, the relationship remains to be
established as a causal one. Intervention and pathogenic
mechanistic studies are required to strengthen the evidence
for the association between the two diseases. A number of
mechanisms have been proposed and incorporate both
direct and indirect effects of bacteria on the vasculature
(97).

A number of reviews have been published outlining the
development of atherosclerosis (1, 98, 99). The following
discussion will provide a brief overview of the development
of atherosclerosis and how oral bacteria may facilitate
and enhance this process.

Atherosclerosis is an immune/inflammatory disease
and presents as focal thickening of the intima (1). The
initiating factor in atherogenesis is endothelial dysfunc-
tion. Endothelial dysfunction occurs initially at sites of
arterial bifurcations, but risk factors such as hypercho-
lesterolemia and hypertension can also lead to patches of
endothelial dysfunction. Low density lipoprotein (LDL)
accumulates in the intima and in these areas becomes
oxidized (oxLDL). Activated endothelial cells express
cellular adhesion molecules such as intercellular adhesion
molecule-1 (ICAM-1), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1
(VCAM-1), and selectins that mediate rolling and adhe-
sion of circulating leukocytes, such as monocytes and
lymphocytes to the endothelial cells. Once adhered to the
cell
leukocytes migrate into the intima in
response to chemoattractant factors such as monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1). Monocytes subse-
quently differentiate into macrophages, in response to
macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF), engulf
oxLDL via scavenger receptors, and become foam cells
forming the first stage of the atherosclerotic lesion known
as the fatty streak (reviewed in Libby (98)).

surface,

T-cells (predominately CD4 cells) present within the
intima recognize antigens presented by the major histo-
compatability complex (MHC) molecules expressed on
the surface of antigen presenting cells and mount cell-
mediated immune responses. T helper 1 (Th1; cellular)
immunity is currently believed to be central in atherogen-
esis and involves proinflammatory mediators such as
interferon-gamma (INF-g), TNF-a, IL-1, and IL-12. The
role of T helper 2 (Th2; humoral) mediated immunity in
disease progression is still unclear (reviewed in Hansson
et al. (99) and Jawien (100)).

Pro-inflammatory cytokines produced by activated
macrophages or T-cells contribute to the local inflamma-
the lesion and stimulate the migration and
tion of
proliferation of
(SMCs). The

smooth muscle cells

4

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781

SMCs subsequently secrete extracellular matrix compo-
nents that lead to the formation of a fibrous cap over the
lesion. As macrophages accumulate more lipid, apoptosis
occurs leading to a necrotic core of extracellular lipid
deposits that are covered by a fibrous cap (reviewed in
Libby (98)). A complication of the lesion is rupture
leading to thrombus formation and obstruction of the
vessel that can result in clinical signs of atherosclerosis
such as myocardial infarction and stroke (1). Vulnerable
lesions are generally characterized by a thin fibrous cap,
large necrotic lipid core, and numerous inflammatory
cells. Stable lesions, on the other hand, have a thick
fibrous cap, small necrotic lipid core, and numerous
SMCs (reviewed in Libby (98)). Inflammation, therefore,
is evident through all stages of lesion development and
not only plays a role in lesion development but also in
lesion instability and rupture.

The anatomical proximity of the oral biofilm to the
periodontal vasculature facilitates the systemic spread of
oral bacteria to distant sites from the oral cavity such as the
heart (101). The sulcular epithelium is relatively thin and
easily disturbed (reviewed in Parahitiyawa et al. (102)).
Mastication, oral hygiene procedures (tooth brushing and
dental flossing) (103105), and periodontal procedures
(periodontal probing, tooth extractions, removal of sub-
gingival plaque and calculus, as well as surgery) can disturb
the sulcular epithelium leading to a bacteremic state (103,
104). In both gingivitis and periodontitis the periodontal
vasculature dilates,
increasing in surface area, further
facilitating bacteremia (reviewed in Parahitiyawa et al.
(102)). Individuals with poor oral hygiene are at a higher
risk of developing bacteremia during periodontal proce-
dures due to a higher bacterial burden (104).

Direct arterial infection
It is hypothesized that transient bacteremia during period-
ontal infection may lead to direct bacterial invasion of
endothelial cells. Invasion of non-phagocytic cells is a
common strategy of pathogens to evade host defenses.
Indeed, bacteria,
including those of oral origin, have
been identified by PCR in atherosclerotic plaques
(106110). Multiple oral bacteria (Streptococcus mutans,
Streptococcus sanguinis, A. actinomycetemcomitans, P.
gingivalis, and T. denticola) have been detected in both
aortic aneurysm specimens and in heart valve specimens
(111). Oral bacteria have also been frequently detected
at sites along the arterial
tree where atherosclerotic
lesions commonly occur. For example, P. gingivalis, A.
actinomycetemcomitans, Prevotella intermedia, and T.
forsythia were commonly found in coronary arteries but
not in internal mammary arteries (96). Supporting this
finding, Ford et al. (109) identified P. gingivalis in 100% of
the carotid endarterectomy specimens examined and
F. nucleatum and T. forsythia in 84 and 48% of specimens,
respectively. Furthermore, two or more species of period-

CVD and roles of oral bacteria

ontal bacteria were detected in 64% of atherosclerotic
plaques from CHD patients with periodontal disease (112).
It is unclear, however, if the presence of oral bacteria in
atherosclerotic lesions contributes to the progression of
atherosclerosis or constitutes an innocent bystander effect.
In support of direct effects of oral bacteria on
endothelial cells,
invasive strains of P. gingivalis have
been shown to induce their uptake by macrophages and
enhance foam cell formation, in the presence of LDL, in
vitro (113). Furthermore, certain strains of P. gingivalis, P.
intermedia (114, 115), and S. mutans (116) have been
shown to invade and persist
in vitro within aortic
endothelial cells. Following on from this, P. gingivalis
has been shown to replicate intracellularly within autop-
hagosomes (117). The ability of P. gingivalis, as well as
other bacteria, to persist intracellularly may allow the
establishment of secondary chronic infections that may
further contribute to the pathology of atherosclerosis.

Invasion of endothelial cells by bacteria can lead to
endothelial dysfunction, a key event in the development
of atherosclerosis. Endothelial dysfunction is associated
with increased procoagulant properties, mononuclear cell
adhesion,
increased expression of cell adhesion mole-
cules, and proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines
(such as IL-6, IL-8, and MCP-1) all of which have been
shown to be induced by P. gingivalis (118, 119). These
proinflammatory and proatherogenic effects of P. gin-
givalis have been linked to the invasive capacity of the
bacterium as DPG3, a mutant form of P. gingivalis
lacking major fimbriae, was unable to induce these effects
in endothelial cells (118, 119). Bacterial invasion of host
cells can also result in apoptosis as high concentrations of
P. gingivalis, but not DPG3, were able to induce apoptotic
cell death of endothelial cells (120). Therefore, an
invasion of endothelial cells by oral bacteria may lead
to changes in the proinflammatory and proatherogenic
properties of endothelial cells as well as programmed cell
death, all of which are indicative of endothelial dysfunc-
tion.

Platelet aggregation
There is increasing evidence that oral bacteria interact with
platelets. While the primary role of platelets is hemostasis,
they also play a role in the immune response to infection
(121). Oral bacteria may affect platelets directly or
indirectly. Firstly, the immune response to oral bacteria
may activate platelets; secondly, oral bacteria may secrete
products that activate platelets; and thirdly, bacteria may
bind to platelets resulting in activation (reviewed in
Kerrigan et al. (122)). Activation of platelets by bacteria
can lead to localized thrombus
formation, platelet
consumption, as well as increased secretion of pro-
inflammatory cytokines and mediators from platelets,
which further contribute to the pathology of athero-
sclerosis (reviewed in Fitzgerald et al. (123)).

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781

(page number not for citation purpose)

5

Shaneen J. Leishman et al.

A number of Streptococci species particularly of the
viridans group, S. sanguinis, S. gordonii, S. mutans, and
S. mitis, have been found to induce platelet adhesion and
aggregation in vitro (reviewed in Kerrigan and Cox (124)).
The process is multifactorial and involves many cell
surface proteins including: the platelet aggregation asso-
ciated protein (PAAP) of S. sanguinis (125), serine rich
glycoproteins designated SrpA and GspB/Hsa
in
S. sanguinis (126) and S. gordonii (127), respectively,
adhesions such as SspA and SspB in S. gordonii (122), as
well as glucosyltansferases (128).

Platelet aggregation is not

limited to Streptococci
species as certain strains of P. gingivalis also induce
platelet aggregation in vitro. The platelet aggregating
ability of P. gingivalis was first attributed to fimbriae as
fimbriaed strains of P. gingivalis were potent activators of
murine platelets and the DPG3 mutant was ineffective at
inducing aggregation (129). Purified fimbriae alone,
however, was unable to induce platelet aggregation
suggesting that other factors, in addition to fimbriae,
must also be involved in the process (129). P. gingivalis
expresses a non-collagen like antigen that is cross-reactive
with PAAP of S. sanguinis (130); however,
further
characterization of this antigen has not been carried
out to date.

Vesicles of P. gingivalis have been shown to induce
platelet aggregation (129). Vesicles are outgrowths of the
outer membrane and contain many virulence factors such
hemagglutinins, proteases, and LPS (131). It is proposed
that fimbriae are involved in the binding of the bacterium
to platelets and that the binding leads to the interaction
of surface expressed vesicle proteins with platelet recep-
tors leading to platelet aggregation (129). Further analy-
sis of the protein vesicles in platelet rich plasma showed
that P. gingivalis induced platelet aggregation was depen-
dent on cysteine proteases (Kgp and Rgp gingipains) and
adhesions such as Hgp44 (132). Recently, P. gingivalis
induced aggregation has also been shown to occur via a
TLR-2 dependent mechanism. To date, other periodontal
pathogens have not been observed to induce platelet
aggregation (129).

Systemic inflammation
Currently there is strong evidence to support the role
of systemic inflammation in the development and progres-
sion of atherosclerosis. Epidemiological studies have
shown that CV-risk is associated with increased levels of
cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, TNF-a, and MCP-1), and acute
phase proteins such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and
fibrinogen (133135). Furthermore, plasma levels of in-
flammatory markers such as CRP have been shown to be a
stronger predictor of future CV events than LDL levels,
strengthening the importance of inflammation in the
progression of atherosclerosis (136). CRP has also been
shown to be directly involved in the development of

atherosclerosis. CRP stimulates the expression of cell
adhesion molecules on arterial endothelial cells, induces
the recruitment of monocytes into the arterial wall, and
stimulates LDL uptake by macrophages, thereby promot-
ing foam cell formation (reviewed in Libby (98)).

As outlined earlier, activated endothelial cells express
cellular adhesion molecules. These molecules can be shed
from the cell surface and soluble forms are markers of
endothelial activation. Indeed, elevated levels of soluble
(s) ICAM-1, sVCAM-1, and selectins have been asso-
ciated with CV-risk (137).

In relation to the systemic inflammation model it is
hypothesized that cytokines and inflammatory mediators
produced in periodontal disease act systemically to
promote systemic disease. In addition, the release of
bacteria and bacterial by-products such as LPS into the
circulation may also trigger a systemic inflammatory
response. Increased levels of circulating cytokines can
activate vascular endothelial cells, ultimately leading
to the development of atherosclerosis. In addition to
activating inflammatory cells, bacterial LPS may trigger
and enhance atherosclerosis by increasing oxidative stress
and modifying lipid metabolism (138).

A number of studies showed that patients with severe
periodontitis have increased levels of systemic inflamma-
tory markers (IL-6, CRP, haptoglobin, and leukocytosis)
(139144). In addition, periodontitis patients were also
found to exhibit dyslipidemia (145) and endothelial
dysfunction as assessed by flow-mediated dilatation of
the brachial artery (140).

Periodontal intervention studies have been implemented
to further investigate the contribution of periodontal
infection to systemic markers of inflammation and vascu-
lar health. In the short-term (hours to 1 week), periodontal
therapy appears to elicit a systemic inflammatory response
and mediate endothelial activation/dysfunction as a result
of transient bacteremia immediately following therapy
(146148). In the long-term, endothelial function improves
and is evident up to 6 months post-therapy (148, 149).

The long-term effects of periodontal therapy in relation
to systemic cytokine levels are inconsistent among studies,
especially with regard to the cytokines affected and
the time frame at which the effect was observed. Patients
receiving periodontal therapy in conjunction with systemic
administration of antibiotics exhibited no significant
change in CRP, IL-6, or TNF-a following a 3 month
period (150). While Buhlin et al. (151) also failed to detect
changes in markers of inflammation at the same time point,
levels of IL-8, INF-g, and haptoglobin were reduced and
lipid profiles improved 12 months after conventional
periodontal therapy. In contrast, periodontitis patients
receiving intensive periodontal therapy (standard period-
ontal therapy plus local administration of minocycline)
had significant reductions in IL-6, CRP, lipid markers,
and systolic blood pressure (SBP) 2 months post-therapy

6

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781

compared with patients who received standard therapy
alone. In addition, patients receiving intensive periodontal
therapy also displayed reductions in Framingham CV-risk
scores 2 and 6 months following therapy (152). In patients
with hypertension followed for 3 months, non-surgical
periodontal therapy resulted in reduced levels of CRP,
IL-6, and fibrinogen (153). Furthermore, while levels of
CRP, IL-6, and fibrinogen were reduced in patients with
and without CHD, changes in fibrinogen and white blood
cell count were higher in patients with CHD (154).

therapy,

including surgery,

Tonetti et al. (148) demonstrated an improvement in
endothelial dysfunction and reduced levels of sE-selectin
and neutrophil counts 6 months post-therapy; however,
the study failed to detect differences in CRP, IL-6, and
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) between treat-
ment and control groups at the same time point. Period-
ontal
reduced levels of
vascular health (PAI-1, sE-selectin, sVCAM-1, MMP-9,
and myeloidperoxidase) in patients with periodontitis;
however, only reduced levels of sE-selectin were main-
tained 1 month after the completion of the periodontal
therapy regime (155). A summary inflammation score
used to assess the systemic inflammatory burden of each
patient indicated that there was a high degree of patient
variability in the systemic inflammatory response to
therapy. Thirty-three percent of patients experienced a
reduction in the inflammatory score, 25% experienced an
increase in the inflammatory score, while the remainder
of the patients experienced no change in the inflamma-
tory score following therapy (155). The apparent patient
variability in systemic inflammation may be due to host
genetic factors. Systemic inflammatory responses are
higher
for
functional polymorphisms in IL-1a, IL-6, and TNF-a
genes (156) and these individuals may be more likely to
experience anti-inflammatory effects after periodontal
therapy.

in periodontitis patients carrying alleles

Another marker of chronic inflammation is anemia.
Anemia of chronic diseases (ACD), as it is otherwise
known, is a cytokine-mediated anemia that is character-
ized by impaired mobilization of iron from reticuloen-
dothelial stores, reduced red blood cell survival, and
impaired erythropoiesis. Cytokines that have been impli-
cated in ACD include IL-1, IL-6, TNF-a, and INF-g
(reviewed in Means (157)). Periodontal infections have
been associated with anemia of chronic inflammation.
Periodontitis patients have been shown to exhibit an
anemic state as indicated by reduced hematocrit levels,
decreased erythrocyte numbers, and reduced hemoglobin
levels (158, 159). Intervention studies have further sup-
ported this association demonstrating that non-surgical
periodontal therapy can result in significant increases in
hemoglobin and hematocrit levels within treatment groups
(159) as well as compared with control patients who
received no periodontal therapy (160).

CVD and roles of oral bacteria

While there are inconsistencies among studies, the
general trend is that periodontal therapy can improve
systemic markers of inflammation and vascular health;
however, the long-term effects of this with regards to CV
events remain unknown. It is difficult to interpret the
results of the intervention studies due to differences in
periodontal therapy (including duration), time frame at
which samples were assessed, and the exclusion of
control, non-intervention, groups in some studies. A
recent meta-analysis of six studies investigating the effects
of periodontal therapy on CRP has provided further
insight into the strength of the relationship, and con-
cluded a modest association between periodontal therapy
and reduced levels of CRP (161).

The reduction in inflammatory markers after period-
ontal therapy provides evidence that the elevated levels of
systemic inflammation were due to periodontal disease
rather than other inflammatory conditions and supports
the hypothesis that periodontal inflammation may add to
the systemic inflammatory burden of affected individuals.

Cross-reactivity
There is increasing evidence that immune responses may
also be involved in the progression of atherosclerosis (97).
One mechanism in which infection may initiate and
facilitate the progression of atherosclerotic lesions can
be explained in terms of the immune response to bacterial
HSPs, termed GroEL (162).

HSPs are expressed by prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
in response to various forms of stress (temperature,
mechanical stress, infection, and oxygen radicals) (163).
They are highly conserved throughout nature and many
pathogens express HSPs that are homologous to human
HSPs (164). During infection, bacterial HSPs are highly
immunogenic (165). Factors such as mechanical stress,
bacterial LPS, and cytokines may induce the expression
of host protective HSP60 (hHSP60) on endothelial cells.
Due to the homologous nature of HSPs across species,
the immune system may not be able to differentiate
between host and bacterial HSPs. As a result of this
molecular mimicry, there may be cross-reactivity of the
immune response to bacterial HSPs with HSPs expressed
by stressed endothelial cells
leading to endothelial
dysfunction and subsequent development of athero-
sclerosis (162). The presence of CV-risk factors such as
hypertension and hypercholesterolemia would enhance
the expression of hHSP60 and adhesion molecules by
endothelial cells and result in progression from early
fatty streak lesions to more severe and irreversible
atherosclerotic alterations. Supporting this, Perschinka
et al. (166) identified that hHSP60 was expressed to
varying degrees in healthy arteries and atherosclerotic
lesions.

Elevated levels of antibodies to hHSP60 have been
associated with the presence and severity of coronary

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781

(page number not for citation purpose)

7

Shaneen J. Leishman et al.

artery disease (167) and atherosclerosis (168). In particular,
Metzler et al. (168) demonstrated a correlation between
high anti-HSP60/65 antibody levels and high morbidity
and mortality due to atherosclerosis. These antibodies were
cross-reactive with other bacterial HSPs and were able to
lyse stressed  but not unstressed  endothelial cells (169).
Elevated anti-hHSP60 levels have also been found in
patients with carotid stiffness (170), borderline hyperten-
sion, and have been associated with early atherosclerosis
(171).

The mechanism by which antibodies to self-antigens,
such as hHSP60, are generated is unclear. It is currently
proposed that anti-hHSP60 antibodies could represent a
cross-reactive host immune response to bacterial HSPs in
susceptible individuals or result from a primary immune
response to altered self-HSP60 expression (172).

The GroEL proteins are major antigens in several
pathogenic bacterial (173). GroEL proteins and homo-
logues have been identified in several oral bacteria includ-
ing P. gingivalis, A. actinomycetemcomitans, F. nucleatum,
P. intermedia, T. denticola, and S. mutans (reviewed in
Goulhen et al. (174)). GroEL from P. gingivalis, F.
nucleatum, and A. actinomycetemcomitans was recognized
by serum antibodies in patients with periodontal disease
(175). Patients with periodontal disease have been shown
to have a higher antibody response to hHSP60 and
P. gingivalis GroEL compared with periodontally healthy
controls. In addition, these antibodies were cross-reactive
with P. gingivalis GroEL and hHSP60, respectively (176).
Due to the homologous nature of bacterial GroEL
with hHSP60, periodontal
infections have been asso-
ciated with atherosclerosis possibly due to cross-reactivity
of
the immune response to bacterial GroEL with
hHSP60. Previous studies have demonstrated the pre-
sence and cross-reactivity of hHSP60, P. gingivalis
GroEL, and P. gingivalis specific T-cells in the gingival
tissues of chronic periodontitis patients (177),
in the
peripheral blood of atherosclerotic patients, and in
human atherosclerotic lesions (178). Furthermore, anti-
bodies to P. gingivalis from atherosclerotic patients with
periodontitis cross-reacted with hHSP60 (109). In an
intervention study, Yamazaki et al. (179) found that
periodontal therapy significantly reduced the levels of
anti-P. gingivalis GroEL antibodies in patients with
moderate to advanced periodontal disease, while the
mean levels of antibodies to hHSP60 remained un-
changed. Similarly, Buhlin et al. (151) detected no change
in anti-hHSP60 antibody levels following periodontal
therapy.

Murine models of atherosclerosis have also provided
evidence for the role of HSP immunity in atherosclerosis.
Immunization of C57BL/6 mice fed a cholesterol rich diet
with HSP resulted in enhanced atherosclerosis (180).
Furthermore, an injection of human anti-hHSP60 anti-
bodies in apoE (/) mice enhanced atherosclerosis

(181). This is supported by an intervention study that
demonstrated protection from atherosclerosis following
oral tolerance to HSP60 (182). In addition, Ford et al. (21)
showed a significant correlation between anti-GroEL
antibody levels and atherosclerotic lesion size in apoE
(/) mice inoculated with P. gingivalis, indicating that
molecular mimicry may be a mechanism involved in
infection-induced atherosclerosis.

Conclusion
There is clear evidence of an epidemiological association
between oral infections and CVD and in vitro and in vivo
mechanistic studies have established a plausible link
between oral bacteria and atherosclerosis. The interactions
between oral bacteria and CVD are extremely complex and
it’s highly likely that more than one mechanism is involved.
Recent studies provide strong support for the roles of
systemic inflammation and immune cross-reactivity in
intervention studies have
atherogenesis. Furthermore,
demonstrated that periodontal
therapy can reduce
systemic markers of inflammation and vascular health
as well as antibody responses to heat shock proteins.
Future studies are now required to determine the long-
term effects of periodontal therapy on CVD outcomes.
Nevertheless, a recent consensus report on periodontitis
and atherosclerotic CVD, published in the American
Journal of Cardiology and the Journal of Periodontology
(183), has recommended that patients with moderate to
severe periodontitis should be informed of a possible
increased risk of CVD and those with more than one
CV-risk factor should undergo a medical evaluation of
CV-risk.

Conflict of interest and funding
There is no conflict of interest in the present study for any
of the authors.

References

1. Ross R. Atherosclerosis is an inﬂammatory disease. Am Heart

J 1999; 138: s41920.

2. Begg S, Khor SL, Bright ML, Stanley L, O’Brien J, Harper C.
Overview of the burden of disease and injury in Queensland,
2003. Queensland burden of disease and injury circular series 1,
no 1. Brisbane: Queensland health; 2008.

3. Heart, Stroke, and Vascular Diseases  Australian Facts 2004.
Canberra: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, National
Heart Foundation of Australia, National Stroke Foundation
Australia; 2004.

4. Crouse JR. Progress in coronary artery disease risk factor
research: what remains to be done? Clin Chem 1984; 30:
11257.

5. Consensus report for periodontal diseases: pathogenesis and

microbiol factors. Ann Periodontol 1996; 1: 92632.

6. Papapanou PN. Periodontal diseases: epidemiology. Ann

Periodontol 1996; 1: 136.

8

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781

7. Mattila KJ, Valle MS, Nieminen MS, Valtonen VV, Hietaniemi
KL. Dental infections and coronary atherosclerosis. Athero-
sclerosis 1993; 103: 20511.

8. DeStefano F, Anda RF, Kahn HS, Williamson DF, Russell
CM. Dental disease and risk of coronary heart disease and
mortality. BMJ 1993; 306: 68891.

9. Valtonen VV. Role of infections in atherosclerosis. Am Heart J

1999; 138: 4313.

10. Beck JD, Elter JR, Heiss G, Couper D, Mauriello SM,
Offenbacher S. Relationship of periodontal disease to carotid
artery intima-media wall thickness: the atherosclerosis risk in
communities (ARIC) study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
2001; 21: 181622.

11. Gotsman I, Lotan C, Soskolne WA, Rassovsky S, Pugatsch T,
Lapidus L, et al. Periodontal destruction is associated with
coronary artery disease and periodontal infection with acute
coronary syndrome. J Periodontol 2007; 78: 84958.

12. Desvarieux M, Demmer RT, Rundek T, Boden-Albala B,
Jacobs DR Jr, Sacco RL, et al. Periodontal microbiota and
carotid intima-media thickness:
Infections and
Vascular Disease Epidemiology Study (INVEST). Circulation
2005; 111: 57682.

the Oral

13. Joshipura KJ, Rimm CW, Douglass D. Poor oral health and

coronary heart disease. J Dent Res 1996; 75: 16316.

14. Hujoel PP, Drangsholt M, Spiekerman C, DeRouen TA.
Periodontal disease and cardiovascular disease. JAMA 2000;
284: 140610.

15. Hujoel PP, Drangsholt M, Spiekerman C, DeRouen TA. Pre-
existing cardiovascular disease and periodontitis: a follow up
study. J Dent Res 2002; 81: 18691.

16. Bahekar AA, Singh S, Saha S, Molnar J, Arora R. The
prevalence and incidence of coronary heart disease is signiﬁ-
cantly increased in periodontitis: a meta-analysis. Am Heart J
2007; 154: 8307.

17. Mustapha IZ, Debrey S, Oladubu M, Ugarte R. Markers
of systemic bacterial exposure in periodontal disease and
cardiovascular disease risk: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Periodontol 2007; 78: 2289302.

18. Humphrey LL, Fu R, Buckley DI, Freeman M, Helfand M.
Periodontal disease and coronary heart disease incidence: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Gen Intern Med 2008;
23: 207986.

19. Li L, Messas E, Batista EL Jr, Levine RA, Amar S.
Porphyromonas gingivalis infection accelerates the progression
of atherosclerosis
in a heterozygous apolipoprotein E-
deﬁcient murine model. Circulation 2002; 105: 8617.

20. Lalla E, Lamster IB, Hofmann MA, Bucciarelli L, Jerud AP,
Tucker S, et al. Oral infection with a periodontal pathogen
accelerates early atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-null mice.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2003; 23: 140511.

21. Ford PJ, Gemmell E, Timms P, Chan A, Preston FM, Seymour
GJ. Anti-P. gingivalis response correlates with atherosclerosis.
J Dent Res 2007; 86: 3540.

22. Socransky SS, Haffajee AD, Cugini MA, Smith C, Kent RL Jr.
Microbial complexes in subgingival plaque. J Clin Periodontol
1998; 25: 13444.

23. Rosan B, Lamont RJ. Dental plaque formation. Microbes

Infect 2000; 2: 1599607.

24. Lamont RJ, Jenkinson HF. Life below the gum line: pathogenic
mechanisms of Porphyromonas gingivalis. Microbiol Mol Biol
Rev 1998; 62: 124463.

25. Gemmell E, Seymour GJ. Immunoregulatory control of Th1/
Th2 cytokine proﬁles in periodontal disease. Periodontol 2000
2004; 35: 2141.

CVD and roles of oral bacteria

gingivalis, Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans and Prevotella
otella intermedia over a 5-year period: effect of a triclosan/
copolymer dentifrice. J Clin Periodontol 2003; 30: 53241.

27. Lamont RJ, Chan A, Belton CM, Izutsu KT, Vasel D,
Weinberg A. Porphyromonas gingivalis invasion of gingival
epithelial cells. Infect Immun 1995; 63: 387885.

28. Gemmell E, Yamazaki K, Seymour GJ. Destructive period-
ontitis lesions are determined by the nature of the lymphocytic
response. Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 2002; 13: 1734.

29. Gemmell E, Carter CL, Hart DN, Drysdale KE, Seymour GJ.
Antigen-presenting cells in human periodontal disease tissues.
Oral Microbiol Immunol 2002; 17: 38893.

30. Gemmell E, Sernia C, Grieco DA, Bird PS, Allen CJ, Seymour
GJ. Genetic variation in the recognition of Porphyromonas
gingivalis antigens in mice. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2001; 16:
12935.

31. Gemmell E, Bird PS, Carter CL, Drysdale KE, Seymour GJ.
Effect of Fusobacterium nucleatum on the T and B cell
responses to Porphyromonas gingivalis in a mouse model.
Clin Exp Immunol 2002; 128: 23844.

32. Milward MR, Chapple IL, Wright HJ, Millard JL, Matthews
JB, Cooper PR. Differential activation of NF-kappaB and
gene expression in oral epithelial cells by periodontal patho-
gens. Clin Exp Immunol 2007; 148: 30724.

33. Bodet C, Chandad F, Grenier D. Inﬂammatory responses of a
macrophage/epithelial cell co-culture model
to mono and
mixed infections with Porphyromonas gingivalis, Treponema
denticola, and Tannerella forsythia. Microbes Infect 2006; 8:
2735.

34. Ji S, Kim Y, Min BM, Han SH, Choi Y. Innate immune
responses of gingival epithelial cells to nonperiodontopathic
and periodontopathic bacteria. J Periodontal Res 2007; 42:
50310.

35. Grenier D. Nutritional

interactions between two suspected
periodontopathogens, Treponema denticola and Porphyro-
monas gingivalis. Infect Immun 1992; 60: 48290.

36. Yao ES, Lamont RJ, Leu SP, Weinberg A. Interbacterial
binding among strains of pathogenic and commensal oral
bacterial species. Oral Microbiol Immunol 1996; 11: 3541.

37. Saito A, Inagaki S, Kimizuka R, Okuda K, Hosaka Y,
Nakagawa T, et al. Fusobacterium nucleatum enhances invasion
of human gingival epithelial and aortic endothelial cells by
Porphyromonas gingivalis. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol
2008; 54: 34955.

38. Metzger Z, Blasbalg J, Dotan M, Weiss EI. Enhanced
attachment of Porphyromonas gingivalis to human ﬁbroblasts
mediated by Fusobacterium nucleatum. J Endod 2009; 35: 825.
39. Kesavalu L, Holt SC, Ebersole JL. Virulence of a polymicrobic
complex, Treponema denticola and Porphyromonas gingivalis,
in a murine model. Oral Microbiol Immunol 1998; 13: 3737.
40. Yoneda M, Hirofuji T, Anan H, Matsumoto A, Hamachi T,
Nakayama K, et al. Mixed infection of Porphyromonas
gingivalis and Bacteroides forsythus in a murine abscess model:
involvement of gingipains in a synergistic effect. J Periodontal
Res 2001; 36: 23743.

41. Takeda K, Akira S. Toll-like receptors in innate immunity. Int

Immunol 2005; 17: 114.

42. Netea MG, van Deuren M, Kullberg BJ, Cavaillon JM, Van
der Meer JW. Does the shape of lipid A determine the
interaction of LPS with toll-like receptors? Trends Immunol
2002; 23: 1359.

43. Hayashi J, Masaka T, Ishikawa I. Increased levels of soluble
CD14 in sera of periodontitis patients. Infect Immun 1999; 67:
41720.

26. Cullinan MP, Hamlet SM, Westerman B, Palmer JE, Faddy
MJ, Seymour GJ. Acquisition and loss of Porphyromonas

44. Pussinen PJ, Tuomisto K, Jousilahti P, Havulinna AS, Sundvall
J, Salomaa V. Endotoxemia, immune response to periodontal

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781

(page number not for citation purpose)

9

Shaneen J. Leishman et al.

pathogens, and systemic inﬂammation associate with incident
cardiovascular disease events. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
2007; 27: 14339.

45. Bascones-Martinez A, Munoz-Corcuera M, Noronha S, Mota
P, Bascones-Ilundain C, Campo-Trapero J. Host defence
mechanisms against bacterial aggression in periodontal
disease: basic mechanisms. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal
2009; 14: e6805.

46. Dixon DR, Bainbridge BW, Darveau RP. Modulation of the
innate immune response within the periodontium. Periodontol
2000 2004; 35: 5374.

47. Kinney JS, Ramseier CA, Giannobile WV. Oral ﬂuid-based
biomarkers of alveolar bone loss in periodontitis. Ann NY
Acad Sci 2007; 1098: 23051.

48. Genco RJ. Host responses in periodontal diseases: current

concepts. J Periodontol 1992; 63: 33855.

49. Ebersole JL. Humoral immune responses in gingival crevice
ﬂuid: local and systemic implications. Periodontol 2000 2003;
31: 13566.

50. Schifferle RE, Wilson ME, Levine MJ, Genco RJ. Activation
of serum complement by polysaccharide-containing antigens
of Porphyromonas gingivalis. J Periodontal Res 1993; 28: 248
54.

51. Imamura T. The role of gingipains in the pathogenesis of

periodontal disease. J Periodontol 2003; 74: 1118.

52. Potempa J, Sroka A, Imamura T, Travis J. Gingipains, the
major cysteine proteinases and virulence factors of Porphyr-
omonas gingivalis: structure, function and assembly of multi-
domain protein complexes. Curr Protein Pept Sci 2003; 4: 397
407.

53. Abe N, Kadowaki T, Okamoto K, Nakayama K, Ohishi M,
Yamamoto K. Biochemical and functional properties of lysine-
speciﬁc cysteine proteinase (Lys-gingipain) as a virulence factor
of Porphyromonas gingivalis in periodontal disease. J Biochem
1998; 123: 30512.

54. Lantz MS, Allen RD, Duck LW, Blume JL, Switalski LM,
Hook M. Identiﬁcation of Porphyromonas gingivalis compo-
nents that mediate its interactions with ﬁbronectin. J Bacteriol
1991; 173: 426370.

55. Pike RN, Potempa J, McGraw W, Coetzer TH, Travis J.
Characterization of the binding activities of proteinase-adhe-
sion complexes from Porphyromonas gingivalis. J Bacteriol
1996; 178: 287682.

56. Nakayama K, Kadowaki T, Okamoto K, Yamamoto K.
Construction and characterization of arginine-speciﬁc cysteine
proteinase (Arg-gingipain)-deﬁcient mutants of Porphyromonas
gingivalis. Evidence for
signiﬁcant contribution of Arg-
gingipain to virulence. J Biol Chem 1995; 270: 2361926.

57. Calkins CC, Platt K, Potempa J, Travis J. Inactivation of tumor
necrosis factor-alpha by proteinases (gingipains) from the
periodontal pathogen, Porphyromonas gingivalis. Implications
of immune evasion. J Biol Chem 1998; 273: 66114.

58. Banbula A, Bugno M, Kuster A, Heinrich PC, Travis J,
Potempa J. Rapid and efﬁcient inactivation of IL-6 gingipains,
lysine- and arginine-speciﬁc proteinases from Porphyromonas
gingivalis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999; 261: 598602.
59. Kadowaki T, Nakayama K, Yoshimura F, Okamoto K, Abe N,
Yamamoto K. Arg-gingipain acts as a major processing
enzyme for various cell surface proteins in Porphyromonas
gingivalis. J Biol Chem 1998; 273: 290726.

60. Oleksy A, Banbula A, Bugno M, Travis J, Potempa J.
Proteolysis of interleukin-6 receptor (IL-6R) by Porphyro-
monas gingivalis cysteine proteinases (gingipains)
inhibits
interleukin-6-mediated cell activation. Microb Pathog 2002;
32: 17381.

61. Imamura T, Pike RN, Potempa J, Travis J. Pathogenesis of
periodontitis: a major arginine-speciﬁc cysteine proteinase
from Porphyromonas gingivalis induces vascular permeability
enhancement through activation of the kallikrein/kinin path-
way. J Clin Invest 1994; 94: 3617.

62. Imamura T, Potempa J, Tanase S, Travis J. Activation of blood
coagulation factor X by arginine-speciﬁc cysteine proteinases
(gingipain-Rs) from Porphyromonas gingivalis. J Biol Chem
1997; 272: 160627.

63. Wingrove JA, DiScipio RG, Chen Z, Potempa J, Travis J, Hugli
TE. Activation of complement components C3 and C5 by
a cysteine proteinase
from Porphyromonas
(bacteroides) gingivalis. J Biol Chem 1992; 267: 189027.

(gingipain-1)

64. Ransjo M, Marklund M, Persson M, Lerner UH. Synergistic
interactions of bradykinin, thrombin, interleukin 1 and tumor
necrosis factor on prostanoid biosynthesis in human period-
ontal-ligament cells. Arch Oral Biol 1998; 43: 25360.

65. Rahman S, Bunning RA, Dobson PR, Evans DB, Chapman K,
Jones TH, et al. Bradykinin stimulates the production of
prostaglandin E2 and interleukin-6 in human osteoblast-like
cells. Biochim Biophys Acta 1992; 1135: 97102.

66. Sugawara S, Nemoto E, Tada H, Miyake K, Imamura T,
Takada H. Proteolysis of human monocyte CD14 by cysteine
proteinases (gingipains) from Porphyromonas gingivalis leading
to lipopolysaccharide hyporesponsiveness. J Immunol 2000;
165: 4118.

67. Duncan L, Yoshioka M, Chandad F, Grenier D. Loss of
lipopolysaccharide receptor CD14 from the surface of human
macrophage-like cells mediated by Porphyromonas gingivalis
outer membrane vesicles. Microb Pathog 2004; 36: 31925.

68. Tokuda M, Duncan M, Cho MI, Kuramitsu HK. Role of
Porphyromonas gingivalis protease activity in colonization of
oral surfaces. Infect Immun 1996; 64: 406773.

69. Tokuda M, Karunakaran T, Duncan M, Hamada N,
Kuramitsu H. Role of Arg-gingipain A in virulence of
Porphyromonas gingivalis. Infect Immun 1998; 66: 115966.

70. Kuramitsu H, Tokuda M, Yoneda M, Duncan M, Cho MI.
Multiple colonization defects in a cysteine protease mutant of
Porphyromonas gingivalis. J Periodontal Res 1997; 32: 1402.
71. Yoneda M, Hirofuji T, Motooka N, Anan H, Hamachi T,
Miura M, et al. Antibody responses to Porphyromonas
gingivalis infection in a murine abscess model  involvement
of gingipains and responses to re-infection. J Periodontal Res
2003; 38: 5516.

72. Kuramitsu HK. Proteases of Porphyromonas gingivalis: what

don’t they do? Oral Microbiol Immunol 1998; 13: 26370.

73. Shi Y, Ratnayake DB, Okamoto K, Abe N, Yamamoto K,
Nakayama K. Genetic analyses of proteolysis, hemoglobin
binding, and hemagglutination of Porphyromonas gingivalis.
Construction of mutants with a combination of rgpA, rgpB,
kgp, and hagA. J Biol Chem 1999; 274: 1795560.

74. McKee AS, McDermid AS, Baskerville A, Dowsett AB,
Ellwood DC, Marsh PD. Effect of hemin on the physiology
and virulence of Bacteroides gingivalis W50. Infect Immun
1986; 52: 34955.

75. Genco CA, Odusanya BM, Potempa J, Mikolajczyk-Pawlinska
J, Travis J. A peptide domain on gingipain R which confers
immunity against Porphyromonas gingivalis infection in mice.
Infect Immun 1998; 66: 410814.

76. O’Brien-Simpson NM, Paolini RA, Reynolds EC. RgpA-Kgp
peptide-based immunogens provide protection against Por-
phyromonas gingivalis challenge in a murine lesion model.
Infect Immun 2000; 68: 405563.

77. Beveridge TJ, Makin SA, Kadurugamuwa JL, Li Z. Interac-
tions between bioﬁlms and the environment. FEMS Microbiol
Rev 1997; 20: 291303.

10

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781

78. Amano A. Disruption of epithelial barrier and impairment of
cellular function by Porphyromonas gingivalis. Front Biosci
2007; 12: 396574.

79. Isogai H, Isogai E, Yoshimura F, Suzuki T, Kagota W, Takano
K. Speciﬁc inhibition of adherence of an oral strain of
Bacteroides gingivalis 381 to epithelial cells by monoclonal
antibodies against the bacterial ﬁmbriae. Arch Oral Biol 1988;
33: 47985.

80. Weinberg A, Belton CM, Park Y, Lamont RJ. Role of ﬁmbriae
in Porphyromonas gingivalis invasion of gingival epithelial cells.
Infect Immun 1997; 65: 3136.

81. Njoroge T, Genco RJ, Sojar HT, Hamada N, Genco CA. A
role for ﬁmbriae in Porphyromonas gingivalis invasion of oral
epithelial cells. Infect Immun 1997; 65: 19804.

82. Amano A, Nakagawa I, Okahashi N, Hamada N. Variations of
Porphyromonas gingivalis ﬁmbriae in relation to microbial
pathogenesis. J Periodontal Res 2004; 39: 13642.

83. Lamont RJ, Yilmaz O. In or out: the invasiveness of oral

bacteria. Periodontol 2000 2002; 30: 619.

84. Hamada S, Fujiwara T, Morishima S, Takahashi I, Nakagawa
I, Kimura S, et al. Molecular and immunological characteriza-
tion of the ﬁmbriae of Porphyromonas gingivalis. Microbiol
Immunol 1994; 38: 92130.

85. Nakagawa I, Amano A, Kimura RK, Nakamura T, Kawabata
S, Hamada S. Distribution and molecular characterization of
Porphyromonas gingivalis carrying a new type of ﬁmA gene.
J Clin Microbiol 2000; 38: 190914.

86. Nakagawa I, Amano A, Ohara-Nemoto Y, Endoh N, Morisaki
I, Kimura S, et al. Identiﬁcation of a new variant of ﬁmA gene
of Porphyromonas gingivalis and its distribution in adults and
disabled populations with periodontitis. J Periodontal Res
2002; 37: 42532.

87. Bodet C, Chandad F, Grenier D. Porphyromonas gingivalis-
induced inﬂammatory mediator proﬁle in an ex vivo human
whole blood model. Clin Exp Immunol 2006; 143: 507.

88. Perez-Chaparro PJ, Lafaurie GI, Gracieux P, Meuric V,
Tamanai-Shacoori Z, Castellanos JE, et al. Distribution of
Porphyromonas gingivalis ﬁmA genotypes in isolates from
subgingival plaque and blood sample during bacteremia.
Biomedica 2009; 29: 298306.

89. Amano A, Kuboniwa M, Nakagawa I, Akiyama S, Morisaki I,
Hamada S. Prevalence of speciﬁc genotypes of Porphyromonas
gingivalis ﬁmA and periodontal health status. J Dent Res 2000;
79: 16648.

90. Eick S, Rodel J, Einax JW, Pﬁster W. Interaction of Porphyro-
monas gingivalis with KB cells: comparison of different clinical
isolates. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2002; 17: 2018.

91. Amano A, Nakagawa I, Kataoka K, Morisaki I, Hamada S.
Distribution of Porphyromonas gingivalis strains with ﬁmA
genotypes in periodontitis patients. J Clin Microbiol 1999; 37:
142630.

92. Nakano K, Kuboniwa M, Nakagawa I, Yamamura T, Nomura
R, Okahashi N, et al. Comparison of inﬂammatory changes
caused by Porphyromonas gingivalis with distinct ﬁmA geno-
types in a mouse abscess model. Oral Microbiol Immunol
2004; 19: 2059.

93. Narayanan SK, Nagaraja TG, Chengappa MM, Stewart GC.
Leukotoxins of Gram-negative bacteria. Vet Microbiol 2002;
84: 33756.

94. Johansson A, Claesson R, Hanstrom L, Sandstrom G,
Kalfas S. Polymorphonuclear leukocyte degranulation induced
by leukotoxin from Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans.
J Periodontal Res 2000; 35: 8592.

95. Mangan DF, Taichman NS, Lally ET, Wahl SM. Lethal effects
of Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans leukotoxin on human
T lymphocytes. Infect Immun 1991; 59: 326772.

CVD and roles of oral bacteria

96. Pucar A, Milasin J, Lekovic V, Vukadinovic M, Ristic M,
Putnik S, et al. Correlation between atherosclerosis and
periodontal putative pathogenic bacterial infections in coron-
ary and internal mammary arteries. J Periodontol 2007; 78:
67782.

97. Campbell JH, Campbell GR. The cell biology of athero-
sclerosis  new developments. Aust NZ J Med 1997; 27: 497
500.

98. Libby P. Inﬂammation in atherosclerosis. Nature 2002; 420:

86874.

99. Hansson GK, Robertson AK, Soderberg-Naucler C. Inﬂam-
mation and atherosclerosis. Annu Rev Pathol 2006; 1: 297329.
100. Jawien J. New insights into immunological aspects of athero-

sclerosis. Pol Arch Med Wewn 2008; 118: 12731.

101. Nanci A, Bosshardt DD. Structure of periodontal tissues in

health and disease. Periodontol 2000 2006; 40: 1128.

102. Parahitiyawa NB, Jin LJ, Leung WK, Yam WC, Samaranayake
LP. Microbiology of odontogenic bacteremia: beyond endo-
carditis. Clin Microbiol Rev 2009; 22: 4664.

103. Kinane DF, Riggio MP, Walker KF, MacKenzie D, Shearer B.
Bacteraemia following periodontal procedures. J Clin Period-
ontol 2005; 32: 70813.

104. Forner L, Larsen T, Kilian M, Holmstrup P. Incidence of
bacteraemia after chewing, tooth brushing and scaling in
individuals with periodontal inﬂammation. J Clin Periodontol
2006; 33: 4017.

105. Crasta K, Daly CG, Mitchell D, Curtis B, Stewart D, Heitz-
Mayﬁeld LJA. Bacteraemia due to dental ﬂossing. J Clin
Periodontol 2009; 36: 32332.

106. Haraszthy VI, Zambon JJ, Trevisan M, Zeid M, Genco RJ.
Identiﬁcation of periodontal pathogens in atheromatous pla-
ques. J Periodontol 2000; 71: 155460.

107. Kozarov VI, Dorn BR, Shelburne CE, Dunn WA Jr, Progulske-
Fox A. Human atherosclerotic plaque contains viable invasive
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans and Porpyromonas gin-
givalis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2005; 25: e178.

108. Elkaim R, Dahan M, Kocgozlu L, Werner S, Kanter D, Kretz
JG, et al. The prevalence of periodontal pathogens
in
subgingival lesions, atherosclerotic plaques, and healthy blood
vessels: a preliminary study. J Periodont Res 2008; 43: 22431.
109. Ford PJ, Gemmell E, Hamlet SM, Hasan A, Walker PJ, West
MJ, et al. Cross-reactivity of GroEL antibodies with human
heat shock protein 60 and quantiﬁcation of pathogens in
atherosclerosis. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2005; 20: 296302.

110. Ford PJ, Gemmell E, Chan A, Carter CL, Walker PJ, Bird PS,
et al. Inﬂammation, heat shock proteins and periodontal
pathogens
in atherosclerosis: an immunohistologic study.
Oral Microbiol Immunol 2006; 21: 20611.

111. Nakano K, Nemoto H, Nomura R, Inaba H, Yoshioka H,
Taniguchi K, et al. Detection of oral bacteria in cardiovascular
specimens. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2009; 24: 648.

112. Gaetti-Jardim E Jr, Marcelino SL, Feitosa AC, Romito GA,
Avila-Campos MJ. Quantitative detection of periodontopathic
bacteria in atherosclerotic plaques from coronary arteries.
J Med Microbiol 2009; 58: 156875.

113. Giacona MB, Papapanou PN, Lamster IB, Rong LL, D’Agati
VD, Schmidt AM. Porphyromonas gingivalis induces its uptake
by human macrophages and promotes foam cell formation in
vitro. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2004; 241: 95101.

114. Deshpande RG, Khan MB, Genco CA. Invasion of aortic and
heart endothelial cells by Porphyromonas gingivalis. Infect
Immun 1998; 66: 533743.

115. Dorn BR, Dunn WA Jr, Progulske-Fox A. Invasion of human
coronary artery cells by periodontal pathogens. Infect Immun
1999; 67: 57928.

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781

(page number not for citation purpose)

11

Shaneen J. Leishman et al.

116. Abranches J, Zeng L, Belanger M, Rodrigues PH, Simpson-
Haidaris PJ, Akin D, et al. Invasion of human coronary artery
endothelial cells by Streptococcus mutans OMZ175. Oral
Microbiol Immunol 2009; 24: 1415.

117. Dorn BR, Dunn WA Jr, Progulske-Fox A. Porphyromonas
gingivalis trafﬁcs to autophagosomes in human coronary artery
endothelial cells. Infect Immun 2001; 69: 5698708.

118. Roth GA, Moser B, Huang SJ, Brandt JS, Huang Y,
Papapanou PN, et al. Infection with a periodontal pathogen
induces procoagulant effects in human aortic endothelial cells.
J Thromb Haemost 2006; 4: 225661.

119. Roth GA, Moser B, Roth-Walter F, Giacona MB, Harja E,
Papapanou PN, et al. Infection with periodontal pathogen
increases mononuclear cell adhesion to human aortic endo-
thelial cells. Atherosclerosis 2007; 190: 27181.

120. Roth GA, Ankersmit HJ, Brown VB, Papapanou PN, Schmidt
AM, Lalla E. Porphyromonas gingivalis infection and cell death
in human aortic endothelial cells. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2007;
272: 10613.

121. Weyrich AS, Zimmerman GA. Platelets: signaling cells in the

immune continuum. Trends Immunol 2004; 25: 48995.

122. Kerrigan SW, Jakubovics NS, Keane C, Maguire P, Wynne K,
Jenkinson HF, et al. Role of Streptococcus gordonii surface
proteins SspA/SspB and Hsa in platelet
function. Infect
Immun 2007; 75: 57407.

123. Fitzgerald JR, Foster TJ, Cox D. The interaction of bacterial
pathogens with platelets. Nat Rev Microbiol 2006; 4: 44557.
124. Kerrigan SW, Cox D. Platelet-bacterial interactions. Cell Mol

Life Sci 2010; 67: 51323.

125. Erickson PR, Herzberg MC. The Streptococcus sanguis platelet
aggregation-associated protein. J Biol Chem 1993; 268: 16469.
126. Plummer C, Wu H, Kerrigan SW, Meade G, Cox D, Douglas
CWI. A serine-rich glycoprotein of Streptococcus sanguis
mediates adhesion to platelets via GPIb. Br J Haematol 2005;
129: 1019.

127. Takahashi Y, Ruhl S, Yoon JW, Sandberg AL, Cisar JO.
Adhesion of biridans group streptococci
to sialic acid-,
galactose-, and N-acetylgalactosamine-containing receptors.
Oral Microbiol Immunol 2002; 17: 25762.

128. Taniguchi N, Nakano K, Nomura R, Naka S, Kojima A,
Matsumoto M, et al. Defect of glucosyltransferases reduces
platelet aggregation activity of Streptococcus mutans: analysis
of clinical strains isolated from oral cavities. Arch Oral Biol
2010; 55: 4106.

129. Sharma A, Novak EK, Sojar HT, Swank RT, Kuramitsu HK,
Genco RJ. Porphyromonas gingivalis platelet aggregation
activity: outer membrane vesicles are potent activators of
murine platelets. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2000; 15: 3936.

130. Herzberg MC, MacFarlane GD, Liu P, Erickson PR. In:
Molecular pathogenesis of periodontal diseases. Washington,
DC: ASM Press; 1994.

131. Holt SC, Bramanti TE. Factors in virulence expression and
their role in periodontal disease pathogenesis. Crit Rev Oral
Biol Med 1991; 2: 177281.

132. Naito M, Sakai E, Shi Y, Ideguchi H, Shoji M, Ohara N, et al.
Porphyromonas gingivalis-induced platelet aggregation in
plasma depends on Hgp44 adhesion but not Rgp proteinase.
Mol Microbiol 2006; 59: 15267.

133. Ridker PM, Hennekens CH, Buring JE, Rifai N. C-reactive
protein and other markers of inﬂammation in the prediction of
cardiovascular disease in women. N Engl J Med 2000; 342:
83643.

134. Ridker PM, Rifai N, Pfeffer M, Sacks F, Lepage S, Braunwald
E. Elevation of tumor necrosis factor-alpha and increased risk
of recurrent coronary events after myocardial
infarction.
Circulation 2000; 101: 214953.

135. Ridker PM, Rifai N, Stampfer MJ, Hennekens CH. Plasma
concentration of interleukin-6 and the risk of future myo-
cardial infarction among apparently healthy men. Circulation
2000; 101: 176772.

136. Ridker PM, Rifai N, Rose L, Buring JE, Cook NR. Compar-
ison of C-reactive protein and low-density lipoprotein choles-
terol levels in the prediction of ﬁrst cardiovascular events. N
Engl J Med 2002; 347: 155765.

137. Hwang SJ, Ballantyne CM, Sharrett AR, Smith LC, Davis CE,
Gotto AM Jr, et al. Circulating adhesion molecules VCAM-1,
ICAM-1, and E-selectin in carotid atherosclerosis and incident
coronary heart disease cases: the Atherosclerosis Risk In
Communities (ARIC) Study. Circulation 1997; 96: 421925.

138. Stoll LL, Denning GM, Weintraub NL. Potential role of
edotoxin as a proinﬂammatory mediator in atherosclerosis.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2004; 24: 222736.

139. Slade GD, Offenbacher S, Beck JD, Heiss G, Pankow JS.
Acute-phase inﬂammatory response to periodontal disease in
the US population. J Dent Res 2000; 79: 4957.

140. Amar S, Gokce N, Morgan S, Loukideli M, Van Dyke TE,
Vita JA. Periodontal disease is associated with brachial artery
endothelial dysfunction and systemic inﬂammation. Arterios-
cler Thromb Vasc Biol 2003; 23: 12459.

141. Ebersole JE, Machen RL, Steffen MJ, Willmann DE. Systemic
acute-phase reactants, C-reactive protein and haptoglobin, in
adult periodontitis. Clin Exp Immunol 1997; 107: 34752.

142. Noack B, Genco RJ, Trevisan M, Grossi S, Zambon JJ, De
Nardin E. Periodontal
infections contribute to elevated
systemic C-reactive protein level. J Periodontol 2001; 72:
12217.

143. Loos BG, Craandijk J, Hoek FJ, Wertheim-van Dillen PM, van
der Velden U. Elevation of systemic markers related to
cardiovascular diseases in the peripheral blood of periodontitis
patients. J Periodontol 2000; 71: 152834.

144. Nakajima T, Honda T, Domon H, Okui T, Kajita K, Ito H
et al. Periodontitis-associated up-regulation of systemic in-
ﬂammatory mediator level may increase the risk of coronary
heart disease. J Periodontal Res 2010; 45: 11622.

145. Nibali L, D’Aiuto F, Grifﬁths G, Patel K, Suvan J, Tonetti MS.
Severe periodontitis is associated with systemic inﬂammation
and a dysmetabolic status: a case-control study. J Clin Period-
ontol 2007; 34: 9317.

146. Ide M, Jagadev D, Coward PY, Crook M, Barclay GR, Wilson
RF. The short-term effects of treatment of chronic period-
ontitis on circulating levels of endotoxin, C-reactive protein,
tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and interleukin-6. J Periodontol
2004; 75: 4208.

147. D’Auito F, Parkar M, Tonetti MS. Acute effects of periodontal
therapy on bio-markers of vascular health. J Clin Periodontol
2007; 34: 1249.

148. Tonetti MS, D’Aiuto F, Nibali L, Donald A, Storry C, Parkar
M, et al. Treatment of periodontitis and endothelial function.
N Engl J Med 2007; 356: 91120.

149. Elter JR, Hinderliter AL, Offenbacher S, Beck JD, Caughey
M, Brodala N, et al. The effects of periodontal therapy on
vascular endothelial function: a pilot trial. Am Heart J 2006;
151: e1e47.

150. Yamazaki K, Honda T, Oda T, Ueki-Maruyama K, Nakajima
T, Yoshie H, et al. Effect of periodontal treatment on the
C-reactive protein and proinﬂammatory cytokine levels in
Japanese periodontitis patients. J Periodontal Res 2005; 40:
538.

151. Buhlin K, Hultin M, Norderyd O, Persson L, Pockley AG,
Pussinen PJ, et al. Periodontal
inﬂuences risk
markers for atherosclerosis in patients with severe period-
ontitis. Atherosclerosis 2009; 206: 51822.

treatment

12

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781

152. D’Auito F, Parkar M, Nibali L, Suvan J, Lessem J, Tonetti M.
in traditional and
Periodontal
novel cardiovascular risk factors: results from a randomised
controlled clinical trial. Am Heart J 2006; 151: 97784.

infections cause changes

153. Vidal F, Figueredo CM, Cordovil I, Fischer RG. Periodontal
therapy reduces plasma levels of
interleukin-6, C-reactive
protein, and ﬁbrinogen in patients with severe periodontitis
and refractory arterial hypertension. J Periodontol 2009; 80:
78691.

154. Hussain Bokhari SA, Khan AA, Tatakis DN, Azhar M, Hanif
M, Izhar M. Non-surgical periodontal therapy lowers serum
inﬂammatory markers: a pilot study. J Periodontol 2009; 80:
157480.

155. Behle JH, Sedaghatfar MH, Demmer RT, Wolf DL, Celenti R,
Kebschull M, et al. Heterogeneity of systemic inﬂammatory
responses to periodontal therapy. J Clin Periodontol 2009; 36:
28794.

156. D’Aiuto F, Parkar M, Brett PM, Ready D, Tonetti MS. Gene
polymorphisms in pro-inﬂammatory cytokines are associated
with systemic inﬂammation in patients with severe periodontal
infections. Cytokine 2004; 28: 2934.

157. Means RT. Hepcidin and cytokines in anaemia. Hematology

2004; 9: 35762.

158. Hutter JW, van der Velden U, Varoufaki A, Huffels RA, Hoek
FJ, Loos BG. Lower numbers of erythrocytes and lower levels
of hemoglobin in periodontitis patients compared to control
subjects. J Clin Periodontol 2001; 28: 9306.

159. Pradeep AR, Sharma A, Arjun Raju P. Anemia of chronic
disease and chronic periodontitis: does periodontal therapy
have effect on anemic status. J Periodontol 2010: aheadofprint.
160. Taylor B, Toﬂer G, Morel-Kopp MC, Carey H, Carter T,
Elliott M, et al. The effect of initial treatment of periodontitis
on systemic markers of inﬂammation and cardiovascular risk:
a randomized controlled trial. Eur J Oral Sci 2010; 118: 3506.
161. Paraskevas S, Huizinga JD, Loos BG. A systematic review and
meta-analyses on C-reactive protein in relation to period-
ontitis. J Clin Periodontol 2008; 35: 27790.

162. Wick G, Perschinka H, Xu Q. Autoimmunity and athero-

sclerosis. Am Heart J 1999; 138: s4449.

163. Polla BS. A role for heat shock proteins in inﬂammation?

Immunol Today 1988; 9: 1347.

164. Fink AL. Chaperone-mediated protein folding. Physiol Rev

1999; 79: 4259.

165. Kauffman S. Heat shock proteins and the immune response.

Immunol Today 1990; 11: 12936.

166. Perschinka H, Mayr M, Millonig G, Mayerl C, van der Zee R,
Morrison SG, et al. Cross-reactive B-cell epitopes of microbial
and human heat shock protein 60/65 in atherosclerosis.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2003; 23: 10605.

167. Zhu J, Quyyumi AA, Rott D, Csako G, Wu H, Halcox J, et al.
Antibodies to human heat-shock protein 60 are associated
with the presence and severity of coronary artery disease.
Circulation 2001; 103: 10715.

168. Metzler B, Schett G, Kleindienst R, van der Zee R, Ottenhoff
T, Hajeer A, et al. Epitope speciﬁcity of anti-heat shock protein
65/60 serum antibodies in atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb
Vasc Biol 1997; 17: 53641.

169. Mayr M, Metzler B, Kiechl S, Willeit J, Schett G, Xu Q, et al.
Endothelial cytotoxicity mediated by serum antibodies to heat-
shock proteins of Escherichia coli and Chlamydia pneumoniae:
immune reactions to heat-shock proteins as a possible link
between infection and atherosclerosis. Circulation 1999; 99:
15606.

CVD and roles of oral bacteria

170. Ellins E, Shamaei-Tousi A, Steptoe A, Donald A, O’Meagher
S, Halcox J, et al. The relationship between carotid stiffness
and circulation levels of heat shock protein 60 in middle-aged
men and women. J Hypertens 2008; 26: 238992.

171. Pockley AG, Wu R, Lemne C, Kiessling R, de Faire U,
Frostegard J. Circulating heat shock protein 60 is associated
with early cardiovascular disease. Hypertension 2000; 36: 3037.
172. Xu Q, Wick G. The role of heat shock proteins in protection
and pathophysiology of the arterial wall. Mol Med Today
1996; 2: 3729.

173. Welch WJ. Heat shock proteins functioning as molecular
chaperones: their roles in normal and stressed cells. Phil Trans
R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 1993; 339: 32733.

174. Goulhen F, Grenier D, Mayrand D. Oral microbial heat-shock
proteins and their potential contributions to infections. Crit
Rev Oral Biol Med 2003; 14: 399412.

175. Maeda H, Miyamoto M, Hongyo H, Nagai A, Kurihara H,
Muryama Y. Heat shock protein 60 (GroEL) from Porphyr-
omonas gingivalis: molecular cloning and sequence analysis of
its gene and puriﬁcation of the recombinant protein. FEMS
Microbiol Lett 1994; 119: 12935.

176. Tabeta K, Yamazaki K, Hotokezaka H, Yoshie H, Hara K.
Elevated humoral immune response to heat shock protein 60
(hsp60) family in periodontitis patients. Clin Exp Immunol
2000; 120: 28593.

177. Yamazaki K, Ohsawa Y, Tabeta K, Ito H, Ueki K, Oda T, et al.
Accumulation of human heat shock protein 60-reactive T cells
in the gingival tissues of periodontitis patients. Infect Immun
2002; 70: 2492501.

178. Ford P, Gemmell E, Walker P, West M, Cullinan M, Seymour
G. Characterisation of heat shock protein-speciﬁc T cells in
atherosclerosis. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 2005; 12: 25967.

179. Yamazaki K, Ueki-Maruayama K, Honda T, Nakajima T,
Seymour GJ. Effect of periodontal treatment on the serum
antibody levels to heat shock proteins. Clin Exp Immunol
2004; 135: 47882.

180. George J, Shoenfeld Y, Afek A, Gilburd B, Keren P, Shaish A,
et al. Enhanced fatty streak formation in C57BL/6 mice by
immunisation with heat shock protein-65. Arterioscler Thromb
Vasc Biol 1999; 19: 50510.

181. Foteinos G, Afzal AR, Mandal K, Jahangiri M, Xu Q. Anti-
heat shock protein 60 autoantibodies induce atherosclerosis
in apolipoprotein E-deﬁcient mice via endothelial damage.
Circulation 2005; 112: 120613.

182. van Puijvelde GHM, van Es T, van Wanrooij EJA, Habets
KLL, deVos P, van der Zee R, et al. Induction of oral tolerance
to HSP60 or and HSP60-peptide activates T cell regulation and
reduces atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2007;
27: 267783.

183. Friedewald VE, Kornman KS, Beck JD, Genco R, Goldﬁne A,
Libby P, et al. The American Journal of Cardiology and
Journal of Periodontology editors’ consensus: periodontitis
and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. J Periodontol 2009;
80: 102132.

*Shaneen J. Leishman
The University of Queensland
Level 1, Clinical Sciences Building
The Prince Charles Hospital
Chermside, QLD 4032, Australia
Tel: 61 7 3139 4792
Fax: 61 7 3359 2173
Email: s.leishman@uq.edu.au

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2010, 2: 5781 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v2i0.5781

(page number not for citation purpose)

13

