æHOST-PATHOGEN INTERACTIONS IN BACTERIA

The gut microbiome: scourge,
sentinel or spectator?

Agata Korecka and Velmurugesan Arulampalam*

Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

The gut microbiota consists of trillions of prokaryotes that reside in the intestinal mucosa. This long-
established commensalism indicates that these microbes are an integral part of the eukaryotic host. Recent
research findings have implicated the dynamics of microbial function in setting thresholds for many
physiological parameters. Conversely, it has been convincingly argued that dysbiosis, representing microbial
imbalance, may be an important underlying factor that contributes to a variety of diseases, inside and outside
the gut. This review discusses the latest findings, including enterotype classification, changes brought on by
dysbiosis, gut inflammation, and metabolic mediators in an attempt to underscore the importance of the
gut microbiota for human health. A cautiously optimistic idea is taking hold, invoking the gut microbiota
as a medium to track, target and treat a plethora of diseases.

Keywords: gut enterotypes; microbiome; metabolism; inﬂammation; diseases

In 1976, Micheal Andrews published a book entitled

‘The life that lives on Man’ (1), in that he describes
with graphic illustrations the array of multicellular
life that thrives on the human being. Representing ticks,
mites, and other ectoparasites, Andrews’ work reminds
us that we and these inhabitants have coevolved and for
most parts live peacefully together. They are our ‘intimate
companions’.

Within this category of close friends is the multitude
of bacteria that live in our gastrointestinal (GI) tract. In
humans, the GI tract (a.k.a. the gut) becomes rapidly
colonized upon birth, as do other parts of the body.
Microbial presence in the GI tract has been much studied
not least because the mucosal surface of the human gut
affords more than 100 m2 of inhabitable space. The gut
microbial community is one of the most densely popu-
lated, and the abundance and identities of bacterial
species living in the GI tract are now being charted
after being pursued for decades (Fig. 1) (2). The Human
Microbiome Project has already highlighted the identifi-
cation of approximately 30% of
the known human
gut microflora. A close second at roughly 26% is the
resident microflora in the oral cavity (3). All
in all,
humans harbor trillions of bacteria living in tolerant
symbiosis. These bacteria, collectively known as micro-
biota, contribute to an array of host physiological
processes. The constituents of the microbiota, ranging
from bacterial genes to proteins and metabolites, are
collectively referred to as the microbiome. We, humans,

in part governed by
are effectively superorganisms,
our resident microbiota. Symbiosis, commensalism, and
mutualism prevail in this hostmicrobe intercourse, and
discordance in this marriage is frequently detrimental
to the host.

Changes in the gut flora (dysbiosis) and the response
of the host to the microbiome have been linked to
diseases such as obesity and chronic inflammation. Being
naturally well placed,
the gut microbiota has been
postulated to contribute to energy harvest, a process
that occurs in the intestine. We will discuss the complexity
surrounding the role of the gut flora in the current
obesity epidemic. This review will also aim to explore
the latest findings that place the microbiota within reach
of the classical hostmicrobe defense and gut home-
ostasis. Additional insight into other physiological para-
meters that may benefit from microbial input will be
briefly highlighted.

Microbial composition and functions in the
GI tract
In recent years, concerted efforts to identify, describe,
and quantify the bacterial communities of the mamma-
lian gastrointestinal tract have begun to bear fruit. Many
international consortia and collaborations have been
established to answer the question: ‘who is there?’ Hot
on the heels of this is the query: ‘what are they doing
there?’ This second, crucial, and rather more complex
question is yet to be satisfactorily tackled, but fascinating

Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012. # 2012 Agata Korecka and Velmurugesan Arulampalam This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-Noncommercial 3.0 Unported License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), permitting all non-commercial use, distribution, and
Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

1

(page number not for citation purpose)

Agata Korecka and Velmurugesan Arulampalam

Common
bacteria

Lactobacillus
Streptococcus
Helicobacter
Peptostreptococcus

Abundance

cfu / ml

Function and

pH

Stomach

1-102

Doudenum

101 to 103

HCl secretion
Macromolecule
digestion
pH2

Main digestion.
Absorption of
mono-
saccharides,
amino acids, fatty
acids and water
pH4 to pH5a

Bile acids,
vit B12 and
water
absorption
pH7

Streptococcus
Lactobacillus

Jejunum

103 to 104

Bacteroides
Clostridium
Streptococcus
Actinomycinaea

Bacteroides
Clostridium
Bifidobacterium
Enterobacteriaceae
Eubacteria

Ileum

107 to 109

Caecum

Proximal

Colon

1011 to 1012

Distal Colon

Rectum

Fig. 1. A schematic representation of the lower intestinal tract showing common bacteria found in various parts of the GI
tract and bacterial abundance in cfu/ml. Main intestinal functions and pH values found along the GI tract are also shown.
(cfu  colony forming unit).

glimpses of what lies ahead have been caught. The
Human Microbiome Project in the USA and the Meta-
genomics of the Human Intestinal Tract (MetaHIT)
consortium in Europe are only two of
the major
initiatives with the purpose of characterizing the micro-
bial communities that inhabit multiple sites in the human
body (skin, nasal, oral, urogenital, and intestinal flora)
and to look for correlations between the changes in
the microbiome and prevalence of diseases. Collabora-
tions to investigate if there is a common core of bacterial
species shared among all or the majority of human beings
have also been initiated, resulting in some interesting
paradigms.

In the uterus, the developing fetus is believed to be
completely devoid of bacterial flora. The same cannot be
said of bacterial influence on the growing fetus. Upon
birth, the intestinal tract of the infant begins to be
colonized, ultimately creating a rich and diverse micro-
environment. The microbiota is first acquired in the
birth canal during delivery and then through breast milk.

Fecal microbial profiles of
infants show a striking
similarity to maternal vaginal and breast milk bacterial
profiles (4). During the course of early childhood,
microbial composition changes with age and diet (5, 6).
From the evolutionary point of view, the character of
gut microbiota strongly depends on the main nutritional
source, separating bacterial profiles of omnivores, carni-
vores, and herbivores (7)

Several groups have been studying the convergence
and variability of the human gut microbiome. These
studies were normally performed on a small group of
healthy individuals. However, even though the sample
size has been minimal, there were some major accom-
plishments, setting the scene for further large-scale
metagenomic approaches. One initial observation was
that the human gut flora belongs mainly to only two
phyla  Firmicutes (mostly represented by Clostridia) and
Bacteroidetes, with a smaller representation of bacteria
belonging to Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria (8). The
second observation brought about
the discovery of

2

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

is

that

interesting is

The composition of

Archaea, mostly represented by the methanogenic
Methanobrevibacter smithii (8, 9). M. smithi facilitates
the lower
fermentation by reducing the acidicity of
intestine. What
the diversity
of Archaea is but a fraction of the expansiveness of
the bacterial species colonizing the gut. Nevertheless, it
has been argued that Archaea may yet contribute to
the health status of the human gut, due to the unique
nature of their metabolic prowess (10).
the bacterial

flora seems to
strongly depend on the environment and the maternal
input during delivery and upon breast feeding. In hu-
mans, members of the same family were shown to have
bacterial communities that were more similar to each
other than to unrelated individuals (11). Moreover, this
feature was host genotype independent because there was
no significant difference detected in the degree of
similarity between samples collected from mono- and
dizigotic twins. This likely suggests that the environment
and maternal flora, rather than genetic factors alone,
have greater impact on establishing bacterial commu-
nities in a new individual. This observation confirmed the
statement that the largest amount of variability between
the gut bacterial flora could be explained by intersubject
differences (8).

the human microbiome, while at

Recent second generation, high throughput studies have
revealed more details about the human bacterial commu-
nities. One major study specifically aimed at assessing
whether a common bacterial core shared by all or at
least a majority of humans could be determined (12).
Fecal material collected from a large cohort of indivi-
duals in different countries was subjected to metagenomic
analysis. The bacterial groups that were present in the
samples in vast numbers were Bacteroidetes and Dorea/
Eubacterium/Ruminococcus. Only 18 species were present
in all individuals examined, while 57 species were seen
in more than 90% of samples and around 50% shared
75 species. Although these numbers are higher than
routinely observed, they are indicative of the diversity
of
the same time
emphasizing the extent of the interindividual differences.
To obtain a better picture of the role or function of
the bacterial communities, a handle on bacterial gene
expression was obviously necessary. Failing this, con-
certed efforts have been made to first identify genes that
are encoded by intestinal microbiota and to place their
relevance within the context of gut function. More than
3 million open reading frames (ORF) of bacterial genes
have been, thus,
identified, potentially coding for as
many genes. However, the majority of these genes could
only be found in very few samples, again confirming
the huge variability between individuals. Only around
300,000 genes were found in more than half of the
individuals queried, denoting commonly shared micro-
bial genes. Each individual
subject carried around

Governance of host traits by gut flora

500,000 bacterially encoded genes, among which the
majority were rare genes, shared by less than half of the
group sampled (12). Around 2.5% of the microbially
encoded genes could be assigned to the functional group
of enzymes involved in carbohydrate metabolism, and
again these sets of genes were more similar within
individuals of the same family (11). Attention has also
been drawn to the minimal gut microbiome  genes that
are present in most bacteria and code for functions
that are necessary for a bacterium to survive in the gut.
This set of genes can be divided into housekeeping genes
(amino acid synthesis, central carbon metabolism, and
protein complexes such as RNA/DNA polymerases) and
those involved in gut-specific functions (fermentation
and adhesion). However,
large portions of the ORF/
genes were of unknown functions (12). On the other
hand, efforts have been made to identify the minimal gut
metagenome coding for functions involved in the home-
ostasis of the whole ecosystem, which are present in most
individual host samples. Most of these common bacterial
genes are involved in the digestion of complex sugars and
their subsequent fermentation. These genes were coded
not by the most abundant bacteria but rather by species
present in low number, suggesting that even a relatively
small bacterial group might be crucial for the establish-
ment of a well
functioning gut, as exemplified by
Archaea. One must, however, note that the minimal gut
microbiome and minimal gut metagenome are not
mutually exclusive, and there are many genes that will
belong to both groups, being necessary both for the
survival of the bacterium as well as for gut function. A
higher degree of redundancy at the gene level rather than
taxonomic level suggests that the core microbiome should
exhibit shared bacterial functions that need to operate to
ensure survival and successful symbiosis in the gut (11).
In a more recent study, inching closer to marrying
microbial profiles and defined functions, Arumugam
et al. (2011) have proposed a relatively new concept in
the classification of the gut microbiome (13). In this
study, using stool samples representing different ethni-
cities, countries, and continents, the authors chanced
on a perplexingly simple finding: despite a large and
dynamic bacterial community, the combination of the
microbes in each individual appeared to be systematically
organized into clusters termed enterotypes. Even more
surprising was that only three enterotypes were identified
based on different clusters of bacterial species. Each
had varied but defined functional profiles arising from
these clusters. A unique set of properties have been
assigned to each enterotype, notably that there is no
geographical demarcation, and further, no correlation
between presence of a given enterotype with sex, age, or
body mass index (BMI) could be shown. The three
enterotypes can be identified and viewed on various
levels  prevalence of bacteria, methods of harvesting

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

(page number not for citation purpose)

3

Agata Korecka and Velmurugesan Arulampalam

energy, and overrepresentation of certain enzymatic
pathways. For instance, enterotype 1 is dominated by
Bacteroides that derive energy mostly from fermentation
of sugars and is enriched in genes coding for biotin
biosynthesis. The second enterotype is driven by Pre-
votella and can be characterized by enrichment of genes
coding for thiamine biosynthesis and harvesting energy
from biodegradation of mucin glycoproteins. Enterotype
3 is mostly enriched in Ruminococcus, also known to be
able to degrade mucins. This enterotype is, however,
enriched in genes coding heme biosynthesis in contrast
to the Prevotella enterotype. The phylogenetic structure
in this instance appears to be indicative of specific
functional properties (summarized in Fig. 2). The con-
temporary concept of enterotypes was given a boost
recently when another study independently confirmed the
existence of
two enterotypes in a population of 98
individuals (6). The study further found that the enter-
otype was associated with long-term diet as shown by
transient feeding experiments. Hence, although signifi-
cant changes
rapidly
on dietary change, no temporary shifts in enterotypes
are forthcoming, that is the enterotype does not seem
to budge easily.

in the microbiota can occur

The properties governing the evolution and stabiliza-
tion of the enterotypes remain to be discovered. The
role of the individual’s immune system, nutritional input
during early childhood,
lifestyle, and the exposure to
other gut microbial ecologies during the formative
years of the microbiome may play a role in the establish-
ment of the individual’s enterotype. The use of genetically

identical
individuals (twin registries), patient cohorts,
and materials collected from longitudinal studies may
aid in answering some of these queries. Finally, although
exciting, the enterotype postulate does require further,
robust proof for universal acceptance and use. It is
altogether heartening to see that the findings of this
study do not preclude the existence of additional
enterotypes.

A word of caution
The results obtained from analyzing the bacterial com-
munities of the human gut and their roles in host
physiology suggest transience in the gut microbiota,
mechanisms of which remain to be discovered (4, 6).
The 16S RNA-based methods of identification still have a
number of limitations including incomplete coverage of
the sequenced gene fragments and problems of correct
alignment to known bacterial genomes. One predictable
problem in trying to fuse function and identity is of
course aligning the bacterial presence with respective
gene expression patterns. This conundrum has yet to be
seriously tackled, although limited steps to redress this
problem are underway. Gosalbes et al.
in a
metatranscriptomic study of 10 volunteers found micro-
bial mRNA expression to have a stable representation
of genes involved in nutrient processing, energy harvest,
and biosynthesis of cellular components. Lipid and
amino acid metabolism were poorly reflected in the
expression pattern. Finally, this study also found expres-
sion of small RNAs that may have higher regulatory
properties. Although in no way conclusive, this study

(2011)

Gut Microbiota / Microbiome

1

2

3

Enterotypes

Enterotype-

specific

Common

M
i
c
r
o
b
o
m
e

i

Common Essential Functions

Enterotype specific functions

Host Response

Fig. 2. The human gut ﬂora has recently been classiﬁed as belonging to one of three different clusters termed enterotypes. This
diagram postulates that properties of the microbiome unique to each enterotype (hatched-hexagon, hatched-triangle and
hatched-rhombus) give rise to enterotype-speciﬁc effects. Each enterotype likely also harbors common essential functions that
may then facilitate bacterial survival in the gut. Both enterotype-speciﬁc and common functions can collectively impact on host
response.

4

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

highlights an additional criterion of gut health assess-
ment to complement with the concept of enterotype
that
the metagenomic
level (14).

is presently available only at

To facilitate rapid, easy, and non-invasive procurement
of samples, fecal material is generally used in microbiota
profiling. In such studies, the fecal microbiota is used to
infer the entire gut microflora, and the lack of informa-
tion about
the potential difference between specific
anatomical sites and viability of the bacteria, although
glaringly obvious, is usually ignored. One very prudent
step in trying to determine ‘active’ microbiota composi-
tion has been to compare microbial communities residing
on intestinal mucosal surfaces with those found in the
feces. The conclusions from such studies point toward
variabilities in microbial composition between sample
sites, indicating that looking at bacterial communities in
the fecal sample may not be as representative for the gut
microbiome as we would like to see it (8).

The results obtained from fecal-derived studies have,
nevertheless, given added credence to the long-held view
that different physiological properties may be influenced
by different microbial manifestations, for example varied
microbiomes or enterotypes. This may lend itself to some
plasticity in the bacterial clusters, while retaining core
enzymatic and biochemical functions that will reflect the
individual enterotypes. The current definition of enter-
otypes will no doubt undergo further refinement over the
next few years. This is likely to provide a better picture
of microbial properties that impact on health status,
xenobiotic, and nutritional metabolism and perhaps act
as an indicator of disease susceptibilities. Ideally, this
information may in the future aid the choice of preferred
therapeutic modules for selected diseases. Although our
current knowledge of enterotypes is far from complete,
the potential uses of this new microbiome classifica-
tion are tantalizing and set a standard to which the
disease-associated bacterial flora or microbiome may be
compared.

Microbiota and its impact on host metabolism
Nutritional metabolism and xenobiotic metabolism are
indispensable cornerstones of survival. The former is a
program to extract, preserve, and build energy reserves,
whereas the latter will identify and eliminate elements
detrimental to the long-term survival of the organism. In
superorganisms such as ourselves (and other eukaryotes),
the resident microbiota is able to influence both types of
metabolic programs. Here, we would like to discuss the
current conundrums facing researchers exploring the
microbial basis of adipocity. We think that it is wise to
discuss the phenomenal progress made thus far, and
emphasize the legitimate concerns that still plague the
interpretation of the results.

Governance of host traits by gut flora

The role of the microbiota in regulation of host energy
balance and metabolism can be studied at various levels.
By introducing a semi-synthetic high fat diet (HFD),
containing a large amount of fat as well as sugars, one
can induce weight gain and subsequent development of
metabolic diseases (1517). The composition of
the
bacterial flora can then be monitored simultaneously
with changes in the animal’s body weight. One very
powerful tool to address this question is germ-free mice
raised in an environment completely devoid of bacteria.
By simply comparing the physiology of germ-free mice
with that of conventionally raised animals, one can
obtain useful information about how bacteria can shape
host metabolism. More interrogative methods rely on
using germ-free mice that have been colonized with one
specific species of bacteria (monocolonization), a whole
group of bacteria, or the entire bacterial flora isolated
from conventionally raised animals (coventionalization).
Experiments have shown that germ-free animals seem
to be protected from diet-induced obesity (18). However,
this protective effect was later shown to be strongly
dependent on the sugar compositions, that is type of
sugar of these diets, not just the amount of fat-derived
calories (19). This may well be because germ-free animals
lack the bacterial enzymes needed to digest polysacchar-
ides, leading, therefore, to a lower calorie intake. Com-
plex polysaccharides are processed in the gut and
fermenting microbes produce short-chain fatty acids
(SCFAs). Butyrate, propionate, and acetate are SCFAs
that can be directly used by colonocytes as an energy
source or be further transported to the liver where they
can be used as substrates for lipid synthesis (20, 21). The
levels of SCFA can be measured directly in the caecum
but more often than not fecal material is used because it
is readily available. However, one must remember that
neither ceacal nor feacal levels of SCFAs are necessarily
true indicators of the amounts produced in the gut
because they are continuously used and absorbed by
colonocytes. Genes involved in SCFA synthesis were
identified in several metagenomic screenings as being
overrepresented and highly abundant in the gut flora,
strongly suggesting that carbohydrate fermentation is one
of the most conserved and important functions of the gut
microbiome (9, 12). Genes governing SCFA biosynthesis
were also shown to be stably represented in at least one
metatranscriptomic analyses (14). Given these observa-
tions, a series of experiments were performed to show
that the ability of carbohydrate fermentation together
with the production of SCFAs was linked to induction
of obesity. When germ-free mice were colonized either by
whole bacterial flora (22) or by saccharolitic fermenting
bacteria such as Bacteroidetes thetaiotamicron together
with M. smithii, which facilitates fermentation (23),
an increase in body weight and adiposity was observed.
The effect of fermenters on host adiposity was strongly

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

(page number not for citation purpose)

5

Agata Korecka and Velmurugesan Arulampalam

reduced in mice lacking the major SCFA receptor,
Gpr41/ (G-protein coupled receptor 41), hence sug-
gesting a link between SCFA producer and host cell
signaling (23). In other studies, introduction of HFD in
conventionally raised animals was accompanied by a
shift toward fermenters in gut flora. This manifested
as the appearance of bacterial genes taking part in
absorption,
transportation, and utilization of simple
sugars as well as polysaccharide fermentation leading
to SCFA production. The authors then referred to this
phenomenon as an ‘obesity-associated microbiome with
increased capacity for energy harvest’ (24). Animals on
HFD had a microbial community that was characterized
by a general decrease in microbial diversity and a
phylogenetic shift from Bacteroidetes toward Firmicutes
(24). This could further be attributed to an extensive
bloom of one of the families within Firmicutes, namely
Mollicutes, belonging to Erysipelotrichaceae (25, 19).
Here, it appears that noticeable phylogenetics shifts need
not be a result of changes of many different species but
rather the selective overgrowth of one or two members.

The change in the proportional abundance of two
major bacterial phyla was then confirmed in another set
of experiments. However, in this instance, although the
obese mice, as before, had more Firmicutes, the levels of
fecal SCFAs were not significantly different (26). Intrigu-
ingly, one study showing a decrease in fecal SCFA
content in obese mice, compared to lean ones, has also
been published (19). These observations are puzzling and
have,
thus, been unsatisfactorily addressed. A more
detailed approach to determine the pathways and routes
of SCFA absorption and use in these mouse models
would shed more light on the relationship between HFD,
SCFA, and the microbiome.

One of the most intensely studied models of obesity
and metabolic syndrome are animals with disrupted
leptin signaling. This is achieved in two ways, either by
using mice lacking leptin receptor (lep/ mice) or by
deleting the gene for the hormone itself (ob/ob mice).
Leptin is crucial for the regulation of food intake (i.e. it
induces satiety). Both genotypes of
leptin signalling
deficiency are characterized by uncontrolled food intake
that results in morbidly increased body weight and
development of metabolic problems (27, 28). Comparison
of intestinal microbiota compositions of ob/ob mice and
their lean wild-type littermates revealed a decrease in
Bacteroidetes and a corresponding increase in Firmicutes
in obese animals, accompanied by a general decline in
microbial diversity in this group (29). This shift was
probably responsible for the observed increase in abun-
dance of bacterial genes involved in sugar metabolism in
another study (24). It is tempting to speculate that the
increased food intake in those animals favored coloniza-
tion by bacteria that had a higher metabolic capacity to
extract energy, thanks to which both host and microbiota

can benefit from otherwise lost calories. Interestingly, the
phenotype was somewhat transferable: wild-type germ-
free mice colonized with flora from ob/ob mice (24)
as well as mice that received HFD (25) were better at
storing fat compared to those colonized with a normal
flora.

Apart from effects on host metabolism arising through
changes in the gut microbial community or the abun-
dance of metabolites such as short chain fatty acids, the
microbiome can also interact with the host tissues by
tweaking host gene expression. Among the many recently
discovered genes transcriptionally regulated by bacteria is
fasting-induced adipose factor (FIAF) also known as
angiopoietin-like protein 4 (22, 30). FIAF is a lipoprotein
lipase (LPL) inhibitor that in effect blocks lipid storage
mediated through LPL activity. Are et al. 2008 showed
that FIAF mRNA in epithelial cells increased in the
presence of bacteria such as Enterococcus faecalis (30).
A putative mechanism through the activity of
the
metabolically important nuclear receptor peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARg) was
suggested to govern this increase. In a recent study,
increases in the serum level of FIAF caused by admin-
istration of Lactobacillus paracasei ssp paracasei F19
were associated with reduced weight gain in HFD-fed
mice (31). However, other studies reported lowered levels
of mRNA expression of FIAF in the intestinal tissue
on bacterial exposure (22, 19). These seemingly con-
founding results may be explained as reflecting two
different situations: (1) in which exposure of mice to
the whole bacterial community results in a decrease in
intestinal FIAF levels; (2), while introduction of a single
defined bacterial species has the opposite result. Because
E. faecalis (30) or F19 (31) seem to be able to upregulate
FIAF expression, it is, therefore, tempting to speculate
that certain bacterial species could have a therapeutical
role in weight management. Another probiotic strain
Lactobacillus gasseri SBT2055 (LG2055) was shown to
impact health in small human cohort study. Volunteers
with higher BMI and visceral
fat when consuming
formula milk containing LG2055 lost weight and had
reduced abdominal adiposity. This suggests that it has a
positive effect on human metabolic health (32). The
mechanism(s) of action is unknown, but another study
in rodents postulated that milk fermented by LG2005 was
able to restrict dietary fat absorption in rat intestine (33).
In humans, however, the correlation between changes
in the gut flora and weight gain are much less clear
because all
the confounding factors (sex, age, diet,
exercise, living environment, antibiotic treatments, dis-
ease history, and finally genetic heterogeneity) have to
be taken into account. Some groups claim that the
shift from Bacteroidetes toward Firmicutes that was
observed in mice was also associated with weight gain
in humans (34). A later study outrightly presents the

6

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

opposite finding showing a lower ratio of Firmicutes
to Bacteroidetes in overweight subjects (35). In other
reports, the decrease in the abundance of Bacteroidetes
could be confirmed, but no difference in Firmicutes was
observed,
instead a bloom of Actinobacteria carrying
the majority of genes overrepresented in obese volunteers
was apparent
(11). In another study, no significant
differences were seen in the proportion of Firmicutes
versus Bacteroidetes in relation to BMI (36). Schwiertz
et al.
(2010) also suggested that rather than major
phylogenetic shifts, discrete, yet metabolically functional
changes at the species level may occur in response to
dietary changes similar to that observed for Mollicutes in
mice (see above) (35).

Presently, we do not fully understand the role of
microbiota in the regulation of host adiposity. In mice,
the shift from Bacteroidetes toward Firmicutes in experi-
ments with obese animals seems well established. The
situation in human looks much more complicated, and it
is very difficult to reach a consensus on the influence of a
specific group of microbiota on changes in body weight.
The variability seen in different studies built on microbial
composition may be due to a multitude of factors,
including diet, volunteer cohort, duration of study,
methods of sample preparation, and storage as well as
methods of detection. Additionally, concentrations of
bacterial metabolites such as SCFA might vary due to
increased microbial production, changes in absorption,
shifts in microbial cross feeding patterns, or even the rate
of transit (reviewed in (37), (38)). Due to the complex
nature of the gut environment, it is quite unlikely that a
single factor, such as a phylogenetic change in the
microbioata, could be responsible for the development
of obesity. Rather, changes in eating habits may favor
bacterial species that now have to accommodate to a
different nutritional environment. Using germ-free mice,
Faith et al. (2011) have attempted to formulate a model to
predict microbiota changes that are dependent on diet
(38). Varying the abundance of 10 defined bacterial
species that were introduced to the guts of germ-free
mice that in turn received different refined diets (protein,
sugars, complex carbohydrate, and fat rich), Faith and
coworkers were able to infer a relationship between diet
and microbiota. It appeared that in general, bacterial
presence relied on availability of a single component in
the food, indicating that the bacterial community may
predominantly depend on the diet and can be changed by
manipulating the type of food ingested. Within this
limited study at least, the diet appears to govern gut
microbial profile. However, as the authors rightly point
out, one challenge ahead is to determine how the complex
interplay between the human microbiome and the
inordinate variability of the human diet affects para-
meters of gut health.

Governance of host traits by gut flora

Presently, it is difficult to show whether the changes in
the bacterial flora preceded weight increase, or if the
changes that occur in the presence of each bacterial
species are strongly associated with the ingested food.
Introducing more processed foods and antibiotics has led
and will lead in the future to the reduction in the diversity
of the microbial flora, simply because there will be a
gradual decrease in nutrients available for microbial use
(reviewed in (39)). It seems likely that a balanced bacterial
flora is needed for maintaining good health, and perturb-
ing this balance could disrupt controlled energy harvest
leading to problems such as obesity.

The microbiota and inflammatory bowel
diseases
Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) is an example of a
complex disease postulated to arise following a dishar-
monious relationship between the immune system and
the commensal flora. Genetic, microbial as well as dietary
and environmental cues together seem to play a role in
the development of pathology. There are two major forms
of IBD  Ulcerative Colitis (UC) affecting mostly colon
and Crohn’s Disease (CD) affecting colon as well as
the distal part of the small intestine (reviewed in (40),
(41)). Previous studies have demonstrated that intestinal
dysbiosis, characterized mainly by altered bacterial
composition and loss of diversity, is strongly associated
with the development of the disease (4244, 12). There
are two major models for experimental colitis, chemically
induced colitis, and spontaneous colitis occurring in
genetically modified animals. Two methods to chemically
induce colitis are extensively used: the administration of
either dextran sulphate sodium (DSS) in drinking water
or 2, 4, 6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid intrarectally.
Both chemically induced and spontaneous models have
advantages and disadvantages that have been extensively
reviewed elsewhere (45).

One posit that perturbed balance between the com-
mensals bacteria and the host may play a role in the
development of obesity is equally applicable to the
pathogenesis of IBD. Studies performed on animals
depleted of certain genes involved in immune regulation
of gut homeostasis show that specific genetic mutations
harbored by the host may cause an uncontrolled growth
of otherwise underrepresented bacteria, which leads to
development of colitis (reviewed in (46)). In recent
studies, this altered microbiota was transmitted to wild-
type animals that then develop the disease, suggesting
that the microbiota retained the disease-causing shift that
can be transmitted between individuals (especially from
mother to pups) (47, 48)

Epithelial cells have the ability to sense microbes by
recognizing the microbe-associated molecular patterns
(MAMPs). Several families of receptors expressed both
on the cell surface as well as in the cytoplasm are involved

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

(page number not for citation purpose)

7

Agata Korecka and Velmurugesan Arulampalam

in recognition of those MAMP molecules, such as Toll-
like receptors (TLRs) (49), nucleotide-binding oligomer-
ization domain (NOD), (50) and NOD-like receptors
(NLRs) (51, 52). In this review, we would like to briefly
highlight the involvement of all three of these recognition
molecules in the pathogenesis of IBD, and how this
may be connected to shifts in microbial communities.

Recognition of microbiota by TLRs is essential for
induction of inflammation and immune response. Ligands
recognized by TLRs are not only specific for pathogens
but are also present on commensal microbiota, and it
remains to be understood how the host distinguishes
danger signals and homeostatic signals. Most TLRs
use an adaptor molecule MyD88 to transmit the signals
within the cell (49). MyD88-, TLR2-, and TLR4-deficient
mice show a more severe phenotype of DSS-induced
colitis compared to their wild-type littermates. Similarly,
animals with depleted microbiota (following treatment
with antibiotics) show increased susceptibility to experi-
mental colitis. On the other hand, administration of
TLR4 or TLR2 ligands, in microbiota-depleted animals,
was able to ameliorate the disease to a level observed
in animals harboring normal flora. These results strongly
suggest that commensal microbiota play an important
role in stimulating TLRs and setting the threshold of
immune response needed for homeostasis (53). Addition-
ally,
spontaneous colitis observed in conventionally
raised, but not germ-free IL10/ mice is dependent on
MyD88 signaling. Deletion of MyD88 in IL10/
animals abolishes TLR signaling and is protective against
the development of the disease. These results suggest that
TLR signaling, although necessary for establishing and
maintaining balance between pro- and antiinflammatory
signals, might also be responsible for development of the
disease if other factors, such as IL10, are missing or when
the balance is otherwise disrupted (54).

In addition to TLRs, microbial molecules can be
recognized by members of the NOD family that reside
in the cytoplasm  NOD1 and NOD2 (50). Mutations in
the NOD2 gene have been associated with increased
susceptibility to IBD, especially CD, but the precise
role of this protein in the pathogenesis of the disease
remains unknown (55). NOD2/ mice display abnormal
Paneth cell functions and develop symptoms similar to
CD (56, 57). Microbial samples coming from patients
harboring mutations in the NOD2 gene display a shift
in bacterial composition not seen in individuals not
carrying these mutations (58). Additionally, NOD2/
animals harbor a microflora that is different from that
of wild-type animals (59).

that

The third important group of defense molecules is
NLRs
form cytoplasmic complexes known as
inflammasomes that are able to sense both endo- and
exogenic stress or damage-associated signals (reviewed in
(60)). When activated, they coassemble with the adaptor

lack components of

protein  apoptosis-associated speck-like protein (ASC),
into multiprotein complexes that activate caspase 1
and subsequent cleavage of IL-1b and IL-18 (61, 62).
Mice that
the inflammasome
(NLRP6/, ASC/) or downstream targets of active
complex (caspase 1/, IL-18/) suffer from more
severe DSS-induced colitis than their wild-type litter-
mates (48). Inflammasome loss resulted in the develop-
ment of more colitogenic microflora that could be
transferred to wild-type mice that were cohoused or
cofostered with knock-out mice, resulting in more severe
phenotype in these animals. Two groups of bacteria were
associated with the colitogenic microbiome: family Pre-
votellaceae in the phylum Bacteroidetes as well as a genus
belonging to TM7 phylum. Both groups are capable of
disrupting the mucus barrier through its degradation and
have been previously associated with development of
IBD and periodontal disease. The Prevotella cluster has
been detected on mucosal surfaces taken from patients
suffering from UC or CD but not in the guts of healthy
subjects (63). Lucke et al. 2006 also highlighted the
abundance of the members of the Prevotella genera in
mucosal biopsy specimens from UC patients (64). On the
species level, Prevotella denticola is much more prevalent
in subjects suffering from periodontitis than in healthy
subjects (65). Antibiotic resistant bacteria belonging
to Prevotella genus has also been identified among
periodontal bacteria (66). TM7 phylum members
(gram-positive, non-cultivable bacteria) could be found
in equal numbers in biopsies obtained from UC, CD, and
non-IBD patients; however,
the
cloned 16S rRNA sequences differed significantly be-
tween diseased and healthy samples (67). CD patients
had a more diverse (broader species spectrum) TM7
flora. One of the clones showed very high similarity to a
clone suggested to play a causative role in periodontal
disease (68), and many members of that phylum have
been associated with oral
inflammation (69, 65, 70).
Hence, there appear to be commonalities in mucosal
inflammation, be it manifesting in the oral or intestinal
cavities.

the composition of

Garrett et al. 2010 have identified two species belonging
to Enterobacteriaea  Klebsiella pneumoniae and Proteus
mirabilis as highly associated with colitogenic phenotype
of T-bet/ RAG 2/ mice (71). These animals harbor
a deficiency in innate immunity relying on T-cells
responses, and they spontaneously develop colitis (re-
ferred by authors as T-bet/ RAG2/ UC  TRUC
mice)
(47). The colitic phenotype was transmittable
to cohoused or cross-fostered WT mice, akin to the
inflammasome-deficient mice discussed above
(71).
Neither of the identified species was, however, able to
cause colitis when transferred to germ-free mice, indicat-
ing a need for other bacterial signals for a full-blown
inflammatory reaction. Klebsiella pneumoniae together

8

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

with other drug-resistant Enterobacteriacae has been pre-
viously reported to be present in oral cavities of patients
with periodontal disease. It is postulated that the hydro-
lytic enzymes produced by these bacteria play a role in
the destruction of the tooth-supporting tissues (72).

(2007)

Frank et al.

identified additional shifts in
microbiota in UC and CD patients compared to non-
IBD samples (73). UC and CD patients had fewer
sequences representative of Bacteroides and Lachnospir-
aceae (a subgroup of Firmicutes) and an overrepresenta-
tion of Proteobacteria and also Bacillus  another
subgroup of Firmicutes. In the small intestine, proteo-
bacterial sequences were more abundant and Bacillus
sequences less so, in UC and CD patients, relative to
non-IBD samples. The bacterial profiles belonging to
some CD and UC patients were clustered separately
from the non-IBD samples and were characterized among
the others by a decreased bacterial
load. A reduced
bacterial diversity was also observed by Qin et al. (2010)
(12). IBD patients recruited to this study harbored on
average 25% less bacterial genes than healthy subjects, and
principal component analysis clearly separated IBD
patients from healthy subjects and CD patients from UC
patients. One speculation, built on the Hygiene Hypoth-
esis, is that decreasing diversity of the bacterial ecology
may be a causative factor in diseases such as IBD.

A new player in IBD pathogenesis is ATG16L1
(Autophagy-related 16-like 1) that codes for a protein
that is a part of a large complex necessary for autophagy 
a process in which cell components are targeted to
degradation. The disease variant of the gene can be found
in around 50% of European population and confers a
twofold increase in disease susceptibility (7476). People
harboring such mutations also have altered microbial
flora (58). In mice with deleted ATG16L1, a reduced
capacity for autophagy is seen (77, 78). On viral infection
with a murine norovirus (MNV), AGT16L1/ mice
display additional
features with strikingly abnormal
Paneth cells, resulting in aberrant packing and exocytosis
of antimicrobial peptides. On DSS treatment, these mice
developed colonic ulcers with various hallmarks of CD-
associated lesions. Administration of antibiotics in these
mice prevented the abnormal DSS-induced pathologies
suggesting the necessity of the microflora to induce a
phenotype resembling CD (79). Interestingly, although
antibiotics have been used to treat CD and UC, it seems to
be more effective in the case of the former, as they could
also prevent the relapse of the disease (80).

Apart

from the inflammatory disorder, IBD also
predisposes to colorectal cancer (CRC). Around 18% of
patients will develop CRC after 30 years of disease
duration (81, 82). Changes in bacterial composition seen
prior to the manifestation of colitis may also be associated
with the pathology of colorectal cancer because TRUC
mice (described above) spontaneously develop colonic

Governance of host traits by gut flora

dysplasia and rectal adenocarcinoma, resembling human
colonic cancers associated with IBD (83).

So far only one bacterial species  enterotoxigenic
Bacillus fragilis could be directly linked to development
of CRC. Toxin produced by this bacterium (BFT) was
identified as being a causative factor for both colitis
and very early tumorigenesis in the APCMin mouse model
of colon cancer (harboring a heterozygous mutation in
the APC gene) (84). BFT acts as an oncogene by cleaving
E-cadherin, a tumor suppressor protein triggering the
nuclear localization of B-catenin and colonic cells pro-
liferation, through the activation of the Wnt pathway.
It also activates the NF-kB signaling pathway in the
cells that results in secretion of proinflammatory cyto-
kines. Interestingly, BTF exerts its oncogenic functions
via the Th17 cells (84), the development of which is solely
dependent on the presence of commensal bacteria in
the gut (85). Hence, the pathologies linked to Klebsiella
(71) and B. fragilis appear to be dependent on the
presence of the whole microbial community.

Although many bacterial species or groups are asso-
ciated with the pathology of IBD, other prokaryotic
partners may play protective roles. Interestingly, B. fragilis
implicated earlier in CRC may have protective effects
in infectious colitis caused by Helicobacter hepaticus.
Interestingly, administration of a single component of
B. fragilis cell wall  namely polysaccharide A (PSA)  (86)
is enough to repress inflammation. Further research could
link the protective effects of PSA with the function of
IL10 in response to commensal bacteria. PSA was shown
to not only prevent but also cure experimental colitis
in mice, by actively inducing mucosal tolerance (87).

that

The presence of whole bacterial flora, as well as the
fraction of fermenting microbiota, has also been sug-
gested to play a protective role against colitis and helps
exclude lethal invasions of pathogenic bacteria. Germ-
free animals are characterized by a more severe phenotype
of DSS-induced colitis compared to conventionally raised
animals (88, 89). This phenotype could be reverted on
conventionalization of GF animals, or by the administra-
tion of acetate in drinking water prior to DSS treatment.
G-coupled receptor 43 (Gpr43) is one of the cell surface
receptors
is activated on binding of acetate.
Gpr43/ mice showed greater morbidity and reduced
potential to overcome the disease (89). Acetate produced
by certain species of Bifidobacteria has also been found
recently to protect mice from colitis and subsequent
death caused by infection with Escherichia coli O157:H7
(90). This clearly indicates that intestinal bacterial meta-
bolites, garnered through microbial processing of avail-
able nutrients, do have a significant effect on gut health.
In conclusion, recent studies have prompted research-
ers to peer deeply into the altered microbial composition
in patients suffering from IBD. This may be associated
with a general reduction of bacterial diversity as well as

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

(page number not for citation purpose)

9

Agata Korecka and Velmurugesan Arulampalam

Intestine

Host Genotype
Environment

Diet

Gut Lumumen

Vaguuss Nerve

Intestinal function
Viscerosenssing

f

s:

s:

f

Intestinal function
Motility
Secretion
Permeabilityty
Digestion
Energy Harvesvr
t

Immune function:
Mucosal Immunity
Barrier Functions

Brain

Cognitive Function

Behaviour

Liver

Lipid Metabolism
Drug Metabolism

Pancrea
PP
ssss

Glucose Metabolism

Fig. 3. The gut microbiota can affect a variety of host responses. In this schematic diagram, host genotype, the environment, and
diet can all impact on the microbiota and the microbiome. The microbiota exerts its effects on the intestine through bacterial
signaling molecules and metabolic products (microbiome). Components of the microbiome can also enter the circulation, be
transported to various organs, and potentiate multiple effects in these organs (gray arrow). At the same time, the gutbrain axis
can circumvent intestinal absorption and may allow the microbiome to directly affect the brain.

shifts toward certain bacterial groups and the appearance
of specific, hitherto unidentified species. The changes
might be driven by environmental cues and genetic
predispositions. As elegantly shown by Cadwell et al.
(2010), IBD is a very complex disease and to understand
it, we have to look at more than one factor and be able to
link microbial changes, presence of viruses with environ-
mental conditions, such as diet and small changes in the
host DNA, that are not able to cause a disease when
present alone (79). This observation only serves to
emphasize the importance of understanding the cross
talk between different microbial communities thriving in
the intestinal milieu. The dynamic communities of
intestinal bacterial biofilms are likely to play a major
role in setting the stage for hostmicrobe interactions and
subsequent physiological outcomes.

Beyond the intestinal millieu
The vast numbers of bacteria in the gut have over
the years been postulated to directly extend their
realm of influence beyond the immediate gut environ-
ment. Here, we briefly list the role of the gut flora
liver function, glucose metabolism, and the control of
behavior.

The gut microbiota has been attributed a role in the
development of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NALFLD)
(91, 92). Urinary metabolites of the NAFLD-susceptible
mice strain 129S6 when fed HFD were enriched in
microbiota-derived methylamines: dimethylamine,
tri-
methylamine
trimethylamine-N-oxide
(TMAO). TMA is synthesized exclusively by symbiotic
bacteria (93) and can be further transformed into TMAO
by the microbiota themselves or at least in humans by

(TMA),

and

10

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

the liver enzyme FMO3. The production of methylamines
by microbiota results in decreased bioavailability of
choline for the host and seems to trigger NAFLD in
mice. This idea was further explored by Wang et al.
(2011), who could link high levels of TMAO in
plasma with increased risk for cardiovascular disease in
humans (92).

The interdependence between microbiota, metabolism,
and inflammation as well as the host genotype has
also been elegantly shown. Mice lacking TLR5 suffer
from spontaneous colitis (94) and at the same time
have higher body weights (95)
than their wild-type
littermates. Interestingly, the increase in weight could
be attributed to higher chow consumption and indeed,
the trait disappeared when mice were subjected to
antibiotic treatment. The obese phenotype could be
transferred from TLR5/ animals to wild-type germ-
free mice through the gut flora, suggesting that micro-
biota may be a factor responsible for hyperphagia and
increased body weight in TLR5/ mice.

Hyperphagia is also very much associated with satiety
signals emanating from the gut and directed to the brain.
Increasingly, the gut flora is being recognized as a factor
in the regulation of the central nervous system (CNS).
Colonization by the gut microbiota may influence brain
development and animal behavior. Germ-free mice dis-
play increased motor activity and reduced anxiety,
compared with conventionally raised ones. This pheno-
type could be reversed if germ-free animals were exposed
to bacteria early in life (96). Lactobacillus rhamnosus has
been recently shown to possess antiinflammatory proper-
ties and has been suggested as a candidate to interfere
with the CNS signaling through the vagus nerve, which
allows communication between the viscera and the brain.
This probiotic was shown to reduce plasma levels of
stress-induced corticosterone as well as anxiety- and
depression-related behavior. These results strongly sug-
gest that modulation of intestinal microbiota in healthy
animals may lead to neurochemical changes affecting
animal behavior (97).

These examples are telling in that they have attracted
the attention of researchers who have traditionally been
working away from the gut environment to seriously
consider the gut microbial milieu when studying a variety
of diseases (see Fig. 3). The scope of
this review
unfortunately precludes the discussion of microbiome as
a source or target for therapies and treatments of various
ailments (reviewed in (98)).

Conclusions
Once touted as the forgotten organ (99), the microbiota is
slowly beginning to reveal many of its secrets. Having
been under close scrutiny for many decades, the gut
microbiota is now said to dictate important traits in the
human host. Future research delineating properties of

Governance of host traits by gut flora

the oral microflora should desist from chasing purely
metagenomic queries. Bacterial transcriptomics and me-
tabolomics of the oral cavity should instead be earnestly
pursued. The oral cavity has one distinct advantage
over the GI tract: accessibility, a trait that should be
exploited to the fullest. Crucially,
information thus
accrued would be important to those of us aspiring to
understand the workings of the microbiota in the GI
tract and beyond.

Painstakingly, slow research of yesterday that lay much
of the groundwork for today’s ideas has given way to
meta-analyses of high throughput findings. Nevertheless,
as we begin to answer the questions of ‘who is there’ and
‘what are they doing there,’ we inadvertently arrive at the
inquiry ‘how and why’ the superorganism functions.
Herein lies the potential to alter the course of many a
pathology. What is obvious is the notion that microbial
influence permeates into nearly every aspect of our
existence. As a component species of a superorganism,
we should now universally acknowledge the importance
of the microbial world in which we live and, crucially,
that which lives on us.

Acknowledgements

supported by the Cross-Talk FP7-PEOPLE-2007-
A.K. was
1-1-ITN-215553 Program. V.A. was
funded through the EU
project TORNADO (Framework 7, grant no. 2227202) and by
Diabetes Fonden, Sweden.

Conflict of interest and funding
There is no conflict of interest in the present study for
any of the authors.

References

1. Andrews M. Life that lives on man. London: Faber & Faber;

1976.

2. Savage DC. Microbial ecology of the gastrointestinal tract.

Ann Rev Microb 1977; 31: 10733.

3. Peterson J, Garges S, Giovanni M, et al. The NIH uuman

microbiome project. Genome Res 2009; 19: 231723.

4. Palmer C, Bik EM, DiGiulio DB, et al. Development of
intestinal microbiota. PLoS Biol 2007;

the human infant
5: e177.

5. De Filippo C, Cavalieri D, Di Paola M, et al. Impact of diet in
shaping gut microbiota revealed by a comparative study in
children from Europe and rural Africa. Proc Nat Acad Sci
USA 2010; 107: 146916.

6. Wu GD, Chen J, Hoffmann C, et al. Linking long-term dietary
patterns with gut microbial enterotypes. Science 2011; 334:
1058.

7. Ley RE, Hamady M, Lozupone C, et al. Evolution of mammals

and their gut microbes. Science 2008; 320: 16471.

8. Eckburg PB, Bik EM, Bernstein CN, et al. Diversity of the

human intestinal microbial ﬂora. Science 2005; 308: 16358.

9. Gill SR, Pop M, Deboy RT, et al. Metagenomic analysis of

the human distal gut microbiome. Science 2006; 312: 13559.

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

(page number not for citation purpose)

11

Agata Korecka and Velmurugesan Arulampalam

10. Horz HP, Conrads G. The discussion goes on: what is the role of

Euryarchaeota in humans? Archaea 2010; 2010: 967271.

11. Turnbaugh PJ, Hamady M, Yatsunenko T, et al. A core gut
microbiome in obese and lean twins. Nature 2009; 457: 4804.
12. Qin J, Li R, Raes J, et al. A human gut microbial gene catalogue
established by metagenomic sequencing. Nature 2010; 464:
5965.

13. Arumugam M, Raes J, Pelletier E, et al. Enterotypes of the

human gut microbiome. Nature 473: 17480.

14. Gosalbes MJ, Durban A, Pignatelli M, et al. Metatranscrip-
tomic approach to analyze the functional human gut micro-
biota. PloS One 6: e17447.

15. Surwit RS, Kuhn CM, Cochrane C, et al. Diet-induced type II

diabetes in C57BL/6J mice. Diabetes 1988; 37: 11637.

16. West DB, Boozer CN, Moody DL, et al. Dietary obesity in nine

inbred mouse strains. Amer J Phys 1992; 262: R102532.

17. Klaus S. Increasing the protein: carbohydrate ratio in a high-fat
diet delays the development of adiposity and improves glucose
homeostasis in mice. J Nutr 2005; 135: 18548.

18. Backhed F, Manchester JK, Semenkovich CF, et al. Mechan-
isms underlying the resistance to diet-induced obesity in germ-
free mice. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 2007; 104: 97984.

19. Fleissner CK, Huebel N, Abd El-Bary MM, et al. Absence of
intestinal microbiota does not protect mice from diet-induced
obesity. Brit J Nutr 104: 91929.

20. Wolever TM, Spadafora P, Eshuis H. Interaction between
colonic acetate and propionate in humans. Amer J Clin Nutr
1991; 53: 6817.

21. Scheppach W. Effects of short chain fatty acids on gut

morphology and function. Gut 1994; 35: S3538.

22. Backhed F, Ding H, Wang T, et al. The gut microbiota as an
environmental factor that regulates fat storage Proc Nat Acad
Sci USA 2004; 101: 157183.

23. Samuel BS, Shaito A, Motoike T, et al. Effects of the gut
microbiota on host adiposity are modulated by the short-chain
fatty-acid binding G protein-coupled receptor, Gpr41 Proc Nat
Acad Sci USA 2008; 105: 167672.

24. Turnbaugh PJ, Ley RE, Mahowald MA, et al. An obesity-
associated gut microbiome with increased capacity for energy
harvest Nature 2006; 444: 102731.

25. Turnbaugh PJ, Backhed F, Fulton L, et al. Diet-induced obesity
is linked to marked but reversible alterations in the mouse distal
gut microbiome Cell Host Microbe 2008; 3: 21323.

26. Murphy EF, Cotter PD, Healy S, et al. Composition and energy
harvesting capacity of the gut microbiota: relationship to diet,
obesity and time in mouse models. Gut 2010; 59: 163542.

27. Tartaglia LA, Dembski M, Weng X, et al. Identiﬁcation and
expression cloning of a leptin receptor OB-R Cell 1995; 83:
126371.

28. Zhang Y, Proenca R, Maffei M, et al. Positional cloning of
the mouse obese gene and its human homologue Nature 1994;
372: 42532.

29. Ley RE, Backhed F, Turnbaugh P, Lozupone CA, Knight RD,
Gordon JI. Obesity alters gut microbial ecology Proc Nat Acad
Sci USA 2005; 102: 110705.

30. Are A, Aronsson L, Wang S, et al. Enterococcus faecalis from
newborn babies regulate endogenous PPARgamma activity
and IL-10 levels in colonic epithelial cells Proc Nat Acad Sci
USA 2008; 105: 19438.

31. Aronsson L, Huang Y, Parini P, et al. Decreased fat storage
by Lactobacillus paracasei is associated with increased levels
of angiopoietin-like 4 protein (ANGPTL4). PloS One 2010; 5:
e13087.

32. Kadooka Y, Sato M, Imaizumi K, et al. Regulation of abdo-
minal adiposity by probiotics (Lactobacillus gasseri SBT2055)

in adults with obese tendencies in a randomized controlled
trial. Eur J Clin Nutr 2010; 64: 63643.

33. Hamad EM, Sato M, Uzu K, et al. Milk fermented by
Lactobacillus gasseri SBT2055 inﬂuences adipocyte size via
inhibition of dietary fat absorption in Zucker rats. Brit J Nutr
2009; 101: 71624.

34. Ley RE, Turnbaugh PJ, Klein S, et al. Microbial ecology:
human gut microbes associated with obesity. Nature 2006;
444: 10223.

35. Schwiertz A, Taras D, Schafer K, et al. Microbiota and SCFA
in lean and overweight healthy subjects. Obesity 2010; 18: 1905.
36. Duncan SH, Lobley GE, Holtrop G, et al. Human colonic
loss.

microbiota associated with diet, obesity and weight
International J Obesity (2005) 2008; 32: 17204.

37. Velazquez OC, Lederer HM, Rombeau JL. Butyrate and the
colonocyte. Production, absorption, metabolism, and therapeu-
tic implications. Adv Exp Med Biol 1997; 427: 12334.

38. Flint HJ, Bayer EA, Rincon MT, et al. Polysaccharide utiliza-
tion by gut bacteria: potential for new insights from genomic
analysis. Nature Reviews 2008; 6: 12131.

39. Faith JJ, McNulty NP, Rey FE, et al. Predicting a human
gut microbiota’s response to diet in gnotobiotic mice. Science
2011; 333: 1014.

40. Podolsky DK. Inﬂammatory bowel disease. New Engl J Med

2002; 347: 41729.

41. Xavier RJ, Podolsky DK. Unravelling the pathogenesis of

inﬂammatory bowel disease. Nature 2007; 448: 42734.

42. Ott SJ, Musfeldt M, Wenderoth DF, et al. Reduction in diversity
of the colonic mucosa associated bacterial microﬂora in patients
with active inﬂammatory bowel disease. Gut 2004; 53: 68593.
43. Manichanh C, Rigottier-Gois L, Bonnaud E, et al. Reduced
diversity of faecal microbiota in Crohn’s disease revealed by a
metagenomic approach. Gut 2006; 55: 20511.

44. Seksik P, Sokol H, Lepage P, et al. Review article: the role
of bacteria in onset and perpetuation of inﬂammatory bowel
disease. Aliment Pharm Therap 2006; 24: 118.

45. Hoffmann JC, Pawlowski NN, Kuhl AA, et al. Animal models
of inﬂammatory bowel disease: an overview. Pathobiology 2002;
70: 12130.

46. Saleh M, Elson CO. Experimental inﬂammatory bowel disease:
insights into the host-microbiota dialog. Immunity 2011; 34:
293302.

47. Garrett WS, Lord GM, Punit S, et al. Communicable ulcerative
colitis induced by T-bet deﬁciency in the innate immune system.
Cell 2007; 131: 3345.

48. Elinav E, Strowig T, Kau AL, et al. 2 NLRP6 inﬂammasome
regulates colonic microbial ecology and risk for colitis. Cell
2011; 145: 74557.

49. Takeda K, Kaisho T, Akira S. Toll-like receptors. Ann Rev

Immunol 2003; 21: 33576.

50. Inohara N, Nunez G. NODs: intracellular proteins involved in

inﬂammation and apoptosis. Nature Revs 2003; 3: 37182.

51. Franchi L, McDonald C, Kanneganti TD, et al. Nucleotide-
binding oligomerization domain-like receptors:
intracellular
pattern recognition molecules for pathogen detection and host
defense. J Immunol 2006; 177: 350713.

52. Kaparakis M, Philpott DJ, Ferrero RL. Mammalian NLR
proteins; discriminating foe from friend. Immunol. Cell Biol
2007; 85: 495502.

53. Rakoff-Nahoum S, Paglino J, Eslami-Varzaneh F, et al.
Recognition of commensal microﬂora by toll-like receptors is
required for intestinal homeostasis. Cell 2004; 118: 22941.

54. Rakoff-Nahoum S, Hao L, Medzhitov R. Role of toll-like
receptors in spontaneous commensal-dependent colitis. Immu-
nity 2006; 25: 31929.

12

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

55. Hugot JP, Chamaillard M, Zouali H, et al. Association of
NOD2 leucine-rich repeat variants with susceptibility to Crohn’s
disease. Nature 2001; 411: 599603.

56. Ogura Y, Lala S, Xin W, et al. Expression of NOD2 in Paneth

cells: a possible link to Crohn’s ileitis. Gut 2003; 52: 15917.

57. Wehkamp J, Harder J, Weichenthal M, et al. NOD2 (CARD15)
mutations in Crohn’s disease are associated with diminished
mucosal alpha-defensin expression. Gut 2004; 53: 165864.

58. Frank DN, Robertson CE, Hamm CM, et al. Disease phenotype
and genotype are associated with shifts in intestinal-associated
microbiota in inﬂammatory bowel diseases. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis
2011; 17: 17984.

59. Rehman A, Sina C, Gavrilova O, et al. Nod2 is essential for
temporal development of intestinal microbial communities. Gut
2011; 60: 135462.

60. Schroder K, Tschopp J. The inﬂammasomes. Cell 2010; 140:

82132.

61. Martinon F, Burns K, Tschopp J. The inﬂammasome: a
molecular platform triggering activation of inﬂammatory cas-
pases and processing of proIL-beta. Mol. Cell 2002; 10: 41726.
62. Agostini L, Martinon F, Burns K, et al. NALP3 forms an IL-
1beta-processing inﬂammasome with increased activity in
Muckle-Wells autoinﬂammatory disorder. Immunity 2004; 20:
31925.

63. Kleessen B, Kroesen AJ, Buhr HJ, et al. Mucosal and invading
bacteria in patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease compared
with controls. Scan J Gastroentero 2002; 37: 103441.

64. Lucke K, Miehlke S, Jacobs E, et al. Prevalence of Bacteroides
and Prevotella spp. in ulcerative colitis. J Med Microb 2006;
55: 61724.

65. Kumar PS, Griffen AL, Barton JA, et al. New bacterial species
associated with chronic periodontitis. J Dent Res 2003; 82:
33844.

66. Van Winkelhoff AJ, Winkel EG, Barendregt D, et al. Beta-
lactamase producing bacteria in adult periodontitis. J Clin
Periodontol 1997; 24: 53843.

67. Kuehbacher T, Rehman A, Lepage P, et al. Intestinal TM7
bacterial phylogenies in active inﬂammatory bowel disease.
J Med Microb 2008; 57: 156976.

68. Brinig MM, Lepp PW, Ouverney CC, et al. Prevalence of
bacteria of division TM7 in human subgingival plaque and
their association with disease. Appl Environ Microb 2003; 69:
168794.

69. Ouverney CC, Armitage GC, Relman DA. Single-cell enumera-
tion of an uncultivated TM7 subgroup in the human subgingival
crevice. Appl Environ Microb 2003; 69: 62948.

70. Marcy Y, Ouverney C, Bik EM, et al. Dissecting biological dark
matter with single-cell genetic analysis of rare and uncultivated
TM7 microbes from the human mouth. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA
2007; 104: 1188994.

71. Garrett WS, Gallini CA, Yatsunenko T, et al. Enterobacter-
iaceae act
in concert with the gut microbiota to induce
spontaneous and maternally transmitted colitis. Cell Host
Microbe 2010; 8: 292300.

72. Goncalves MO, Coutinho-Filho WP, Pimenta FP, et al. Period-
ontal disease as reservoir for multi-resistant and hydrolytic
enterobacterial species. Lett Appl Microbiol 2007; 44: 48894.
73. Frank DN, St Amand AL, Feldman RA, et al. Molecular-
phylogenetic characterization of microbial community imbal-
ances in human inﬂammatory bowel diseases. Proc Nat Acad
Sci USA 2007; 104: 137805.

74. The Wellcome Trust Consortium. Genome-wide association
study of 14,000 cases of seven common diseases and 3,000
shared controls. Nature 2007; 447: 66178.

75. Rioux JD, Xavier RJ, Taylor KD, et al. Genome-wide associa-
tion study identiﬁes new susceptibility loci for Crohn disease

Governance of host traits by gut flora

and implicates autophagy in disease pathogenesis. Nature
Genetics 2007; 39: 596604.

76. Hampe J, Franke A, Rosenstiel P, et al. A genome-wide
association scan of nonsynonymous SNPs identiﬁes a suscept-
ibility variant for Crohn disease in ATG16L1. Nature Genetics
2007; 39: 20711.

77. Cadwell K, Liu JY, Brown SL, et al. A key role for autophagy
and the autophagy gene Atg16l1 in mouse and human intestinal
Paneth cells. Nature 2008; 456: 25963.

78. Ju JS, Miller SE, Jackson E, et al. Quantitation of selective
autophagic protein aggregate degradation in vitro and in vivo
using luciferase reporters. Autophagy 2009; 5: 5119.

79. Cadwell K, Patel KK, Maloney NS, et al. Virus-plus-suscept-
interaction determines Crohn’s disease gene

ibility gene
Atg16L1 phenotypes in intestine. Cell 2010; 141: 113545.

80. Khan KJ, Ullman TA, Ford AC, et al. Antibiotic therapy in
inﬂammatory bowel disease: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Amer J Gastroenterol 2011; 106: 66173.

81. Eaden JA, Abrams KR, Mayberry JF. The risk of colorectal
cancer in ulcerative colitis: a meta-analysis. Gut 2001; 48:
52635.

82. Xie J, Itzkowitz SH. Cancer in inﬂammatory bowel disease.

World J Gastroentero 2008; 14: 37889.

83. Garrett WS, Punit S, Gallini CA, et al. Colitis-associated
colorectal cancer driven by T-bet deﬁciency in dendritic cells.
Cancer Cell 2009; 16: 20819.

84. Wu S, Rhee KJ, Albesiano E, et al. A human colonic commensal
promotes colon tumorigenesis via activation of T helper type
17 T cell responses. Nature medicine 2009; 15: 101622.

85. Ivanov II, Frutos Rde L, Manel N, et al. Speciﬁc microbiota
direct the differentiation of IL-17-producing T-helper cells in
the mucosa of the small intestine. Cell Host Microbe 2008; 4:
33749.

86. Mazmanian SK, Round JL, Kasper DL. A microbial symbiosis
factor prevents intestinal inﬂammatory disease. Nature 2008;
453: 6205.

87. Round JL, Mazmanian SK. Inducible Foxp3 regulatory
T-cell development by a commensal bacterium of the intestinal
microbiota. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 2010; 107: 122049.

88. Kitajima S, Morimoto M, Sagara E, et al. Dextran sodium
sulfate-induced colitis in germ-free IQI/Jic mice. Exp Anim
2001; 50: 38795.

89. Maslowski KM, Vieira AT, Ng A, et al. Regulation of
inﬂammatory responses by gut microbiota and chemoattractant
receptor GPR43. Nature 2009; 461: 12826.

90. Fukuda S, Toh H, Hase K, et al. Biﬁdobacteria can protect from
enteropathogenic infection through production of acetate.
Nature 469: 5437.

91. Dumas ME, Barton RH, Toye A, et al. Metabolic proﬁling
reveals a contribution of gut microbiota to fatty liver phenotype
in insulin-resistant mice. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 2006; 103:
125116.

92. Wang Z, Klipfell E, Bennett BJ, et al. Gut ﬂora metabolism of
phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease. Nature
2011; 472: 5763.

93. Al-Waiz M, Mikov M, Mitchell SC, et al. The exogenous origin

of trimethylamine in the mouse. Metabolism 1992; 41: 1356.

94. Vijay-Kumar M, Sanders CJ, Taylor RT, et al. Deletion of TLR5
results in spontaneous colitis in mice. The J.Clin. Invest 2007;
117: 390921.

95. Vijay-Kumar M, Aitken JD, Carvalho FA, et al. Metabolic
syndrome and altered gut microbiota in mice lacking Toll-like
receptor 5. Science 2010; 328: 22831.

96. Heijtz RD, Wang S, Anuar F, et al. Normal gut microbiota
modulates brain development and behavior. Proc Nat Acad Sci
USA 108: 304752.

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

(page number not for citation purpose)

13

Agata Korecka and Velmurugesan Arulampalam

97. Bravo JA, Forsythe P, Chew MV, et al. Ingestion of Lactoba-
cillus strain regulates emotional behavior and central GABA
receptor expression in a mouse via the vagus nerve. Proc Nat
Acad Sci USA 2011; 108: 160505.

98. Cani PD, Delzenne NM. The gut microbiome as therapeutic

target. Pharmacol Therapeut 130: 20212.

99. O’Hara AM, Shanahan F. The gut ﬂora as a forgotten organ.

EMBO Reports 2006; 7: 68893.

*Velmurugesan Arulampalam
Department of Microbiology
Tumor and Cell Biology
Karolinska Institutet
Stockholm, Sweden
Email: velmurugesan.arulampalam@ki.se

14

(page number not for citation purpose)

Citation: Journal of Oral Microbiology 2012, 4: 9367 - DOI: 10.3402/jom.v4i0.9367

