Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 31 38  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics  www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb  www.sciencedirect.com  ORIGINAL RESEARCH  Pathway-based Analysis of the Hidden Genetic Heterogeneities in Cancers  Xiaolei Zhao 1,#, Shouqiang Zhong 2,#, Xiaoyu Zuo 3, Meihua Lin 1, Jiheng Qin 1, Yizhao Luan 1, Naizun Zhang 2, Yan Liang 2,*, Shaoqi Rao 1,3,*  1 Institute for Medical Systems Biology and Department of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health,  Guangdong Medical College, Dongguan 523808, China 2 Maoming People s Hospital, Maoming 525000, China 3 Department of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China  Received 10 October 2013  revised 6 December 2013  accepted 9 December 2013 Available online 22 January 2014  Handled by Arndt G. Benecke  KEYWORDS  Genetic heterogeneity  Pathway-based approach  Sample partitioning  Enrichment analysis  Survival analysis  Cancer  Abstract Many cancers apparently showing similar phenotypes are actually distinct at the molecu- lar level, leading to very different responses to the same treatment.
It has been recently demonstrated that pathway-based approaches are robust and reliable for genetic analysis of cancers.
Nevertheless, it remains unclear whether such function-based approaches are useful in deciphering molecular heterogeneities in cancers.
Therefore, we aimed to test this possibility in the present study.
First, we used a NCI60 dataset to validate the ability of pathways to correctly partition samples.
Next, we applied the proposed method to identify the hidden subtypes in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
Finally, the clinical signiﬁcance of the identiﬁed subtypes was veriﬁed using survival anal- ysis.
For the NCI60 dataset, we achieved highly accurate partitions that best ﬁt the clinical cancer phenotypes.
Subsequently, for a DLBCL dataset, we identiﬁed three hidden subtypes that showed very different 10-year overall survival rates (90%, 46% and 20%) and were highly signiﬁcantly (P = 0.008) correlated with the clinical survival rate.
This study demonstrated that the pathway- based approach is promising for unveiling genetic heterogeneities in complex human diseases.
* Corresponding authors.
E-mail: lye30668@aliyun.com (Liang Y), raoshaoq@gdmc.edu.cn  Introduction  (Rao S).
# Equal contribution.
Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier  Genetic heterogeneity has attracted increasing attention in the study of genetic mechanisms of complex diseases.
It describes the biological complexities that apparently similar characters may result from different genes or different genetic mecha- nisms [1].
In the clinical setting, patients with diseases displaying a similar phenotype but resulting from different genetic causes frequently respond very differently to the same  1672-0229/$ - see front matter ª 2014 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2013.12.001   32  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 31 38  treatment and thus receive a markedly different prognosis.
Therefore, elucidation of the genetic heterogeneities underlying complex diseases has profound inﬂuences on both modern clinical practice and basic biomedical research.
Rapidly accumulated genomic-scale molecular data provide good opportunities to unveil the genetic heterogeneities in complex diseases at the molecular level.
Signiﬁcant improve- ments in methods and applications for analysis of the genetic heterogeneity have been achieved in the past decades.
The use- fulness of large-scale gene expression data, as measured by microarrays, has noticeably been indicated by the successful stratiﬁcation of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) [2 5].
In these pioneering studies, an unsupervised clustering algorithm was used to partition both gene expression data and patients with an aim to deﬁne genetically homogeneous novel cancer subgroups among cancer patients based on the principle that patients within the same cluster probably involve the similar molecular pathogenesis and hence could be grouped into the same molecular subphenotype [6].
Although the traditional clustering analysis based on individual gene expression proﬁles has achieved great success in unveiling the genetic heterogeneity, it seldom considered the combined ac- tions of multiple functionally dependent genes.
It is increas- ingly recognized that complex diseases such as cancers are a consequence of alterations in a complicated cascade of events involving multiple biological processes and pathways.
Thus, subtypes identiﬁed by individual genes often lack good biolog- ical interpretations.
In this sense, the development of function- based methods for cancer subtyping is warranted.
Gene Ontology (GO) [7] and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) [8] are the two most common databases currently used for gene functional annotation.
GO terms are used primarily for the annotation of individual gene products, whereas KEGG pathway terms are used for the annotation of classes of gene products, thus providing a more precise delineation of functionalities for a group of genes that act together to some extent.
KEGG pathway is a collection of manually drawn pathway maps that represent the knowledge on molecular interactions and reaction networks for human diseases, environmental information processing, genetic infor- mation processing, etc., thus possibly providing biological interpretations of higher-level systemic functions [9].
Hence, a pathway-based approach can integrate the effects of genetic factors and biological networks [10] and has been used for dis- ease classiﬁcation [11].
In our previous work [1], we proposed a GO-based approach to unveil the hidden heterogeneities in cancers, and demonstrated that it can successfully integrate the cellular function and the gene expression proﬁle, and the approach showed the greater advantage of GO in classifying the cancer types.
In principle, a similar pathway-based ap- proach should have comparable performance in the genetic analysis of molecular heterogeneities in cancers.
Numerous studies have shown that the cancer subtypes are, in essence, related to multiple pathways [12 14].
For example, recent evidence has shown that molecular subtypes of DLBCL arise from distinct genetic pathways [15].
Therefore, this study aimed to verify whether a pathway-based approach is useful in deciphering molecular heterogeneities in complex diseases such as cancer.
In this study, we proposed a pathway-based clustering approach to unveil disease heterogeneities based on multiple pathways.
First, we selected differentially expressed genes that  are associated with speciﬁc disease conditions.
It should be noted that algorithms such as the t test or F test are not proper for selecting differentially expressed genes due to the presence of genetic heterogeneity, because the validity of these tests re- lies on accurately and unambiguously deﬁning phenotype characteristics.
Hence, we took a robust metric, the overall variability of gene expression, to guide gene selection.
Firstly, genes with top-ranked expression variations across samples, which explain most of the total variance potentially contrib- uted by known or unknown factors (for example, the hidden cancer subtypes), were selected as   feature genes   in the initial gene selection as implemented in several previous studies [16,17].
Then, we identiﬁed KEGG pathways enriched with feature genes as   putative signature pathways   (here,   en- riched   means that a pathway has saliently more feature genes (with large variance) than a random gene set of the same size does).
Finally, we classiﬁed samples to identify the hidden dis- ease subtypes using the expression proﬁles of genes annotated to these well-characterized pathways.
In the numerical analy- sis, we ﬁrst validated the proposed approach in accurately partitioning cancer phenotypes using a publicly-available large cancer dataset.
Subsequently, we used the approach to identify the hidden subtypes of a notoriously heterogeneous pheno- type, DLBCL.
Our results demonstrated that three new subtypes identiﬁed using signature pathways had very different 10-year overall survival rates, and the partitions were highly signiﬁcantly correlated with the clinical survival rates.
Results  Validation of the proposed pathway-based approach using a large microarray dataset  We selected the signature pathways that were signiﬁcantly (FDR 6 0.01, see the Materials and methods section for the details) enriched with the 10% top-ranked genes with largest expression variances based on the NCI60 dataset [18].
As a re- sult, three pathways were identiﬁed, which were used for the subsequent analyses.
These include the small cell lung cancer pathway (hsa05222), the extracellular matrix (ECM) receptor interaction pathway (hsa04512) and the focal adhesion path- way (hsa04510) (Table 1).
First, we evaluated the ability of each signature pathway to accurately partition the samples into the known cancer types using the clustering analysis based on only the expression proﬁles of genes within the pathway.
Our results based on each of the three pathways agreed well with the original clinical labels.
The observed values for the adjusted Rand index (ARI) [19] (to measure the agreement between the identiﬁed clusters and the original partitions, ranging from 0 to 1, see the Materials and methods section for the details) were 0.83, 0.69 and 0.78, respectively.
Subse- quently, to determine the empirical signiﬁcance of each pathway, we randomly selected 1000 gene subsets of the same pathway size from the null distribution as described in the Materials and methods section.
No random subset achieved an ARI value higher than that of the corresponding pathway such that all identiﬁed signature pathways showed signiﬁcantly better performance (P   0.001) in correctly partitioning the samples (that is, more likely relevant to the phenotypic parti- tions).
Furthermore, after applying the majority rule voting for integrating results from the three signature pathways, we   Zhao X et al / Pathway-based Analysis of Heterogeneities  33  Table 1 Signature pathways for NCI60  Signature pathway  hsa05222: small cell lung cancer hsa04512: ECM receptor interaction hsa04510: focal adhesion  Number of annotated genes  19  21  36  Nominal P (pathway)a 7.83E 06 3.03E 07 1.54E 10  FDR (pathway)b 9.82E 03 3.81E 04 1.93E 07  ARI  0.83  0.69  0.78  Number of misallocated samples  P (ARI)c  2  8  3   0.001   0.001   0.001  Note: Signature pathways for NCI60 were identiﬁed by using FDR for multiple tests correction (adjusted a = 0.01).
Details of the NCI60 dataset were described previously [18].
a Modiﬁed Fisher Exact P value.
b FDR stands for false positive rate, which is used for adjustment of multiple tests for 201 pathways.
c Statistical signiﬁcance of ARI for the selected pathway.
ARI stands for adjusted Rand index.
achieved a ARI value of 0.83, with only two tumor samples misallocated.
Alternatively, four samples were misclassiﬁed with construction of a decision tree (Figure 1).
We also assessed the robustness of the proposed pathway- based approach to the methods for feature gene selection.
With the feature genes selected as the top 10%, 15% and 20% ranked genes with the largest variances, we found that the identiﬁed signature pathways largely overlapped.
Com- pared to using the top 10% ranked genes as feature genes, no additional pathways were identiﬁed when using the top 15% genes, and only one more pathway was identiﬁed when using the top 20% genes.
These data suggest the robustness of such pathways to the differences of the thresholds for select- ing feature genes.
Numerous biological experiments provided ample evidence to support the involvement of the three path- ways in the molecular mechanisms underlying the various can- cer types.
For example, the focal adhesion pathway and the ECM receptor interaction pathway were identiﬁed to be the functional gene sets that were signiﬁcantly differentially ex- pressed in leukemia [20].
In addition, by searching for the oncogenes in the KEGG database, one can easily ﬁnd that the three pathways, particularly the small cell lung cancer pathway and the focal adhesion pathway, were enriched with  hsa04512    0.573    0.573  hsa05222  hsa05222    0.385    0.385     1.053     1.053  Renal cancer  (9/2)  Central nervous  system cancer  (4/0)  hsa04510  Leukemia  (7/1)     0.374     0.374  Melanoma  (8/1)  Colon cancer  (7/0)  Figure 1 Decision tree based on three signature pathways for ﬁve cancer types The internal nodes of the tree are the signature pathways.
The leaf nodes represent the classiﬁcation for ﬁve types of cancer (renal cancer, central nervous system cancer, melanoma, colon cancer and leukemia).
Included in the leaf nodes are the total number of samples over the number of the incorrectly predicted samples for the speciﬁc type of cancer indicated.
various oncogenes.
All evidence supports that these three path- ways are truly linked to cancer(s).
Unveiling the hidden genetic heterogeneities in DLBCL  The genetic heterogeneities in DLBCL have been extensively investigated previously [2,21,22].
Inspired by its success in clas- sifying the known NCI60 cancer types, we then applied the proposed pathway-based approach to discover the hidden molecular types of DLBCL.
Based on the DLBCL dataset [2], we identiﬁed three sub- types using two signature pathways, i.e., the hematopoietic cell lineage pathway (has04640) and the cytokine receptor interac- tion pathway (has04060) (Table 2).
These two pathways might be substantially responsible for the incidence and progression of DLBCL.
The former pathway was associated with the im- mune system, and latter pathway was associated with various signaling molecules and their corresponding interactions.
The abnormalities in either the immune function and/or the signal- ing molecules and their interactions were considered to be the major causes of DLBCL [23].
The sensitivity analysis based on different criteria for feature gene selection (top 10%, 15% and 20% ranked genes with the largest variances) revealed that the identiﬁed signature pathways largely overlapped.
Compared to using the top 10% ranked genes as feature genes, two addi- tional pathways were identiﬁed when using the top 15% genes, and only one more pathway was identiﬁed when using the top 20% genes.
Thus, only the results for the criterion of the top 10% ranked genes were presented in this study.
The survival results for these subtypes are shown in Figure 2.
The 10-year overall survival rates for three newly deﬁned molecular subtypes were 90%, 46% and 20%, respec- tively.
The log-rank statistic showed that the survival time of the three subtypes was signiﬁcantly different (P = 0.008), which had a markedly higher caliber compared to the original partitions (the clinic labels, P = 0.010, see [2]) to map their dif- ferential survival proﬁles.
Compared with the partitioning re- sults from a GO module (P = 0.007) obtained previously by our group [1], the pathway-based approach performed equally well, and identiﬁed one more molecular subtype.
To further explore a compact model for clinical use, we ana- lyzed genes included in the two signature pathways using Cox proportional-hazards models.
In the univariate analysis, nine genes were found at the liberal signiﬁcance level of 0.1.
Subse- quently, using the stepwise variable selection option (with the same inclusion and exclusion P values of 0.05) for the multivar- iate Cox proportional-hazards regression model, we identiﬁed three genes, CD10, CD21 and IL2RB, as predictors (Table 3).
34  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 31 38  Table 2 Signature pathways for DLBCL  Signature pathway  Number of annotated genes  hsa04640: hematopoietic cell lineage hsa04060: cytokine receptor interaction  22 24  Nominal P (pathway)a 3.80E 10 1.00E 06  FDR (pathway)b 4.76E 07 1.26E 03  Note: Signature pathways for DLBCL were identiﬁed by using FDR for multiple tests correction (adjusted a = 0.01).
a Modiﬁed Fisher Exact P value.
b FDR stands for false positive rate, which is used for adjustment of multiple tests for 201 pathways.
DLBCL stands for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
systematic in revealing and elucidating the sophisticated molecular mechanisms underlying complex diseases such as cancer.
Several studies have suggested the link between cancer subtypes and pathways.
Therefore, the proposed pathway-based clustering approach for unveiling genetic het- erogeneities of complex diseases would facilitate better understanding of the mechanisms underlying these phenom- ena.
In this study, we evaluated this approach using a public benchmark dataset.
Our results demonstrated that the gene expression proﬁles of pathways effectively distinguished well-characterized clinical types of cancers.
Hence, there was sufﬁcient reason to believe that the putative signature pathways for a heterogeneous disease could depict the underlying molecular mechanism(s) leading to the molecular subtypes.
Further application of this proposed pathway- based approach to DLBCL demonstrated its effectiveness in dissecting genetic heterogeneities in complex diseases.
Similar to the GO-based approach, the proposed pathway- based approach is also an efﬁcient unsupervised feature selection method, which yields multiple feature gene sets (i.e., genes annotated to identiﬁed signature pathways) of functional compactness.
The genes with top-rank expression variations across samples were selected as the initial feature genes [16,17].
Subsequently, the feature genes were further ﬁltered or organized by signiﬁcant KEGG pathways.
Similar to the GO-based approach, this approach is not only useful in identifying both the gene expression signatures and the functional signatures of disease subtypes but can also provide guidance for functional studies on the molecular pathogenesis of the diseases investigated.
Although some previous studies [2] that clustered disease subtypes based on expression proﬁles of the genes achieved great success in dissecting genetic heterogeneities involved in DLBCL, such a clustering algorithm itself does not provide proof of the best grouping of genes in terms of biological func- tions [28].
Thus, biological interpretation of the grouping requires expert knowledge, which is often subjective [29].
In this study, we proposed to directly use an external annotation database such as the KEGG pathway to extract multiple functionally compact and coherent gene sets.
Three hidden subtypes were identiﬁed by applying the proposed pathway- based approach in unraveling DLBCL.
In terms of the survival analysis and the implications of the signature pathways, the proposed pathway-based approach provided a novel and  Figure 2 Clinically distinct DLBCL subtypes deﬁned by gene expression proﬁling of two signature pathways Kaplan Meier plot of the overall survival of the three molecular subtypes of DLBCL, partitioned using the expression proﬁles of the genes contained in two signature pathways, hsa04640 and hsa04060.
CD10 encodes a common acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) antigen that serves as an important cell surface marker in the diagnosis of ALL [24].
CD21 encodes a membrane protein that functions as a receptor for Epstein Barr virus (EBV) binding on B and T lymphocytes.
A previous study [25] reported that the prognosis of CD21-positive DLBCL was signiﬁcantly favorable to that of CD21-negative DLBCL and then a later in vivo exper- iment [26] showed that CD21 was closely related to LFA-1 expression in B-cell lymphoma (BCL), and the absence of CD21/LFA-1 expression was associated with pleural/peritoneal ﬂuid involvement caused by BCL, which is a potential indicator of BCL progression.
It is interesting to note that interleukin-2 receptor beta (IL2RB) was signiﬁcant in the Cox propor- tional-hazards model.
Although no study has directly shown that IL2RB is a predictor for DLBCL, IL2RB has been reported to be a potential prognostic biomarker for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) [27].
Discussion  From a biological perspective, compared to GO that reﬂects the functional similarities of genes, KEGG pathway reﬂects an integration of several speciﬁc functions.
It is more  Table 3 Multivariate Cox proportional-hazard model built using the genes in the two signature pathways  Variable  CD10 CD21 IL2RB  Estimated coeﬃcient  0.762  0.735  0.630  Wald v2  10.635 6.210 6.377  P value  Hazard ratio (95% CI)  0.001 0.013 0.012  0.530 (0.295 0.738) 0.467 (0.269 0.855) 0.479 (0.327 0.869)  Note: CI stands for conﬁdence interval.
Zhao X et al / Pathway-based Analysis of Heterogeneities  35  feasible avenue to the genetic analysis of the hidden subtypes of complex human diseases such as cancer.
In this study, we took the known cluster number suggested by the preassigned clinic labels to validate the proposed ap- proach, assuming the lack of heterogeneities in the NCI60 data for several well-characterized cancers.
Although the clustering results provided good ﬁts to the known phenotypic partitions, this assumption might not be true [1].
Meanwhile, the problem of estimating the correct number of clusters to unveil hidden cancer subtypes has largely remained unresolved.
In addition, although the proposed pathway-based approach has achieved some success in the genetic analysis of the underlying molecu- lar stratiﬁcations in cancer, we should recognize the limitations of this study.
First, only one dataset for DLBCL was analyzed, it is thus very likely that only a small proportion of the relevant pathways were identiﬁed due to the limited information pro- vided by a single dataset.
Second, the current knowledge about pathways is largely fragmented and far from complete  hence, this limitation would compromise the aspect of this analysis that relies on pathway knowledge.
Finally, although we tried our best to control type I errors (incorrect rejections of true null hypotheses) in various steps toward the identiﬁcation of either pathways or hidden cancer subtypes, whether the overall type I error was well-controlled remains unclear.
In this sense, we considered our analysis as exploratory in nature.
Further studies using large-scale datasets and reﬁned pathway knowl- edge are highly demanded, which could increase the effective- ness in detecting pathways with modest effects.
Finally, although in principle the proposed pathway-based method for the analysis of genetic heterogeneities could be extended to other types of data such as that of genome-wide SNPs and next generation sequencing data, such an approach has to be carefully assessed.
This assessment will be the next focus of our research group.
Materials and methods  Description of datasets  A large classical multiple-class dataset NCI60 [18] was used as the benchmark dataset to validate the efﬁciency of the pro- posed pathway-based approach, which consists of 9703 cDNAs measured in 60 cell lines of nine cancers.
The data for prostate cancer were excluded because these consisted of only two samples.
Samples of breast tumors, ovarian cancer and non-small cell lung carcinoma were also excluded for the possible existence of heterogeneous hidden subtypes or misassigned labeling of samples [21,30].
Thus, a subset of the NCI60 data (35 samples of ﬁve cancer types) was used in the study, including eight samples of renal cancer (RE), six samples of central nervous system cancer (CNS), eight samples of melanoma (ME), seven samples of colon cancer (CO) and six samples of leukemia (LE).
After evaluating its ability for accurately partitioning this diverse data structure, we used the proposed pathway-based approach to analyze the hidden subtypes of DLBCL, which has been demonstrated to be noto- riously heterogeneous [21,22,30].
The independent dataset for DLBCL consists of 4026 cDNAs measured in 42 samples [2].
We veriﬁed the identiﬁed hidden partitions by survival analy- sis of the clinical proﬁles of patients in each molecular-based partition.
A detailed procedure chart for the pathway-based ap- proach is shown in Figure 3 and described below.
The corre- sponding source code is freely available upon written request.
For data preprocessing, we adopted a uniﬁed criterion for the initial selection of genes from the previously described cDNA microarray datasets.
First, we discarded clones with missing data in more than 5% of the arrays and applied a base-2 logarithmic transformation to the expression data.
Sec- ond, similar to our previous paper [2], we imputed remaining missing data with zeros.
Third, the data for genes were cen- tered by subtracting the observed median value.
The ﬁnal datasets of NCI60 and DLBCL ﬁnally comprised 5124 and 3148 genes, respectively.
Selecting putative signature pathways from KEGG  For the NCI60 and DLBCL datasets, the top x percent of genes with largest expression variances were selected as fea- ture genes.
Subsequently, we loaded these feature genes into the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) [31] software to test their enrichment in pathways based on a modiﬁed Fisher Exact test.
Finally, we identiﬁed the signiﬁcantly enriched pathways at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 to adjust for multiple tests of 201 pathways in the DAVID database.
To demonstrate the robustness of the pathways, we compared the pathways iden- tiﬁed at different top percentage levels (x = 10, 15 and 20) of the feature genes with the largest variances for NCI60 or DLBCL.
Clustering samples based on individual pathways  For each signature pathway, we extracted the expression pro- ﬁles of the measured genes that were annotated to it.
By agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithm, each sample was initially assigned to one cluster, then the distances between clusters were computed, and the two clusters with the smallest distance value were merged.
Distance computation and merg- ing were repeated until there was only one cluster left.
In this work, correlation (uncentered) was used as the distance metric and the average linkage method was used for merging.
The software can be downloaded from the website of the Eisen Lab (http://rana.lbl.gov/EisenSoftware.html).
We pruned off the hierarchical tree to allocate the samples into clusters.
To evaluate the performance of the proposed approach, the num- ber of clusters in the validation dataset was determined by the number of predeﬁned clusters from the original data source.
Additionally, we assessed the classiﬁcation performance of these signature pathways using a decision-tree based approach [32].
Finally, the adjusted ARI [19] was calculated to measure the agreement between the identiﬁed clusters and the original partitions, which ranged from 0 to 1.
The expected value of the ARI is 0 when the partitions are randomly drawn, and the ARI is 1 when two partitions perfectly agree.
A larger ARI dictates a higher correspondence between two types of partitions.
To assess the signiﬁcance of the ARI, we compared the observed ARI value with that of the same-sized gene subsets randomly selected from the whole microarray.
The aim of this statistical test was to empirically verify whether the proﬁles of the genes in the signature pathways performed   36  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 31 38  Validation dataset   NCI60 expression data  Application dataset   DLBCL expression data  Data pre-processing   Discard genes with missing  rate   5%   Apply a base-2 logarithmic  transformation    Impute the missing data with 0   Center each gene with 0 median across samples  Signature pathway selection    Select  the top 10% of genes with largest expression  variance as feature genes   Identify  signature pathways by enrichment  analysis  Sample clustering    Cluster samples using hierarchical clustering  algorithm  based on individual pathways   Determine the sample label by multiple pathways  Approach validation    Calculate ARI   Build a decision tree  Survival analysis    Estimate survival curves by Kaplan Meier product-limit   Assess the difference by log-rank test   Explore  clinical predictors by Cox  proportional-hazards model  Figure 3 A detailed procedure chart for pathway-based analysis of genetic heterogeneities  signiﬁcantly better at clustering than the gene groups ran- domly selected from a null (or contrast) population, in which the gene had no or less functional relationship.
It is well known that similarly expressed (co-expressed) genes tend to share the same or similar function(s) and in fact, the gene co-expression information is often used for predicting gene functions [33].
Similar to our previous study [1], we con- structed the null gene population using the silenced genes among all the annotated genes from the original expression proﬁles after excluding the genes annotated to the identiﬁed signature pathways and the genes signiﬁcantly co-expressed with at least one gene in the signature pathways.
Here, two genes were classiﬁed as co-expressed when the absolute value of Pearson correlation coefﬁcient of their expression was lar- ger than a threshold at signiﬁcance level a = 0.005, as deter- mined using 10,000 gene pairs randomly sampled from the original expression proﬁles.
Subsequently, for each signature pathway, 1000 gene subsets of the same gene set size were randomly sampled from the null population.
By applying the same clustering procedure to the 1000 random gene subsets, we deﬁned the empirical P value for the observed ARI of each signature pathway as the fraction (proportion) of 1000 random subsets having ARIs larger than that of the signature pathway.
The P value was used to assess whether an identiﬁed signature pathway had signiﬁcantly better performance at correctly partitioning the samples (i.e., more likely relevant to the phenotypic partitions) than the random gene subsets that were less likely to be functionally related.
Clustering based on multiple pathways  The utility of partition for a single pathway might be limited, wherein some samples could have been misclassiﬁed through the use of information from only one or a few pathways.
To increase the accuracy of phenotypic partition, we applied a voting step to comprehensively integrate the partition results drawn from each signature pathway.
Speciﬁcally, for a sample that had multiple membership labels obtained from different pathways, we applied a simple majority rule to determine the sample s membership.
If several classes drew the vote, we ran- domly assigned one of the class labels to the sample.
The agreement between the clustering results based on multi- ple pathways and the original partitions was also evaluated by calculating the ARI.
Alternatively, assuming that the original phenotypic labels for samples were correct, we evaluated the signature pathways by building a decision tree [32].
We then used the approach to unveil the hidden subtypes of DLBCL.
Survival analysis  To verify the clinical signiﬁcance of the identiﬁed hidden DLBCL subtypes, we estimated the survival curves of the subtypes using the Kaplan Meier product-limit method and assessed the difference between the survival curves using the log-rank test [34].
To explore a compact model for clinical use, we also evaluated the potential of genes in the signature   Zhao X et al / Pathway-based Analysis of Heterogeneities  37  pathways for predicting phenotypes.
First, we applied a uni- variate Cox proportional-hazards model to identify the genes whose marginal effects on the overall survival time were signif- icant.
Subsequently, a multivariate Cox proportional-hazards model was used to analyze the power of the signiﬁcant genes for predicting the overall survival time.
The Wald v2 test was used to determine the signiﬁcance of each predictor s hazard toward the patients  survival time.
Authors  contributions  SR, XZ and SZ conceived the project, performed the analysis and wrote the manuscript.
All the remaining authors partici- pated in writing the computing codes and analyzing the public datasets.
All authors read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Competing interests  The authors declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgements  This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.
31071166 and 81373085), Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province, China (Grant No.
8251008901000007), Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province (Grant No.
2009A030301004), Science and Technology Project of Dongguan (Grant No.
2011108101015) and the funds from Guangdong Medical College (Grant Nos.
XG1001, JB1214, XZ1105, STIF201122, M2011024 and M2011010).
References  [1] Xu JZ, Guo Z, Zhang M, Li X, Li YJ, Rao SQ.
Peeling off the hidden genetic heterogeneities of cancers based on disease-relevant functional modules.
Mol Med 2006 12:25 33.
[2] Alizadeh AA, Eisen MB, Davis RE, Ma C, Lossos IS, Rosenwald A, et al.
Distinct types of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma identiﬁed by gene expression proﬁling.
Nature 2000 403:503 11.
[3] Getz G, Levine E, Domany E. Coupled two-way clustering analysis of gene microarray data.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 97:12079 84.
[4] Zhang W, Li L, Li X, Jiang W, Huo J, Wang Y, et al.
Unravelling the hidden heterogeneities of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma based on coupled two-way clustering.
BMC Genomics 2007 8:332.
[5] Bullinger L, Dohner K, Bair E, Frohling S, Schlenk RF, Tibshirani R, et al.
Use of gene-expression proﬁling to identify prognostic subclasses in adult acute myeloid leukemia.
N Engl J Med 2004 350:1605 16.
[6] Bea S, Zettl A, Wright G, Salaverria I, Jehn P, Moreno V, et al.
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma subgroups have distinct genetic proﬁles that inﬂuence tumor biology and improve gene-expres- sion-based survival prediction.
Blood 2005 106:3183 90.
[7] Harris MA, Clark J, Ireland A, Lomax J, Ashburner M, Foulger R, et al.
The Gene Ontology (GO) database and informatics resource.
Nucleic Acids Res 2004 32:D258 61.
[8] Ogata H, Goto S, Sato K, Fujibuchi W, Bono H, Kanehisa M. KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res 1999 27:29 34.
[9] Kanehisa M, Goto S, Kawashima S, Nakaya A.
The KEGG  databases at GenomeNet.
Nucleic Acids Res 2002 30:42 6.
[10] Chen L, Zhang L, Zhao Y, Xu L, Shang Y, Wang Q, et al.
Prioritizing risk pathways: a novel association approach to searching for disease pathways fusing SNPs and pathways.
Bioinformatics 2009 25:237 42.
[11] Lee E, Chuang HY, Kim JW, Ideker T, Lee D. Inferring pathway activity toward precise disease classiﬁcation.
PLoS Comput Biol 2008 4:e1000217.
[12] Bild AH, Yao G, Chang JT, Wang Q, Potti A, Chasse D, et al.
Oncogenic pathway signatures in human cancers as a guide to targeted therapies.
Nature 2006 439:353 7.
[13] Sherr CJ, McCormick F. The RB and p53 pathways in cancer.
Cancer Cell 2002 2:103 12.
[14] Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW.
Cancer genes and the pathways they  control.
Nat Med 2004 10:789 99.
[15] Lenz G, Wright GW, Emre NC, Kohlhammer H, Dave SS, Davis RE, et al.
Molecular subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma arise by distinct genetic pathways.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 105:13520 5.
[16] Ding CH.
Unsupervised feature selection via two-way ordering in  gene expression analysis.
Bioinformatics 2003 19:1259 66.
[17] Dudoit S, Fridlyand J. Bagging to improve the accuracy of a  clustering procedure.
Bioinformatics 2003 19:1090 9.
[18] Scherf U, Ross DT, Waltham M, Smith LH, Lee JK, Tanabe L, et al.
A gene expression database for the molecular pharmacology of cancer.
Nat Genet 2000 24:236 44.
[19] Yeung KY, Ruzzo WL.
Details of the adjusted Rand index and clustering algorithms, supplement to the paper   An empirical study on principal component analysis for clustering gene expression data  .
Science 2001 17:763 74.
[20] Kim J, Shin M. Identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant gene-sets differentially expressed in a speciﬁc disease by co-expressed functional gene modules generation.
BioChip 2010 4:204 9.
[21] Monti S, Savage KJ, Kutok JL, Feuerhake F, Kurtin P, Mihm M, et al.
Molecular proﬁling of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma identiﬁes robust subtypes including one characterized by host inﬂammatory response.
Blood 2005 105:1851 61.
[22] Rosenwald A, Wright G, Chan WC, Connors JM, Campo E, Fisher RI, et al.
The use of molecular proﬁling to predict survival after chemotherapy for diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma.
N Engl J Med 2002 346:1937 47.
[23] Zhang ZX, Shen CF, Zou WH, Shou LH, Zhang HY, Jin WJ.
Exploration of molecular mechanisms of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma development using a microarray.
Asian Pac J Cancer Prev 2013 14:1731 5.
[24] Letarte M, Vera S, Tran R, Addis JB, Onizuka RJ, Quacken- bush EJ, et al.
Common acute lymphocytic leukemia antigen is identical Exp Med 1988 168:1247 53.  endopeptidase.
neutral  to  J  [25] Otsuka M, Yakushijin Y, Hamada M, Hato T, Yasukawa M, Fujita S. Role of CD21 antigen in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and its J Haematol 2004 127:416 24.  signiﬁcance.
Br  clinical  [26] Tanimoto K, Yakushijin Y, Fujiwara H, Otsuka M, Ohshima K, Sugita A, et al.
Clinical signiﬁcance of co-expression of CD21 and LFA-1 in B-cell J Hematol 2009 89:497 507.  lymphoma.
Int  [27] Zhang J, Xiang Y, Ding L, Keen-Circle K, Borlawsky TB, Ozer HG, et al.
Using gene co-expression network analysis to predict biomarkers for chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
BMC Bioinfor- matics 2010 11:S5.
[28] Gibbons FD, Roth FP.
Judging the quality of gene expression- based clustering methods using gene annotation.
Genome Res 2002 12:1574 81.
[29] Rhodes DR, Chinnaiyan AM.
Integrative analysis of the cancer  transcriptome.
Nat Genet 2005 37:S31 7.
[30] Ross DT, Scherf U, Eisen MB, Perou CM, Rees C, Spellman P, et al.
Systematic variation in gene expression patterns in human cancer cell lines.
Nat Genet 2000 24:227 35.
38  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 31 38  [31] Dennis Jr G, Sherman BT, Hosack DA, Yang J, Gao W, Lane HC, et al.
DAVID: database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery.
Genome Biol 2003 4:P3.
[33] Obayashi T, Kinoshita K. Rank of correlation coefﬁcient as a comparable measure for biological signiﬁcance of gene coexpres- sion.
DNA Res 2009 16:249 60.
[32] Guo Z, Zhang T, Li X, Wang Q, Xu J, Yu H, et al.
Towards precise classiﬁcation of cancers based on robust gene functional expression proﬁles.
BMC Bioinformatics 2005 6:58.
[34] Altman DG.
Practical statistics for medical research.
1st ed.
Lon-  don: Chapman and Hall  1991.
