Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 247 252  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics  www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb  www.sciencedirect.com  APPLICATION NOTE  A Computational Workﬂow to Identify Allele-speciﬁc Expression and Epigenetic Modiﬁcation in Maize  Xiaoxing Wei 1, Xiangfeng Wang 2,*  1 Department of Basic Medicine, Medical College of Qinghai University, Xining 810016, China 2 School of Plant Sciences, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85715, USA  Received 25 April 2013  revised 20 May 2013  accepted 23 May 2013 Available online 26 July 2013  KEYWORDS  Allele-speciﬁc expression  Epigenetic modiﬁcation  Poisson model  Hybrid maize  Illumina sequencing  Abstract Allele-speciﬁc expression refers to the preferential expression of one of the two alleles in a diploid genome, which has been thought largely attributable to the associated cis-element variation and allele-speciﬁc epigenetic modiﬁcation patterns.
Allele-speciﬁc expression may contribute to the heterosis (or hybrid vigor) effect in hybrid plants that are produced from crosses of closely-related species, subspecies and/or inbred lines.
In this study, using Illumina high-throughput sequencing of maize transcriptomics, chromatic H3K27me3 histone modiﬁcation and DNA methylation data, we developed a new computational framework to identify allele-speciﬁcally expressed genes by simul- taneously tracking allele-speciﬁc gene expression patterns and the epigenetic modiﬁcation landscape in the seedling tissues of hybrid maize.
This approach relies on detecting nucleotide polymorphisms and any genomic structural variation between two parental genomes in order to distinguish pater- nally or maternally derived sequencing reads.
This computational pipeline also incorporates a mod- iﬁed Chi-square test to statistically identify allele-speciﬁc gene expression and epigenetic modiﬁcation based on the Poisson distribution.
Introduction  Allele-speciﬁc gene expression refers to the differential expres- sion of the two alleles in a hybrid genome, such as gene imprinting phenomena in endosperm tissues in ﬂowering plants and placental tissues in animals.
The allele-speciﬁc expression of a gene is attributed to a distinct epigenetic status  * Corresponding author.
E-mail: xwang1@cals.arizona.edu (Wang X).
Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier  of its two parental alleles [1 3].
Two types of epigenetically repressive marks were found to label the silenced allele of an allele-speciﬁcally expressed locus.
The ﬁrst is DNA methyla- tion, which plays an important role in establishing the imprint- ing status prior to fertilization both in plants and animals.
Many allele-speciﬁcally expressed genes were located in the dif- ferentially methylated regions (DMRs) in neighboring up- stream and downstream cytosine-rich sequences of the two alleles [4].
Histone H3 lysine 27 tri-methylation (H3K27me3) is another silencing mark that is associated with allele-speciﬁc expression, whose formation is mediated by Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins [1,5].
In Arabidopsis, members of the PcG com- plex contribute to allele-speciﬁc expression.
The maternal PcG is able to autonomously silence the paternal alleles by adding H3K27me3 to the regulatory sequences of the unwanted  1672-0229/$ - see front matter ª 2013 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2013.05.006   248  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 247 252  paternal alleles, resulting in imprinting phenomena [1,5].
How- ever, how PcG speciﬁcally recognizes one of the two alleles and whether other PcG-targeted genes are also subjected to allele- speciﬁc H3K27me3 is not known yet.
Allele-speciﬁc expression may also involve activation of transposable elements (TEs) and uniparental expression of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) resulting from allele-speciﬁc hypo-methylation in endosperm [6 11].
Nonetheless, the exact underlying mechanisms remain elusive.
Identiﬁcation of allele-speciﬁcally expressed genes has relied on RNA-based technology to infer differentially expressed al- leles based on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).
How- ever, this type of analysis has been hindered due to the lack of SNPs in many genes from parental genomes.
The genome-wide discovery of imprinted genes has been carried out by perform- ing array- and sequencing-based RNA proﬁling using SNPs to distinguish paternally or maternally derived transcripts [12].
The array method is very imprecise, since one nucleotide dif- ference on an array probe containing the SNP site is not sen- sitive enough to differentiate the probe hybridization signals to conﬁrm allelic expression.
Sequencing methods are more accurate, as they rely on directly calling the mismatches from reads.
However, technical issues do exist.
For example, reads are usually non-uniformly distributed in different portions of a gene, due to experimental bias in sample preparation and sequencing.
Thus, multiple SNP points on the same gene often have varied coverage, which makes statistical evaluation quite inaccurate.
Other disadvantages of RNA-based methods in- clude: (1) because high-quality SNPs are usually located in coding regions, other types of genomic variation such as inser- tion and deletions (INDELs), intronic and UTR-related poly- morphisms are usually not used for calling allelic expression  (2) for genes without SNPs, it is impossible to measure any al- lele-speciﬁc expression and (3) the intergenic regions where po- tential allele-speciﬁc epigenetic modiﬁcation may exist will be missed by RNA analysis.
To overcome these limitations in RNA-based methods, epigenetic modiﬁcations associated with allele-speciﬁcally expressed genes can be proﬁled to infer the molecular mechanisms underlying the allele-speciﬁc expression and may facilitate identiﬁcation of more allele-speciﬁcally expressed genes.
The feasibility of this type of analysis has been demon- strated in studying the association between allele-speciﬁc DNA methylation and imprinted gene expression by mapping the DNA methylome in maize along with mRNA expression levels [13].
We propose a similar computational framework to con- duct a combinatorial analysis of mRNA and epigenetic marks to improve the accuracy of identifying allele-speciﬁcally expressed genes in the seedling tissues of hybrid maize.
This strategy identiﬁed allele-speciﬁcally expressed genes by simul- taneously tracking allele-speciﬁc gene expression and epige- netic modiﬁcation in maize seeding tissues in reciprocal F1 hybrids crossed from the B73 and Mo17 inbred lines.
After dif- ferentiating the sequencing reads derived from B73 and Mo17 genomes, we determined the allele-speciﬁcally expressed genes by combining allele-speciﬁc epigenetic marks and RNA expres- sion.
The RNA-seq and ChIP-seq data used for developing the pipeline were obtained from an unpublished project that pro- ﬁled DNA methylation, H3K27me3 and mRNA transcriptome in the seedling tissues of reciprocal F1 hybrids of maize.
Methods  Macro-syntenic map construction  The Mo17 contigs were ﬁrst partitioned into 2-kbp fragments, so that the large chunks of genomic DNA can be aligned by the BLAST-like alignment tool (BLAT) with small gaps al- lowed [14].
The adjacently aligned fragments within 1 kbp were then merged as one syntenic block.
Finally, various types of genomic variation were indexed, including SNPs and INDELs.
Gaps longer than 100 bp were excluded, which may possibly result from the poor coverage of 454 sequencing of Mo17 genome.
Read mapping, genomic position conversion and data visualization  The chromosome sequences of the B73 genome and the contig sequences of the Mo17 genome were ﬁrst indexed by Bowtie 2 software.
These sequences were prepared as two index dat- abases in order to map the reads to the genomes [15].
The map- ping results in the SAM format were converted to BAM format using the SAMtools software [16].
We then converted the chromosomal coordinates for the ChIP-seq and RNA- seq reads in hybrids mapped on the Mo17 contigs to the cor- responding positions on the B73 genome using a customized Perl Script.
To visualize the RNA-seq and ChIP-seq data in the UCSC genome browser, three output ﬁles containing the B73-unique reads, Mo17-unique reads and commonly mapped reads, respectively, were ﬁrst converted into wiggle format ﬁles to represent base coverage in each 100 bp bin.
Then, the gen- erated wiggle ﬁles were uploaded to the UCSC genome brow- ser installed on the local server for visualization (http:// genome.ucsc.edu/).
Chi-square test for detecting allele-speciﬁc gene expression and epigenetic modiﬁcation  We used the Chi-square test to detect allele-speciﬁc gene expression patterns and epigenetic modiﬁcation, with a slight modiﬁcation of the regular Poisson distribution that intro- duced another parameter k to represent average bias during sample preparation and sequencing.
Let X0 represent the reads mapped on a gene territory with length L, the read genes are counts ( 3  .
.
.
x0 L. Then, the overall X0 followed a generalized x0 1  x0 2  x0 Poisson distribution: ð Þx0 1e h x0k=x0!
0 for x0   q if k   0  different  encoded  loci  by  in  PrðX0 ¼ x0Þ ¼ h h þ x0k P  The optimal parameter k was calculated by the maximum likelihood estimation using the Newton Raphson equation  ið1 x0 x0 iÞ i   x0Þ ¼ L  x0, where  x0 was the average read count at  x0þðx0  L i¼1  different positions of a gene.
q is an empirical parameter rep- resenting the minimum count of reads used in the test with the default value of q set as 20.
The optimal parameter h was calculated by ^h ¼  x0ð1   ^kÞ.
Wei X and Wang X / Allele-speciﬁc Expression and Epigenetic Modiﬁcation  249  Results  Construct a macro-syntenic map of the B73 and Mo17 genomes  The genome of maize inbred line B73 has been recently re- leased with well-assembled chromosome sequences and anno- tated gene sets [17].
The Mo17 genome was sequenced independently by Joint Genome Institute using 454 shotgun sequencing technology and 25 Gbps of sequencing reads were generated.
These sequencing reads for Mo17 were de novo assembled to 528 Mbps non-redundant contig sequences (http://www.phytozome.net), which cover most of gene-encod- ing regions and sequences upstream or downstream of protein- coding genes.
Thus, the sequence availability of both genomes facilitated identiﬁcation of allele-speciﬁcally expressed genes using the proposed strategy.
Based on the 528 Mbps Mo17 contigs and 2.5 Gbps B73 genome sequences, we developed a pipeline to build a macro-syntenic map for these two inbred lines (see Methods).
The syntenic map was built to identify usable natural genomic variation and to convert the position of any read mapped on the Mo17 contigs to the corresponding position in the B73 genome.
Shown in Figure 1 is one exem- plary syntenic block, fragments mapped in small pieces are usually located at the ﬂanking regions or untranslated regions (UTRs) of genes, indicating that more genomic variations oc- cur in regulatory regions or UTRs of genes than in coding regions.
Our pipeline mapped 315,224 (63% of total 496,300) Mo17 contigs to B73 genome, and generated 46,099 syntenic blocks, which cover 18% (451 Mbps) of the B73 genome.
We found that 35,244 genes (90.1%) in the ﬁltered gene set (39,097 high-conﬁdence genes in total) and 80,660 genes (73.5%) in the working gene set (109,626 genes in total without excluding pseudo-genes and putative TEs) partially overlapped with or were located entirely inside these 46,099 syntenic blocks.
These data indicated that Mo17 genome is not completely covered  however, most high-conﬁdence coding genes and non-repeti- tive regions can be covered for identiﬁcation of imprinted genes.
Details of all the identiﬁed genomic variations in B73 and Mo17 syntenic blocks were stored in plain text ﬁle.
Based on the Bowtie 2 mapping score, the SNP information is used to differentiate the reads uniquely/preferentially mapped onto each genome, or commonly mapped onto both genomes.
Correlating the mapped locations of reads with the syntenic blocks between B73 and Mo17 genomes  After mapping short reads to the B73 and Mo17 genomes, we developed a script to correlate the mapped positions of reads in the B73 genome with their corresponding positions in the syntenic blocks.
Such correlation information would be used to infer the allele-speciﬁcally mapped reads in the homologous regions of the two genomes.
Subsequently, we developed an- other script to load the information from the syntenic database and the sequencing read databases in order to differentiate the reads in the two reciprocal F1 hybrids.
Reads were classiﬁed into three groups: (1) reads that were only or preferentially mapped to the B73 genome (B73-unique reads)  (2) reads that were only or preferentially mapped to Mo17 (Mo17-unique reads)  and (3) reads mapped to both genomes with equal bow- tie mapping score (common reads).
Visualization of allele-speciﬁc gene expression and epigenetic modiﬁcation patterns  To facilitate the analysis of allele-speciﬁc epigenetic modiﬁca- tion and gene expression patterns in hybrid maize, the counts of reads mapped on the two parental genomes were visualized in the UCSC browser (http://genome.ucsc.edu/).
In the brow- ser, we illustrated densities of three types of reads aforemen- tioned for a speciﬁed genomic locus using B73 as the reference genome.
While most RNA-seq reads were commonly mapped to the coding regions where nucleotide polymor- phisms are fewer, the untranslated regions (50 & 30 UTRs) usu- ally contained more B73-unique or Mo17-unique reads as expected (Figure 2).
In the ﬁrst case in Figure 2, there are more B73-unique RNA reads at the 50 end of gene while there are more Mo17-unique reads at the 30 end of gene in the two reciprocal crosses (Figure 2A).
Thus, allele-speciﬁc expression of the B73 and Mo17 alleles can be inferred from the ratio of the amount of unique reads and common reads.
A statistical test then can be used to estimate signiﬁcance.
In the second case in Figure 2, a miRNA gene, zma-MIR171n, contains more Mo17-unique H3K27me3 reads at the 50 end, indicating it is unevenly modiﬁed on two alleles (Figure 2B).
Figure 2C shows equally modiﬁed by  two alleles may be  that  Figure 1 A representative syntenic block covering one gene Mo17 contigs were aligned in many small pieces at the 30 end of the gene, indicating that more genomic variations occur in its 30 end region.
The near-identical sequences in red contain SNPs (mismatches).
INDELs or short gaps on Mo17 and B73 were indicated in blue and green, respectively.
250  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 247 252  Figure 2 Examples of maize genes subject to allele-speciﬁc expression and epigenetic modiﬁcation due to natural genomic variations between B73 and Mo17 genomes A.
A gene with more Mo17-unique reads at its 50 end and more B73-unique reads at its 30 end.
Allele-speciﬁc expression can be inferred by considering the overall distribution of the B73- and Mo17-unique reads and the common reads.
B.
A miRNA gene with more Mo17- unqiue reads at its 50 end, indicating the two alleles are differentially modiﬁed by H3K27me3.
C. Two genes equally modiﬁed by H3K27me3 on the two parental alleles.
No signiﬁcantly different B73-unique and Mo17-unique reads are found.
D. A gene with more Mo17-unique reads and differential methylation at 50 end.
H3K27me3 since there were no signiﬁcantly different inbred- unique reads detected on these two genes.
Figure 2D shows an allele-speciﬁc DNA methylation at the 50 end of another gene.
However, these genes should not be regarded as im- printed, since no parent-of-origin effect was observed.
The al- lele-speciﬁc pattern is due to the occurrence of natural sequence variations in these two genomes.
In the case of endosperm, consistent detection of the inbred-unique reads, regardless of the direction of the cross, will facilitate the iden- tiﬁcation of imprinted genes.
Moreover, these examples indi- cated that genomic variations in the intergenic regions can better differentiate the maternal and paternal reads, and they are more suitable for statistical evaluation of the differences in the reads mapped on the two parental alleles than SNPs in the coding regions alone.
Identiﬁcation of allele-speciﬁc expression and epigenetic modiﬁcation based on Chi-square test  To assess allele-speciﬁc gene expression and epigenetics, we ﬁrst analyzed the RNA-seq data in two reciprocal F1 hybrids using the Chi-square test.
The Chi-square test is a relatively simple method, which does not require distribution modeling or parameter estimation.
In Chi-square test, ratio of the expres- sion levels from the two alleles was assumed to be 1:1.
This null hypothesis was also applied to histone modiﬁcation and DNA methylation, since there was one copy of maternal DNA and one copy of paternal DNA in the genome of seedling tissues.
However, uneven read distribution within a gene, caused by experimental bias in sample preparation and sequencing, would greatly affect the estimation of allele-speciﬁc patterns (Figure 3).
GRMZM2G177508  Near-identical region with mismatches INDELs or short gaps on Mo17 INDELs or short gaps on B73  GRMZM2G177508  500  500  500  l  ) e a m  (   7 1 o M   x   ) e a m e f (   3 7 B  l  Common reads  Poisson regression  Estimated coverage on B73 allele   B73-unique reads  Comparison on two alleles after regression  Mo17-unique reads  Poisson regression  Region 2  Estimated coverage on Mo17 allele  Region 1  Figure 3 Estimation of read coverage on B73 and Mo17 allele Left panel shows that read coverage on a speciﬁc gene is not uniformly distributed (see regions 1 & 2) due to the bias in sample preparation and sequencing.
B73 and Mo17 unique reads are usually enriched at 30 and 50 ends presumably in the UTR regions.
The right panel shows the result after Poisson regression was employed to estimate the read coverage on B73 and Mo17 alleles using the unique reads at a speciﬁc portion of the gene.
The Poisson test is then used to compare smoothed read coverage on the two alleles.
Wei X and Wang X / Allele-speciﬁc Expression and Epigenetic Modiﬁcation  251  Thus, systematic errors need to be minimized before the statis- tical test is performed.
parental genomes.
This computational framework can be ap- plied to both plants and animal research.
The Poisson distribution has been widely used to model the read count feature of RNA-seq and ChIP-seq data.
Therefore, we performed a Poisson regression to estimate read coverage for the B73 and Mo17 alleles based on generalized Poisson dis- tribution by considering the amount of B73- and Mo17-unique reads as well as common reads within an allele (Figure 3).
We used the Poisson test to evaluate differences of read coverage between the B73 and Mo17 alleles, based on the null hypoth- esis that the ratio was 1:1 (maternal expression & modiﬁcation versus paternal expression & modiﬁcation).
To correct the type I error derived from multiple testing, we employed the Sida  k correction method to calculate the adjusted P value, adjusted P = 1   (1   Pi)1/n, where n is the number of P values derived from multiple testing.
Finally, genes and genomic regions with signiﬁcant allele-speciﬁc patterns in terms of gene expression and epigenetic modiﬁcation were selected using a P value of 0.01.
Conclusion  Allele-speciﬁc expression is found ubiquitously in both plant and animal kingdoms, which has been thought largely attribut- able to associated cis-element variations and allele-speciﬁc epi- genetic modiﬁcation patterns.
This interesting expression pattern was ﬁrst observed in maize endosperm and then was expanded to maize meristem evaluated by massively parallel signature sequencing (MPSS).
Allele-speciﬁc expression phe- nomenon was also reported in Arabidopsis, suggesting that this phenomenon is widely spread in plants.
Allele-speciﬁc expression could result in allelic gene expression variation in hybrid and thus may have an impact on heterosis performance of F1 hyrbid.
Therefore, proﬁling of transcriptome and epige- nomic data from the hybrid plants that were generated from crosses of the subspecies or different inbred lines has been car- ried out in many plant species, in order to investigate the cor- relation between allele-speciﬁc gene expression and epigenetic modiﬁcation and heterosis in crop plants.
However, no mature bioinformatic pipelines and computational framework have been developed for this type of study.
Using the Illumina high-throughput sequencing data of the mRNA transcriptome, DNA methylome and H3K27me3 mod- iﬁcation in hybrid maize seedling tissue, we developed a compu- tational procedure for detecting allele-speciﬁc gene expression and epigenetic modiﬁcation.
The ﬁrst step was to generate a ﬁle storing a variety of natural genomic variations within the syn- tenic blocks identiﬁed in the two parental maize genomes.
The second step was to generate a ﬁle storing the mapping informa- tion from the sequenced RNAs and epigenetic marks in F1 hy- brids.
The third step was to differentiate the reads mapped only/preferentially to B73 and Mo17 genomes, and commonly to both genomes, ﬁnally convert positions of reads on Mo17 to the reference B73 genome.
The fourth step generated outcomes in the wiggle format, ready to be visualized in the UCSC gen- ome browser.
We also introduced a statistical method to mea- sure the signiﬁcance of allele-speciﬁc gene expression and epigenetic modiﬁcation using the Chi-square test to accommo- date the bias of the inbred-unique reads inherited from the two  Authors  contributions  XFW conceived the project.
XXW performed the analysis.
XFW and XXW wrote the manuscript.
Both authors read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Competing interests  The authors declare no conﬂict of interests.
Acknowledgements  This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.
31260015), Natural Science Foundation of Qinghai Province (Grant No.
2012-Z-919Q), the Research Fund for Youth Project of Qinghai University (Grant No.
2011-QYY-1) and the State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology of China Agricultural University (Grant No.
2012SKLAB06-5).
References  [1] Raissig MT, Baroux C, Grossniklaus U.
Regulation and ﬂexibility of genomic imprinting during seed development.
Plant Cell 2011 23:16 26.
[2] Bauer MJ, Fischer RL.
Genome demethylation and imprinting in  the endosperm.
Curr Opin Plant Biol 2011 14:162 7.
[3] Gutierrez-Marcos J. Imprinting in plants.
Chin Sci Bull 2009 54:  2383 9.
[4] Feng S, Jacobsen SE, Reik W. Epigenetic reprogramming in plant  and animal development.
Science 2010 330:622 7.
[5] Jullien PE, Katz A, Oliva M, Ohad N, Berger F. Polycomb group complexes self-regulate imprinting of the polycomb group gene MEDEA in Arabidopsis.
Curr Biol 2006 16:486 92.
[6] Kinoshita T, Miura A, Choi YH, Kinoshita Y, Cao XF, Jacobsen SE, et al.
One-way control of FWA imprinting in Arabidopsis endosperm by DNA methylation.
Science 2004 303:521 3.
[7] Hsieh TF, Shin J, Uzawa R, Silva P, Cohen S, Bauer MJ, et al.
Regulation of imprinted gene expression in Arabidopsis endo- sperm.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 108:1755 62.
[8] Zemach A, Kim MY, Silva P, Rodrigues JA, Dotson B, Brooks MD, et al.
Local DNA hypomethylation activates genes in rice endosperm.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107:18729 34.
[9] Gehring M, Bubb KL, Henikoff S. Extensive demethylation of repetitive elements during seed development underlies gene imprinting.
Science 2009 324:1447 51.
[10] Mosher RA.
Maternal control of Pol IV-dependent siRNAs in  Arabidopsis endosperm.
New Phytol 2010 186:358 64.
[11] Mosher RA, Melnyk CW, Kelly KA, Dunn RM, Studholme DJ, Baulcombe DC.
Uniparental expression of PolIV-dependent siRNAs in developing endosperm of Arabidopsis.
Nature 2009 460:283 6.
[12] Luedi PP, Dietrich FS, Weidman JR, Bosko JM, Jirtle RL, Hartemink AJ.
Computational and experimental identiﬁcation of novel human imprinted genes.
Genome Res 2007 17:1723 30.
[13] Waters AJ, Makarevitch I, Eichten SR, Swanson-Wagner RA, Yeh CT, Xu W, et al.
Parent-of-origin effects on gene expression   252  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 247 252  and DNA methylation in the maize endosperm.
Plant Cell 2011 23:4221 33.
[14] Kent WJ.
BLAT   the BLAST-like alignment tool.
Genome Res  2002 12:656 64.
[15] Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL.
Ultrafast and memory-efﬁcient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome.
Genome Biol 2009 10:R25.
[16] Li H, Handsaker B, Wysoker A, Fennell T, Ruan J, Homer N, et al.
The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools.
Bioinformatics 2009 25:2078 9.
[17] Schnable PS, Ware D, Fulton RS, Stein JC, Wei FS, Pasternak S, et al.
The B73 maize genome: complexity, diversity, and dynam- ics.
Science 2009 326:1112 5.
