Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 210 220  H O S T E D   BY  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics  www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb  www.sciencedirect.com  REVIEW  Pathway-based Analysis Tools for Complex Diseases: A Review  Lv Jin 1, Xiao-Yu Zuo 2, Wei-Yang Su 3, Xiao-Lei Zhao 1, Man-Qiong Yuan 4, Li-Zhen Han 2, Xiang Zhao 1, Ye-Da Chen 1, Shao-Qi Rao 1,2,4,*  1 Institute for Medical Systems Biology, and Department of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health,  Guangdong Medical College, Dongguan 523808, China  2 Department of Medical Statistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China 3 Community Health Service Management Center of Panyu District, Guangzhou 511400, China 4 Department of Statistical Sciences, School of Mathematics and Computational Science, Sun Yat-Sen University,  Guangzhou 510275, China  Received 21 June 2014  revised 30 August 2014  accepted 4 September 2014 Available online 28 October 2014  Handled by Andreas Keller  KEYWORDS  Complex disease  Pathway-based analysis  Algorithms  Software and databases  Abstract Genetic studies are traditionally based on single-gene analysis.
The use of these analyses can pose tremendous challenges for elucidating complicated genetic interplays involved in complex human diseases.
Modern pathway-based analysis provides a technique, which allows a comprehen- sive understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying complex diseases.
Extensive studies uti- lizing the methods and applications for pathway-based analysis have signiﬁcantly advanced our capacity to explore large-scale omics data, which has rapidly accumulated in biomedical ﬁelds.
This article is a comprehensive review of the pathway-based analysis methods  the powerful methods with the potential to uncover the biological depths of the complex diseases.
The general concepts and procedures for the pathway-based analysis methods are introduced and then, a comprehensive review of the major approaches for this analysis is presented.
In addition, a list of available path- way-based analysis software and databases is provided.
Finally, future directions and challenges for the methodological development and applications of pathway-based analysis techniques are dis- cussed.
This review will provide a useful guide to dissect complex diseases.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail: raoshaoq@gdmc.edu.cn (Rao SQ).
Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Introduction  The etiology for complex human disease is complicated, which involves numerous genes, environmental factors and their interactions [1].
Yet until recently, the genetic basis for most complex diseases has been largely unknown, with just a list of genes identiﬁed accounting for very little of the diseases in  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2014.10.002 1672-0229 ª 2014 The Authors.
Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).
Jin L et al / Pathway-based Methods for Complex Diseases  211  the population [2].
Genetic approaches that explore the hered- itary variants for complex human diseases have signiﬁcantly changed from family-based linkage studies, which traditionally mapped Mendelian disorders, to population-based association studies, which were aimed at capturing both common and rare variants for the complex diseases.
In the last decade, following the International HapMap Project [3], the development of industrial high-throughput genotyping platforms has led to large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAS), which are now commonly used to determine the genetic basis for the complex human diseases [4,5].
The methods used to analyze large-scale genetic data are signiﬁcantly behind the rapid advances in the industrial omics technology.
Traditional genetic analysis to explore likely single genes or SNPs associated with the disease only identiﬁes a small proportion of the susceptible genetic variants and con- tributes to a limited understanding of complex diseases.
In addition, current popular single-point analysis of GWAS data suffers from the low replication and validation rate [1,6,7].
There is a growing consensus that genetic risk to complex dis- ease is mostly contributed by multiple genes of small or mod- erate effect factors through their sophisticated interactions acting in a modular fashion, rather than by the mutations of individual genes [5,7].
Hence, to further interpret the underly- ing molecular mechanisms that cause complex diseases, sys- tematic dissection of the interactions between the individual disease genes as well as their functionalities is essential [6,8].
Pathway-based analysis is an effective technique that over- comes the limitations of the current single-locus methods.
This procedure provides a comprehensive understanding of the molecular mechanisms that cause complex diseases [2].
Princi- pally, a pathway-based approach is similar to the Gene Ontol- ogy (GO) analysis [9].
However, the pathway analysis is more speciﬁc and detailed, and it tests the association between a pathway, which comprises a set of functionally-related genes, and a disease phenotype.
Its capacity of capturing biological interaction among genes and improving power and robustness has been well recognized [10,11].
The early application of path- way-based approaches was extended directly from the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) in microarray data analysis [2,12] and now it has evolved in several directions [13,14].
Moreover, varieties of set-based methods with similar ideas have been developed, such as the gene set analysis (GSA) [15], SNP-ratio test (SRT) [16] and LRpath, a logistic regres- sion-based method for pathway (or gene set) analysis [17].
Methods that focus on the original data instead of statistical results have also been developed and these techniques test the joint distribution of the multi-locus data or extract the principal components from the original data, such as in the lin- ear combination test (LCT) [18] and supervised principal com- ponent analysis (SPCA) [19].
Recently, some topological methods to parse the internal information of pathway (e.g., signaling pathway impact analysis (SPIA) [20] and CliPPER [21]) have also been developed.
In short, pathway-based anal- ysis has gradually become an advanced way to the analysis of complex diseases [22].
With the methodological advance, application of pathway- based analysis to unravel complex human diseases has also entered a new era [23,24].
Several studies have demonstrated that pathway-based analysis is superior when it is applied to large-scale genetic datasets for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) [18,24], schizophrenia [13],  type 2 diabetes  (T2D)  [25],  Parkinson s disease [26], etc.
In addition, tracing the shared pathways among several pathologies tends to be an ongoing interest of disease pleiotropism, for example, the study of genetic links between RA and systemic lupus erythematosus [27], schizophrenia and T2D [28].
This article is a comprehensive review of the pathway-based analysis methods.
The general concepts and principles for the pathway-based analysis are introduced and then, a comprehen- sive review of the major approaches for this type of analysis is presented.
In addition, a list of available pathway-based analysis software and databases is provided.
Finally, future directions and challenges for the methodological development and appli- cations of pathway-based analysis techniques are discussed.
Pathway-based analysis: general concepts and principles  Currently, there are a variety of pathway-based approaches, which correspond to different research designs and data types.
In this article, we focus on SNP/GWAS-derived pathway anal- ysis, but we also include some classical tools for analysis of microarray, as principally they can be easily extended to other data types.
Despite some differences in methods for pathway prioritization or null hypotheses to be tested, the basic princi- ple is largely the same, i.e., a pathway-based analysis relies on the use of a testing strategy that targets damaged functional- ities, which can produce the outward disease phenotype.
It is increasingly recognized that the genetic variations occurring at multiple loci often perturb signal transduction, regulatory and metabolic pathways, resulting in detrimental changes in phenotype [18].
Therefore, pathway-based methods are aimed at analyzing a predetermined aggregation of genes (or SNPs) (alternatively called a gene set) that are contained in a func- tional unit as deﬁned by prior biological knowledge (e.g., Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), see http://www.genome.jp/kegg/).
Depending on whether the indi- vidual genotype data or single-point SNP P values (often obtained by single-point association test) are used, varieties of methods, such as over-representation analysis (ORA), gene set analysis for  results  data [29], principal components or regressions for the individual data [19,30]and topology-based analysis [20] (see next section for details), are proposed to com- bine information from multiple genetic loci within a pathway to assess its overall association with a phenotype.
Compared to single gene analysis methods, pathway-based approaches appear to be well suited for analysis of massive GWAS data, either from biological or statistical consider- ations [23].
First, since pathway-based approaches focus on sets of genes instead of individual genes, dimension reduction is automatically achieved.
Consequently, pathway-based anal- ysis unlikely suffers from the issue of the multiple-test correc- tions when a large number of SNPs are examined.
Second, common diseases often arise from the joint action of multiple SNPs/genes within a pathway.
Although each single SNP may confer only a small disease risk, their joint actions are likely to have a signiﬁcant role in the development of disease.
If one only considers the most signiﬁcant SNPs, the genetic variants that jointly have signiﬁcant risk effects but make only a small contribution if individually will be missed.
Third, locus heter- ogeneity, in which alleles at different loci cause disease in different populations, will increase the difﬁculty in replicating   212  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 210 220  associations of a single marker with a disease.
The list of sig- niﬁcant SNPs from several studies may have little overlap.
Therefore, replication of association ﬁndings at the SNP level can be difﬁcult if there are redundant genes with similar roles present [18].
In comparison, pathway-based approaches that utilize information from multiple loci in a functional unit could produce more stable and robust results than single gene analyses do [7,31].
Fourth, the ultimate purpose of genetic studies of complex diseases is to decipher the path from geno- type to phenotype.
In spite of the conduct of extensive studies in search for genes causing complex diseases, connections between DNA variations and complex phenotypes, which are essential for unraveling pathogeneses of complex diseases and predicting variation in human health, have remained elusive.
In this sense, pathway-based approaches provide a complementary role to single-point analysis for interpreting the molecular paths underlying human diseases.
where N is the number of all the studied genes, n is the total number of the risk genes, M is the total number of genes in a pathway ki and m is the number of risk genes contained in pathway ki.
ORA is the most widely used functional analysis method because it is easily performed.
However, it has several limita- tions.
First, ORA considers that each individual gene is of equal importance, which is often not so in biology.
Second, the gene (or SNP) list for ORA is usually based on a stringent signiﬁcant threshold, which can be a salient issue when the number of genes or SNPs analyzed is very large.
For GWAS data, statistical power for identifying signiﬁcant genes or SNPs is limited and therefore the list is often incomplete.
Third, con- struction of the list of statistically signiﬁcant genes based on the univariate analysis of individual genes does not permit results for genes in a pathway to reinforce each other for detecting an over-represented pathway.
Pathway-based analysis methods  Gene set-based scoring  According to the strategies for handling the multivariate genetic data for pathways, we classify pathway-based analysis methods into four groups.
Instead of individually reviewing each pathway analysis approach, our goal here is to illustrate the algorithms of the representative methods for each group, as shown in Table 1, and discuss their relative merits.
Over-representation analysis  ORA, often called functional enrichment analysis, is the earli- est pathway-based analysis approach to identify an over-repre- sented pathway with a list of susceptible genes obtained by using traditional statistical tests for contingency tables (e.g., Fisher s exact test, see Table 1) [32].
ORA for SNP data starts by selecting SNPs and mapping the interesting SNPs to the corresponding genes.
This initial selection process is based on whether a SNP is mapped to the pathway or whether the SNP is susceptible to the disease [32].
Depending on the results, ORA builds a 2   2 contingency table to conduct a hypergeometric test [32].
The corresponding P value of a given pathway (ki) is computed by:           X M     N   M n   m N  n     PðkiÞ ¼ 1    n  Table 1 Algorithms and their applications in pathway-based analysis  Algorithm  Core method  Gene set-based scoring approaches cover a range of methods that are directly extended from ORA, in which each individual gene is not assumed to be equivalent, instead their importance is ranked by some statistics or P values.
Some non-parametric rank sum statistics like Kolmogorov Smirnov statistic or the Wilcoxon rank sum is used to assess the overall effect of a gene set on a biological phenotype [2,12,33].
The abovementioned ORA is the simplest case in that an equal weight is assumed for all the genes included in a gene set.
The earliest application of a gene-set based scoring approach is the analysis of genome-wide expression proﬁles [12], in which Subramanian et al.
described a powerful analyt- ical method called GSEA for interpreting gene expression data.
The method derives its power by focusing on gene sets, that is, groups of genes that share common biological function, chromosomal location or regulation.
The rationale is: if a set of functionally-related genes (e.g., a module or a pathway) is correlated with a disease phenotype, there is a trend that the set enriches in a certain area of the ranked gene list according to their differential expression between the sample classes [12].
This idea can be directly borrowed for pathway-based analysis of GWAS data by using a ranked SNP/gene list according to their statistical signiﬁcance in association with a disease pheno- type.
Then, similarly, an enrichment score (ES), a running-sum statistic, is calculated for a pathway-based gene set, by walking down the list.
This statistic reﬂects the degree to which a gene  Over-representation analysis Gene set-based scoring  Multivariate approaches  Topological-based analysis  Fisher s exact test GSEA GSA SRT LRpath A two-stage approach SPCA Logistic kernel machine regression SPIA CliPPER  Data types  SNP Microarray/SNP SNP SNP Microarray SNP SNP Microarray/SNP Microarray Microarray  Refs.
[32] [2,12] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [38,39] [20,46] [21]  Note: GSEA, gene set enrichment analysis  GSA, gene set analysis  SRT, SNP-ratio test  SPCA, supervised principal component analysis  SPIA, signaling pathway impact analysis.
Jin L et al / Pathway-based Methods for Complex Diseases  213  set is overrepresented at the extremes (top or bottom) of the entire ranked list.
ES is the maximum deviation from zero encountered in the random walk  it corresponds to a weighted Kolmogorov Smirnov-like statistic.
Finally, we can assess sig- niﬁcance of the analyzed pathway by using some permutation techniques and adjust for multiple testing, as described previously [34].
Later, Wang et al.
[2] extended the aforementioned GSEA to analyze the GWAS data and explicitly formulate the ES com- putation.
Supposed that N genes, which are each represented by a SNP, have their statistical values ranked from the largest to smallest, and the list is denoted by r(1), .
.
., r(N).
A weighted Kolmogorov Smirnov-like running-sum statistic tests for the over-represented genes within a given gene set S (e.g., a path- way composed of NH genes Gj) and is calculated by:    ESðSÞ ¼ max P 16i6N Gj2S  j6i Gj2SjrðjÞjp and p is a parameter that gives more where NR ¼ weight to the genes with extreme statistical values [2].
jrðjÞpj NR  N   NH  X  X  GjRS  j6i  !
1     Evidently, in gene set-based scoring approach, each individ- ual gene is no longer considered of equal importance and it uses more information than ORA to analyze pathways.
Gene set-based scoring approaches (GSEA and its derivatives) differ from the previous ORA in two important aspects.
First, it con- siders all of the genes/SNPs in an experiment, not only those above an arbitrary cutoff in terms of expression fold-change or association signiﬁcance.
Second, it assesses the signiﬁcance by permuting the phenotype class labels, which preserves gene gene correlations and, thus, provides a more accurate null model.
Nevertheless, gene set-based scoring approach relies on the results of single-point analysis for each genetic locus, in essence it is a univariate analysis.
It does not explicitly conﬁgure the sophisticated interplays between genes contained in a pathway.
Multivariate approaches  A two-stage approach  A two-stage approach, proposed by several scientists [18], is aimed at tackling several challenges inherent in the aforemen- tioned ORA and gene set-based scoring approaches.
The ﬁrst challenge is how to represent a gene in GWAS.
Wang et al.
[2] suggested to choose the most signiﬁcant SNP from each gene as a representative.
But, in GWAS, a gene often contains a variable number of SNPs.
The genes that contain a number of SNPs jointly having signiﬁcant risk effects, but individually making only a small contribution, will be missed in such rep- resentation.
The second challenge is how to deal with correla- tions among SNPs and genes.
Owing to linkage disequilibrium (LD), there may be high correlations among some SNPs.
The statistics that were used by Wang and colleagues [2] for testing association of a pathway with the disease do not take correla- tions among SNPs into account.
To solve these problems, Luo et al.
[18] considered three basic units of association analysis  SNP, gene and path- way  and suggest a two-stage (gene and pathway) GWAS.
In gene and pathway-based GWAS, each gene is represented by all SNPs of the gene, which are either located within the  gene or are not  500 kb away from the gene.
Unlike the afore- mentioned ORA and gene set-based scoring approaches, in which one examines whether signiﬁcantly-associated genes are overrepresented in the set of genes to be analyzed, the authors formulated the gene and pathway-based GWAS as the problem to jointly test for association of multiple SNPs within the gene or multiple genes within the pathway with dis- ease.
As the proposed two-stage analysis makes full use of the correlation structures between multiple SNPs within a gene or multiple genes within a pathway, it demonstrated better repeatability and reliability in identifying insightful pathways or gene groups related to the development of complex diseases in several large independent genome-wide association studies [18,19,29,35 37].
In order to combine a set of dependent P values of SNPs into an overall signiﬁcance level for a gene or a set of depen- dent P values of genes into an overall signiﬁcance level for a pathway, Luo et al.
[18] proposed three novel statistics.
These include LCT, quadratic test (QT) and the decorrelation test (DT).
LCT takes a linear combination of P values for all SNPs within the gene or a linear combination of statistics for testing association of the genes within the pathway  QT is based on a quadratic form and the test statistic thus follows asymptoti- cally a central v2 distribution  ﬁnally, in DT, to combine dependent P values, these dependent variables are ﬁrst trans- formed into independent variables and then independent vari- ables are combined.
For technical details of the three test statistics, readers can consult with the original publication [18].
Supervised principal component analysis  to deal with the problems of multicollinearity Similarly, encountered in a pathway-based analysis, Chen et al.
[19] proposed to apply the SPCA model to pathway-based SNP association analysis to test the association between a group of SNPs and variation in disease outcome.
The idea behind the SPCA model is that within a biological pathway, genetic variations in a subset of SNPs, each contributing a modest amount to disease predisposition, work together to disrupt normal biological processes.
Given a gene set deﬁned by a pri- ori knowledge for pathways (e.g., KEGG database), SNPs on an array are ﬁrst mapped to groups of genes within each pathway.
Then a subset of SNPs that is most signiﬁcantly asso- ciated with disease outcome is selected to estimate the latent variable through PCA of this subset.
Finally, to identify path- ways associated with disease outcome, the authors [19] pro- posed to test the association between the estimated latent variable and disease outcome using a linear model.
In the pro- posed model, the estimated latent variable is an optimal linear combination of a selected subset of SNPs  therefore, the pro- posed SPCA model fully utilizes information from both dis- ease-predisposing and disease-protective SNPs in a pathway.
Logistic kernel machine  The logistic kernel machine, ﬁrst proposed by Liu et al.
[38] for analysis of genome-wide expression proﬁles, may be the ﬁrst uniﬁed approach for multi-dimensional parametric and non- parametric modeling of the pathway effect.
This model links the disease to covariates parametrically, and to genes within a genetic pathway nonparametrically using kernel machines.
214  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 210 220  The nonparametric genetic pathway effect allows for possible interactions among the genes within the same pathway and a complicated relationship between the genetic pathway and the outcome.
Later, Wu et al.
[39] extended this semi- parametric regression model to analyze GWAS data.
This type of genome-wide pathway-based analysis proceeds via a two- step procedure.
First, SNPs are assigned to SNP sets based on certain meaningful biological criteria (e.g., KEGG pathway classiﬁcations or other genomic features).
Then, tests for the association between each genomic feature and a disease phenotype are performed using a logistic kernel machine-based multimarker statistic as described below.
For a population-based case-control GWAS in which n independent subjects are genotyped, individual SNPs are ﬁrst grouped into a SNP set belonging to a pathway (more accu- rately, genes annotated to these SNPs belong to a pathway).
For a pathway-afﬁliated SNP set containing p SNPs, zi1, zi2, .
.
., zip are the genotyped values of SNPs for the ith subject (i = 1, .
.
.,n), and yi is the disease status for the ith subject (yi = 0 and 1 for controls and cases, respectively).
Let xi1, xi2, .
.
., xim denote the values of the covariates and zij = 0, 1 and 2, corresponding to homozygotes for the major allele, het- erozygotes and homozygotes for the minor allele, respectively.
For the ith individual, the semiparametric model is given by logitPðyi ¼ 1Þ ¼ a0 þ a1xi1 þ     þ amxim þ hðzi1  zi2       zipÞ  where a0 is an intercept term and a1, .
.
., am are regression coef- ﬁcients of the covariates.
The general function h(Æ) is arbitrary and is deﬁned by a positive, semi-deﬁnite kernel function K(Æ,Æ), and yi is inﬂuenced by zi1, zi2, .
.
., zip through h(Æ) [39].
Choosing an optimal kernel function is the key to analyzing h(Æ).
A desired model can be speciﬁed by changing the choice of K(Æ,Æ).
Essentially, K(Æ,Æ) is a function that projects the genotype data from the original space to another space and then h(Æ) is modeled linearly in this new space, such that if one considers h(Æ) in the original space, it can be highly nonlinear.
More intu- itively, however, K(Æ,Æ) can be viewed as a function that mea- sures the similarity between two individuals on the basis of the genotypes of the SNPs in the SNP set.
The common choices for K(Æ,Æ) are the linear, Gaussian and identical-by-state (IBS) kernels.
Finally, the genetic effect of the pathway speciﬁed by h(Æ) is tested by a variance component score, which follows a scaled v2 distribution.
Topological-based analysis  Recently a new group of methods for pathway-based analysis emerges as topological-based approaches, aiming at explicitly incorporating the dependent structure among genes high- lighted by the topology of pathways.
Although most methods of this category are developed for analyzing gene expression data, they virtually can be extended to other data types (e.g., GWAS) fairly easily.
Unlike the aforementioned approaches that consider only the number of genes and their   expression   in a pathway, topological-based approaches combine the con- ventionally measured molecular data and also the structural information of the pathway provided by biological databases.
A large number of publicly available pathway knowledge bases provide information beyond simple lists of genes for each pathway.
These knowledge bases, including KEGG [40], Reac- tome [41], MetaCyc [42], RegulonDB [43], BioCarta (http:// www.biocarta.com) also provide  and PantherDB [44],  information about gene products that interact with each other in a given pathway, how they interact (e.g., activation or inhi- bition) and where they interact (e.g., cytoplasm or nucleus).
Topological-based methods are essentially the same as the aforementioned multivariate approaches.
The key difference between the two methodological groups is the use of pathway topology to compute gene-level statistics.
Massa et al.
[45] pro- posed to use graphical Gaussian models that exploit the graph- ical evidence of a pathway.
This method converts a pathway into a graphical mode and then compares gene sets, which are deﬁned by the pathway.
The topological analysis is focused on the strength of the links among genes of a pathway between two phenotypic groups, which is analogous to the aforemen- tioned logical kernel machine modeling.
Thus, both the rela- tionship between the genes (i.e., their strength) determined by their topology and experimental data (microarrays and GWAS data) are used to analyze this pathway.
Later on, Mar- tini et al.
[21] proposed CliPPER, an empirical two-step method, for the identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant signal transduction paths within signiﬁcantly-altered pathways.
The initial step uses the aforementioned method to test the entire pathway, which identiﬁes the subgroups of the genes (i.e., signal paths) that makes the entire structure different.
The P value of the test determining whether two graphical Gaussian models are homoscedastic as the weight is collected to compute the rele- vance of each path.
Then, a junction tree is reconstructed to identify related pathways with means or covariance matrices that are signiﬁcantly different between biological statuses.
A recent impact factor analytic approach called SPIA was proposed by Tarca et al.
[20,46], which attempts to capture several aspects of the data: changes in gene expression, the pathway enrichment and the topology of signaling pathways.
This method considers the structure and dynamics of an entire pathway by incorporating a number of important biological factors, including changes in gene expression, types of interac- tions and the positions of genes in a pathway.
In brief, SPIA models a signaling pathway as a graph, where nodes represent genes and edges represent interactions between them.
Further- more, it deﬁnes a gene-level statistic, called perturbation factor (PF) of a gene, as a sum of its measured change in expression and a linear function of the PFs of all genes in a pathway.
The impact factor of a pathway (pathway-level statistic) is deﬁned as a sum of PFs of all genes in a pathway.
In our own perception, topological-based analysis is supe- rior to other methods because it also considers the internal structure of the pathway, reﬂecting its own property of the path- way, i.e., it gains power from pathway topology.
An additional advantage is that it has the merit of sound biological interpreta- tion due to the very nature of this methodology.
However, one obvious limitation of this analysis is that these methods are lar- gely empirical, thus hard to prove.
In addition, there is a dearth of available software and platforms for implementation, although some Bioconductor packages or web tools (e.g., graphite [47,48]) are released.
Finally, current topological-based methods only handle the static properties of the network topol- ogy  thus, they have the inability for a dynamic systems model.
Available resources for pathway-based analysis  Pathway resources have been rapidly accumulated, which has in turn facilitated the development of pathway-based approaches.
The term   pathway-based   refers to the basic   Jin L et al / Pathway-based Methods for Complex Diseases  215  analysis unit that is not a gene or a SNP, but a pathway.
A pathway is usually deﬁned as a set of related functional genes.
The composition of a pathway can be artiﬁcially deﬁned or acquired from several public pathway databases.
These public databases, include KEGG (website: http://www.genome.jp/ kegg/pathway.html) [49], BioCarta and Pathway Interaction Database (PID, website: http://pid.nci.nih.gov), are aimed at providing different pathway repositories based on their func- tional categorizations (e.g., metabolic pathways and regulatory pathways).
Generally, these databases can be grouped into four categories depending on what the researcher wants to emphasize [10]: the metabolic pathway databases, signal trans- duction pathway databases, protein protein interaction path- way databases and transcriptional regulation pathway databases, respectively.
More detailed descriptions about these categories and the long list of the corresponding databases are presented in Table 2.
In the last decade, software and web tools to utilize these databases for pathway-based analysis of omics data were rap- idly developed with advances in database construction, and consequently have greatly promoted application of these pub- lic resources in the biomedical ﬁelds.
Table 3 lists the common software and web platforms mainly used for analysis of micro- array data, and Table 4 lists the available pathway-based ana- lytical tools and web servers designed for pathway analysis on GWAS data.
Also, their unique features, functionalities, and databases for annotations are given.
Challenges and future direction  Biological challenges  Pathway-based analysis has signiﬁcantly enhanced our capac- ity to explore large-scale omic data, providing an invaluable tool for identifying the damaged functionalities involved in complex diseases.
However, we should be cautious on several challenges and limits inherent in this knowledge-guided analy- sis, which can be divided into two broad categories: (i) knowl- edge biases and (ii) methodological challenges.
Pathway-based analysis relies on acquiring knowledge from gene or pathway databases which provide us varieties of information about  genes and how these genes interact with each other.
Neverthe- less, our knowledge about the existing genes or biological pathways is incomplete [22].
Although a few prominent path- ways are well studied, our knowledge of majority of biological pathways (including the limited number of pathways docu- mented in various pathway databases) remains largely frag- mented.
Because most of pathway-based approaches still rely on mapping multiple SNPs to a single gene, followed by gene-to-pathway mapping, it is often the case in a pathway- based association study that a large number of SNPs or genes fail to be mapped to their corresponding genes or pathways.
Apparently, to make full use of biological knowledge to gain power for a pathway-based analysis, we need knowledge bases with high-resolution annotations, in particular for analysis of next-generation sequencing (NGS) data.
In addition to the incomplete annotations, many of the existing annotations are of low quality and may be inaccurate.
Annotations inferred from indirect evidence (e.g., computationally predicted) are considered to be of lower quality than those derived from direct experimental evidence.
Finally, current diagrams for pathways are largely inferred from transcriptional relation- ships among genes or at protein level, and knowledge for many other regulatory factors (e.g., post transcriptional modiﬁers, epigenetic factors and environmental triggers) is generally lacking.
Hence, improved power of pathway-based approaches to ﬁnd damaged functionalities, more integrated databases, which comprehensively review the link of genetic variants, pathways and the environmental triggers, and which jointly analyze their interplays and their contributions to disease, have been called [8,26,50,51].
The Human Genome Epidemiology Network (HuGENet) project is dedicated to this end [52].
for  Methodological challenges  Methodological challenges for pathway-based approaches in analysis of GWAS or transcriptome have been extensively reviewed in several previous reports [22,53 55].
Hence, we only discuss several key issues here.
The ﬁrst key issue is to improve statistical power for detecting damaged functionalities, which may be achievable by developing more proper weighing schemes for SNPs within a gene or genes within a pathway  Table 2 Pathway databases  Category  Description  Examples  URL  Metabolic pathways  Primarily contain a series of biochemical reactions, especially the chemical modiﬁcations of the small molecule substrates of enzymes  Signal transduction pathways  Describe the information spread from one part or sub-process of the cell to another, generally through a series of covalent modiﬁcations of protein  Protein protein interaction pathways  Focus on interactions between proteins, most of which are derived from various large-scale experimental methods  Transcriptional regulation pathway  Mainly concern the relationships between transcription factors and the corresponding genes they regulate  http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/ http://www.biocyc.org/  KEGG BioCyc BIOPATH http://www.mol-net.de/databases/biopath.html EMP CSNDB SPAD TransPath BBID CYGD DIP GRID HPRD STKE BTITE TRANSFAC http://transfac.gbf.de/ CST  http://emp.mcs.anl.gov/ http://geo.nihs.go.jp/csndb/ http://www.grt.kyushu-u.ac.jp/spad/ http://transpath.gbf.de/ http://bbid.grc.nia.nih.gov/ http://mips.gsf.de/genre/proj/yeast/index.jsp http://dip.doe-mbi.ucla.edu/ http://biodata.mshri.on.ca/grid/servlet/Index http://www.hprd.org/ http://www.stke.org/ http://www.genome.ad.jp/brite/  http://www.cellsignal.com/   Table 3 The common software and web platforms used for microarray data analysis  Software  PathMAPA  MetaCore  Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) ePath3D  Pathway Builder  Interactive Pathways Explorer (iPath)  GSEA-P & R-GSEA  DAVID  MetaCyc  Reactome  GenMAPP  FunCluster  Graphite web  Feature  A tool for displaying gene expression and performing statistical tests on metabolic pathways at multiple levels for Arabidopsis, based on expression data Based on a high-quality, manually-curated database, MetaCore is an integrated software suite for functional analysis of microarray, metabolic, SAGE, proteomics, NGS, copy number variation, siRNA, microRNA and screening data A comprehensive software/database search tool for ﬁnding functions and pathways for speciﬁc biological states An easy-to-use and powerful software for creating and managing illustrated 3D pathways for publications and presentations An online pathway drawing tool which is the fastest and easiest method of creating signal transduction pathways, enabling the users to design their own project or use pre-made pathway templates to help get them started A web-based tool for the visualization, analysis and customization of various pathways maps from KEGG.
The recently-released version 2 could deal with metabolic pathway, regulatory pathway and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites GSEA-P is a desktop application for Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, with a friendly graphic interface.
R-GSEA is provided as a standalone R program.
A tool for augmenting and integrating functional annotations from other databases Applications include serving as an encyclopedia of metabolism, providing a reference data set for the computational prediction of metabolic pathways in sequenced organisms, supporting metabolic engineering and helping to compare biochemical networks Intuitive bioinformatics tools for the visualization, interpretation and analysis of pathway knowledge to support basic research, genome analysis, modeling, systems biology and education Designed to visualize gene expression and other genomic data on maps representing biological pathways and groupings of genes An integrative tool for analyzing gene co-expression networks from microarray expression data  the analytic model implemented in the library involves two abstraction layers: transcriptional and functional (biological roles) A novel web tool for pathway analyses, consisting of topological-based analysis and network visualization for gene expression data of both microarray and RNA-seq experiments  2 1 6  G e n o m i c s  P r o t e o m i c s  B i o i n f o r  m a t i c s  1 2  ( 2 0 1 4 )  2 1 0   2 2 0  Annotations  Local databases  URL  http://bioinformatics.med.yale.edu/pathmapa.htm  MetaRodent, MetaLink, MetaSearch  http://www.genego.com/  GO, KEGG, BIND  https://www.ingenuity.com/  eProtein, ePathway  http://www.proteinlounge.com/epath3d/  GenBank, Uniprot/Swiss-Prot, TrEMBL, KEGG, ENZYME, etc.
http://www.pathwaybuilder.com/  KEGG  https://pathwayexplorer.genome.tugraz.at  MSigDB, Gene Set Cards, GEO  http://www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/  KEGG,GO  http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/  KEGG, BioCyc, EcoCyc  http://metacyc.org/  KEGG  http://www.reactome.org/  GenMAPP, GO  http://www.genmapp.org  GO, KEGG  http://corneliu.henegar.info/FunCluster.htm  KEGG, Reactome  http://graphiteweb.bio.unipd.it/   Table 4 The available analytical tools and web servers designed for pathway analysis on GWAS data  Software  INRICH  GeSBAP  GSEA-SNP  GSA-SNP  dmGWAS  PLINK  Path  Pathway-PDT  ALIGATOR  GenGen  SNP ratio test  i-GSEA4GWAS  ICSNPathway  Feature  A pathway-based genome-wide association (GWA) analysis tool that tests for enriched association signals of predeﬁned gene sets across independent genomic intervals A simple implementation tool of the GSA strategy for the analysis of GWA studies, provides a signiﬁcant increase in the power testing for this type of studies A program for the identiﬁcation of disease-associated SNPs and pathways, the understanding of the underlying biological mechanisms, and the identiﬁcation of markers with weak eﬀects, undetectable in association studies without pathway consideration A standalone software that implements three widely-used GSA methods: Z-statistic method, Restandardized GSA and GSEA for pathway analysis, providing a fast computation and an easy-to-use interface Designed to identify signiﬁcant protein protein interaction (PPI) modules and the candidate genes, speciﬁcally adapted for GWAS datasets, including data preparation, integration, searching and validation in GWAS permutation data A whole genome association analysis toolset, designed to perform a range of basic, large-scale analyses in a computationally-eﬃcient manner A valuable tool for investigating gene gene interactions in large genetic association studies, designed to help researchers interface their data with biological information from several bioinformatics resources A new tool to perform pathway analysis using the framework of Pedigree Disequilibrium Test (PDT) for general family data, combining more information from raw genotypes in general nuclear families A program for testing for Gene Ontology categories over-represented on a list of signiﬁcant SNPs from a GWA analysis, deﬁning signiﬁcant SNPs by prespeciﬁed P value cut-oﬀ and then counting signiﬁcant genes in each pathway A suite of free software tools to facilitate the analysis of high-throughput genomics data sets Assess signiﬁcance of enrichment of signiﬁcant associations in GWA studies and can be applied to pathways such as KEGG/GO or user-deﬁned pathways to test speciﬁc hypotheses A tool for SNP label permutation, assign SNPs to genes, calculate modiﬁed GSEA enrichment score A tool for comprehensive interpretation of GWAS data by integrating LD analysis, functional SNP annotation and pathway-based analysis  Annotations  KEGG, GO  URL  http://atgu.mgh.harvard.edu/inrich/  GO, BioCarta, KEGG  http://bioinfo.cipf.es/gesbap/  http://nr.no/pages/samba/area_emr_smbi_gseasnp  dbSNP, GO, MSigDB, GeneCards  http://gsa.muldas.org  GO,MINT, IntAct, DIP, BioGRID, HPRD,MIPS/MPact  http://bioinfo.mc.vanderbilt.edu/dmGWAS.html  http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/purcell/plink/  NCBI, OMIM, KEGG, UCSC dbSNP, IIDB, PharmGKB, etc.
http://genapha.icapture.ubc.ca/PathTutorial  KEGG  https://sourceforge.net/projects/pathway-pdt/  GO, dbSNP, NCBI  http://x004.psycm.uwcm.ac.uk/.peter/  KEGG, BioCarta, GO  http://www.openbioinformatics.org/gengen/  KEGG, GO  http://sourceforge.net/projects/snpratiotest/  KEGG, BioCarta, GO  http://gsea4gwas.psych.ac.cn/  KEGG, BioCarta, GO  http://icsnpathway.psych.ac.cn/  J i n L  e t  a l  / P a t h w a y - b a s e d M  e t h o d s  f o r C o m p l e x D  i s e a s e s  2 1 7   218  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 210 220  by leveraging a priori biological information from multiple sources or integrating different omic data (e.g., GWAS, micro- arrays and proteomics).
For a pathway-based GWAS, improv- ing SNP coverage and, thus, the number of informative genes may also be a feasible solution.
For multivariate approaches, imputation for un-typed SNPs or other covariates is an effec- tive way to increase sample size for improved power.
Better reﬁned gene set deﬁnitions that group genes according to well-deﬁned biological information or by identifying the signal paths within a pathway using the aforementioned topology- based approaches [20,21,45,46] may also be beneﬁcial.
The sec- ond key issue is to eliminate or reduce the biases introduced during various steps of a pathway-based analysis.
For example, large genes containing many SNPs are more likely to contain signiﬁcant SNPs by chance alone and so are large pathways containing large genes.
Some permutation-based approaches that control for gene size by comparing the actual association data with the distribution of association statistics generated from randomly-permuted data sets are expected to reﬂect chance-based confounding effects, including biases introduced by gene size [55].
However, the permutation proce- dures per se, if not designed properly, can also introduce some bias [53].
For instance, permutation of SNPs, which is often used in P value-based approaches, can disrupt LD patterns between SNPs and may not generate the correct null distribu- tion.
For raw genotype-based approaches, permutation of phe- notypes (binary traits or quantitative traits) may not generate the correct null distribution either, as explained previously [53].
Furthermore, no matter whether the SNPs or phenotypes are being permuted, the sampling units are assumed to be inde- pendent and identically distributed, which may not be the case, as gene gene interactions may play an important role in dis- ease susceptibility and study participants might be distantly related.
The third key issue is to enhance robustness of path- way-based approaches or repeatability of the signiﬁcance test- ing results obtained for pathways.
One possible cause for poor repeatability of the results in pathway-based analysis is genetic heterogeneity, in which different variants may account for dis- ease status or trait level in different patients.
In addition, the different properties of statistical tests on a disease architecture with no major-effect [53] or arbitrary thresholds used to assess signiﬁcance of a SNP, gene or gene set may also lead to poor repeatability [54].
In conclusion, although some scientists believe that results from testing gene sets rather than from individual markers would be more stable across different sam- ples in the population and, thus, easier to replicate [56,57], enhancing robustness of pathway-based approaches or repeat- ability of the signiﬁcance testing results in analysis of pathways still remains to be a difﬁcult task.
Finally, it is worth noting that the recently-developed topo- logical-based methods for analysis of microarrays have the potential to signiﬁcantly advance the current methods for the pathway-based analysis for GWAS.
The classical ORA [58] or GESA [11,12] pay little attention to the contribution of gene or pathway s architecture on their biological activity [8,51], while the multivariate approaches developed so far only con- sider the statistical correlations between SNPs within a gene or between genes within a pathway.
It can be imagined that the underlying genetic architecture for most complex pheno- types is far more complicated than any mathematical models could fully accommodate.
For example, the commonly-used Pearson s linear  correlation metric only  captures  the  dependence between genes in a pathway, while in reality the biological relationships between genes may not follow linear- ity.
In our own perceptive, incorporating the internal structure or topological properties and environmental triggers into path- way-based analyses is essential for fully assessing the suscepti- bility of a pathway to a disease.
In addition to the merits aforementioned, topology-based approaches have the poten- tial to model and analyze dynamic responses or model effects of external stimuli [22].
All these factors would render topol- ogy-based approaches to be a next-generation benchmark methodology for pathway-based analysis of both microarrays and GWAS data.
Extension to analysis of NGS data  Although pathway-based approaches are initially developed for expression microarray data, and later extended to analysis of GWAS data, they may have good potential for a broader application to other omic data like NGS data.
Recently, increasing attention is being placed on comprehensive explora- tion of the genomic variants as high-throughput sequencing has become a feasible solution in practice.
The high resolution genome-wide sequence maps provided by these advanced sequencing technologies enable us to examine every detail in sequence variations including SNPs that is used for the tradi- tional GWA studies.
In spite of some speciﬁc challenges for pathway-based analysis of the massive but more informative sequence data (see the previous review by Wang et al.
[53]), NGS data would provide golden opportunities to expand the capacity and power of pathway-based analysis or gene set analysis in general to formulate and test the global hypothesis on disease susceptibility.
First, the NGS data could provide necessary coverage to capture all potential genomic subsets [59].
Such reﬁned subsets of candidate genomic regions would allow us to examine all possible genomic structures and their biological roles.
Second, the NGS data could provide clues for rare variant discovery.
Rare variants and their interactions with common variants and the environment have been shown to contribute to the heterogeneity of several complex diseases [60].
These rare variants may help us to purify the population and to enhance power of a pathway-based analysis on the NGS data.
Although the NGS data hold several extended promises, there are several outstanding statistical and practical considerations for performing a pathway-based (or a set- based) analysis of such huge data.
To name a few, pathway- based analysis of NGS data requires more efﬁcient statistical methods for detecting genome-wide rare variants, good com- putational capacity for handling large-scale datasets, improved genotype calling rate for sequencing data and ﬁnally the pre- cise functional annotations.
Nevertheless, with advent of 1000 Genomes Project [61] and improvements in both high- throughput sequencing techniques and data analytic tools, we believe that it will become feasible to perform sequenc- ing-based GWA studies.
It is delightful to see that the ﬁrst methodological article for pathway analysis on NGS data is published this year.
Zhao et al.
[62] proposed a novel pathway analysis approach, called smoothed functional principal com- ponent analysis (SFPCA), for pathway-based association anal- ysis on NGS data.
We anticipate that more and more pathway- based methodologies for dealing with this new data type will appear in the near future.
Also, we notice that a de novo sequencing technology, known as Single Molecule Real Time   Jin L et al / Pathway-based Methods for Complex Diseases  219  (SMRT) DNA sequencing [63] is invented last year.
It has super capacity in fast sequencing DNA, RNA and methylated DNA (10 times faster than current sequencing facilities).
As a result, we can foresee that large amount of sequencing data will be available, providing unprecedented opportunities for fully exploring the power of pathway-based approaches for dissecting complex diseases.
Competing interests  The authors declare no conﬂict of interests.
Acknowledgements  (Grant No.
This study was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.
31071166 and 81373085), Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province (Grant No.
and Technology Project (Grant No.
2011108101015) and the Guangdong Medical College Funds (Grant Nos.
JB1214, XG1001, XZ1105 and STIF201122).
2009A030301004), Dongguan City  8251008901000007), Science  Science  References  [1] Panoutsopoulou K, Zeggini E. Finding common susceptibility variants for complex disease: past, present and future.
Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic 2009 8:345 52.
[2] Wang K, Li M, Bucan M. Pathway-based approaches for analysis association studies.
Am J Hum Genet  of genomewide 2007 81:1278 83.
[3] International HapMap Consortium, Frazer KA, Ballinger DG, Cox DR, Hinds DA, Stuve LL, et al.
A second generation human haplotype map of over 3.1 million SNPs.
Nature 2007 449:851 61.
[4] Carlson CS, Eberle MA, Kruglyak L, Nickerson DA.
Mapping complex disease loci in whole-genome association studies.
Nature 2004 429:446 52.
[5] Freimer NB, Sabatti C. Human genetics: variants in common  diseases.
Nature 2007 445:828 30.
[6] Cordell HJ.
Detecting gene-gene interactions that underlie human  diseases.
Nat Rev Genet 2009 10:392 404.
[7] Thomas D. Gene environment-wide association studies: emerging  approaches.
Nat Rev Genet 2010 11:259 72.
[8] Moore JH, Williams SM.
Epistasis and its implications for  personal genetics.
Am J Hum Genet 2009 85:309 20.
[9] Holmans P, Green EK, Pahwa JS, Ferreira MA, Purcell SM, Sklar P, et al.
Gene ontology analysis of GWA study data sets provides insights into the biology of bipolar disorder.
Am J Hum Genet 2009 85:13 24.
[10] Curtis RK, Oresic M, Vidal-Puig A.
Pathways to the analysis of  microarray data.
Trends Biotechnol 2005 23:429 35.
[11] Tilford CA, Siemers NO.
Gene set enrichment analysis.
Methods  Mol Biol 2009 563:99 121.
[12] Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA, et al.
Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge- based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression proﬁles.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 102:15545 50.
[13] Jia P, Wang L, Meltzer HY, Zhao Z.
Common variants conferring risk of schizophrenia: a pathway analysis of GWAS data.
Schizophr Res 2010 122:38 42.
[14] Yang W, de las Fuentes L, Davila-Roman VG, Charles Gu C. Variable set enrichment analysis in genome-wide association studies.
Eur J Hum Genet 2011 19:893 900.
[15] Medina I, Montaner D, Bonifaci N, Pujana MA, Carbonell J, Tarraga J, et al.
Gene set-based analysis of polymorphisms: ﬁnding pathways or biological processes associated to traits in genome-wide studies.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009 37:W340 4.  association  [16] O Dushlaine C, Kenny E, Heron EA, Segurado R, Gill M, Morris DW, et al.
The SNP ratio test: pathway analysis of genome-wide association datasets.
Bioinformatics 2009 25:2762 3.
[17] Sartor MA, Leikauf GD, Medvedovic M. LRpath: a logistic regression approach for identifying enriched biological groups in gene expression data.
Bioinformatics 2009 25:211 7.
[18] Luo L, Peng G, Zhu Y, Dong H, Amos CI, Xiong M. Genome- J Hum Genet  and pathway  analysis.
Eur  gene  wide 2010 18:1045 53.
[19] Chen X, Wang L, Hu B, Guo M, Barnard J, Zhu X. Pathway- based analysis for genome-wide association studies using super- vised principal components.
Genet Epidemiol 2010 34:716 24.
[20] Draghici S, Khatri P, Tarca AL, Amin K, Done A, Voichita C, et al.
A systems biology approach for pathway level analysis.
Genome Res 2007 17:1537 45.
[21] Martini P, Sales G, Massa MS, Chiogna M, Romualdi C. Along signal paths: an empirical gene set approach exploiting pathway topology.
Nucleic Acids Res 2013 41:e19.
[22] Khatri P, Sirota M, Butte AJ.
Ten years of pathway analysis: current approaches and outstanding challenges.
PLoS Comput Biol 2012 8:e1002375.
[23] Wilke RA, Mareedu RK, Moore JH.
The pathway less traveled: moving from candidate genes to candidate pathways in the analysis of genome-wide data from large scale pharmacogenetic association studies.
Curr Pharmacogenomics Person Med 2008 6:150 9.
[24] Giacomelli L, Covani U. Bioinformatics and data mining studies in oral genomics and proteomics: new trends and challenges.
Open Dent J 2010 4:67 71.
[25] Elbers CC, van Eijk KR, Franke L, Mulder F, van der Schouw YT, Wijmenga C, et al.
Using genome-wide pathway analysis to unravel the etiology of complex diseases.
Genet Epidemiol 2009 33:419 31.
[26] Lesnick TG, Papapetropoulos S, Mash DC, Ffrench-Mullen J, Shehadeh L, de Andrade M, et al.
A genomic pathway approach to a complex disease: axon guidance and Parkinson disease.
PLoS Genet 2007 3:e98.
[27] Lee YH, Bae SC, Choi SJ, Ji JD, Song GG.
Genome-wide pathway analysis of genome-wide association studies on systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis.
Mol Biol Rep 2012 39:10627 35.
[28] Liu Y, Li Z, Zhang M, Deng Y, Yi Z, Shi T. Exploring the pathogenetic association between schizophrenia and type 2 diabetes mellitus diseases based on pathway analysis.
BMC Med Genomics 2013 6:S17.
[29] Peng G, Luo L, Siu H, Zhu Y, Hu P, Hong S, et al.
Gene and pathway-based second-wave analysis of genome-wide association studies.
Eur J Hum Genet 2010 18:111 7.
[30] Ballard D, Abraham C, Cho J, Zhao H. Pathway analysis comparison using Crohn s disease genome wide association studies.
BMC Med Genomics 2010 3:25.
[31] Wu MC, Lin X.
Prior biological knowledge-based approaches for the analysis of genome-wide expression proﬁles using gene sets and pathways.
Stat Methods Med Res 2009 18:577 93.
[32] Chen L, Zhang L, Zhao Y, Xu L, Shang Y, Wang Q, et al.
Prioritizing risk pathways: a novel association approach to searching for disease pathways fusing SNPs and pathways.
Bioinformatics 2009 25:237 42.
220  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 210 220  [33] Barry WT, Nobel AB, Wright FA.
Signiﬁcance analysis of functional categories in gene expression studies: a structured permutation approach.
Bioinformatics 2005 21:1943 9.
[48] Sales G, Calura E, Martini P, Romualdi C. Graphite web: web tool for gene set analysis exploiting pathway topology.
Nucleic Acids Res 2013 41:W89 97.
[34] Benjamini Y, Drai D, Elmer G, Kafkaﬁ N, Golani I.
Controlling the false discovery rate in behavior genetics research.
Behav Brain Res 2001 125:279 84.
[49] Kanehisa M, Goto S, Kawashima S, Okuno Y, Hattori M. The KEGG resource for deciphering the genome.
Nucleic Acids Res 2004 32:D277 80.
[35] De la Cruz O, Wen X, Ke B, Song M, Nicolae DL.
Gene, region and pathway level analyses in whole-genome studies.
Genet Epidemiol 2010 34:222 31.
[50] Moore JH, Asselbergs FW, Williams SM.
Bioinformatics chal- for genome-wide association studies.
Bioinformatics  lenges 2010 26:445 55.
[36] Hong MG, Pawitan Y, Magnusson PK, Prince JA.
Strategies and issues in the detection of pathway enrichment in genome-wide association studies.
Hum Genet 2009 126:289 301.
[51] Minguez P, Dopazo J. Functional genomics and networks: new approaches in the extraction of complex gene modules.
Expert Rev Proteomics 2010 7:55 63.
[37] Yu K, Li Q, Bergen AW, Pfeiffer RM, Rosenberg PS, Caporaso N, et al.
Pathway analysis by adaptive combination of P-values.
Genet Epidemiol 2009 33:700 9.
[38] Liu D, Ghosh D, Lin X. Estimation and testing for the effect of a genetic pathway on a disease outcome using logistic kernel machine regression via logistic mixed models.
BMC Bioinformat- ics 2008 9:292.
[39] Wu MC, Kraft P, Epstein MP, Taylor DM, Chanock SJ, Hunter DJ, et al.
Powerful SNP-set analysis for case-control genome- wide association studies.
Am J Hum Genet 2010 86:929 42.
[40] Kanehisa M, Goto S. KEGG: Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and  genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res 2000 28:27 30.
[41] Joshi-Tope G, Vastrik I, Gopinath GR, Matthews L, Schmidt E, Gillespie M, et al.
The genome knowledgebase: a resource for biologists and bioinformaticists.
Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 2003 68:237 43.
[42] Karp PD, Riley M, Paley SM, Pellegrini-Toole A.
The MetaCyc  database.
Nucleic Acids Res 2002 30:59 61.
[43] Huerta AM, Salgado H, Thieffry D, Collado-Vides J. Regul- onDB: a database on transcriptional regulation in Escherichia coli.
Nucleic Acids Res 1998 26:55 9.
[44] Thomas PD, Campbell MJ, Kejariwal A, Mi H, Karlak B, Daverman R, et al.
PANTHER: a library of protein families and subfamilies indexed by function.
Genome Res 2003 13:2129 41.
[45] Massa MS, Chiogna M, Romualdi C. Gene set analysis exploiting  the topology of a pathway.
BMC Syst Biol 2010 4:121.
[46] Tarca AL, Draghici S, Khatri P, Hassan SS, Mittal P, Kim JS, et al.
A novel signaling pathway impact analysis.
Bioinformatics 2009 25:75 82.
[52] Lin BK, Clyne M, Walsh M, Gomez O, Yu W, Gwinn M, et al.
Tracking the epidemiology of human genes in the literature: the HuGE Published Literature database.
Am J Epidemiol 2006 164:1 4.
[53] Wang K, Li M, Hakonarson H. Analysing biological pathways in genome-wide association studies.
Nat Rev Genet 2010 11:843 54.
[54] Wang L, Jia P, Wolﬁnger RD, Chen X, Zhao Z. Gene set analysis of genome-wide association studies: methodological issues and perspectives.
Genomics 2011 98:1 8.
[55] Ramanan VK, Shen L, Moore JH, Saykin AJ.
Pathway analysis of genomic data: concepts, methods, and prospects for future development.
Trends Genet 2012 28:323 32.
[56] Nam D, Kim J, Kim SY, Kim S. GSA-SNP: a general approach for gene set analysis of polymorphisms.
Nucleic Acids Res 2010 38:W749 54.
[57] Guo YF, Li J, Chen Y, Zhang LS, Deng HW.
A new permutation strategy of pathway-based approach for genome-wide association study.
BMC Bioinformatics 2009 10:429.
[58] Draghici S, Khatri P, Martins RP, Ostermeier GC, Krawetz SA.
expression.
Genomics  functional proﬁling of gene  Global 2003 81:98 104.
[59] Shendure J, Ji H. Next-generation DNA sequencing.
Nat  Biotechnol 2008 26:1135 45.
[60] Gottlieb B, Beitel LK, Alvarado C, Triﬁro MA.
Selection and mutation in the   new   genetics: an emerging hypothesis.
Hum Genet 2010 127:491 501.
[61] Siva N. 1000 Genomes project.
Nat Biotechnol 2008 26:256.
[62] Zhao J, Zhu Y, Boerwinkle E, Xiong M. Pathway analysis with next-generation sequencing data.
Eur J Hum Genet 2014. http:// dx.doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2014.121.
[47] Sales G, Calura E, Cavalieri D, Romualdi C. Graphite   a Bioconductor package to convert pathway topology to gene network.
BMC Bioinformatics 2012 13:20.
[63] Chin CS, Alexander DH, Marks P, Klammer AA, Drake J, Heiner C, et al.
Nonhybrid, ﬁnished microbial genome assemblies from long-read SMRT sequencing data.
Nat Methods 2013 10:563 9.
