Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 219 229  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics  www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb  www.sciencedirect.com  ORIGINAL RESEARCH  In silico Proteome-wide Amino aCid and Elemental Composition (PACE) Analysis of Expression Proteomics Data Provides A Fingerprint of Dominant Metabolic Processes  David M. Good 1,#, Anwer Mamdoh 1, Harshavardhan Budamgunta 1, Roman A. Zubarev 1,2,*  1 Division of Physiological Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institute,  SE 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden  2 Science for Life Laboratory, SE 171 21 Solna, Sweden  Received 22 February 2013  revised 29 May 2013  accepted 6 June 2013 Available online 3 August 2013  KEYWORDS  Shotgun proteomics  Mass spectrometry  LC MS/MS  Data reduction  Cyanobacterium  Arginine deprivation  Abstract Proteome-wide Amino aCid and Elemental composition (PACE) analysis is a novel and informative way of interrogating the proteome.
The PACE approach consists of in silico decompo- sition of proteins detected and quantiﬁed in a proteomics experiment into 20 amino acids and ﬁve elements (C, H, N, O and S), with protein abundances converted to relative abundances of amino acids and elements.
The method is robust and very sensitive  it provides statistically reliable differ- entiation between very similar proteomes.
In addition, PACE provides novel insights into prote- ome-wide metabolic processes, occurring, e.g., during cell starvation.
For instance, both Escherichia coli and Synechocystis down-regulate sulfur-rich proteins upon sulfur deprivation, but E. coli preferentially down-regulates cysteine-rich proteins while Synechocystis mainly down- regulates methionine-rich proteins.
Due to its relative simplicity, ﬂexibility, generality and wide applicability, PACE analysis has the potential of becoming a standard analytical tool in proteomics.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail: Roman.Zubarev@ki.se (Zubarev RA).
# Current address: Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin    Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier  Introduction  Modern proteomics analysis provides the identities and the rel- ative abundance changes for thousands of proteins per a single LC MS/MS experiment [1,2].
However, since many proteins have multiple functions and the exact function of many pro- teins is not yet known, this information is not always easy to rationalize.
Pathway analysis [3,4] provides mapping of the proteome onto more than 160 known signaling pathways and dozens of metabolic pathways.
Nonetheless, molecular  1672-0229/$ - see front matter ª 2013 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2013.07.002   220  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 219 229  pathways are often overlapping and inter-related, such a map- ping is rarely unequivocal.
A similar problem plagues the pop- ular gene ontology (GO) mapping.
Ideally, an aggregate analysis of the proteome state would involve mapping onto a i.e., non-overlapping reasonably small number orthogonal, and mutually independent, classiﬁcation factors that have clear physico-chemical interpretations.
Although mutually orthogo- nal (  extreme  ) pathways have been constructed for microor- ganisms [5,6], such constructs are usually artiﬁcial, i.e., do not have clear counterparts at the molecular level.
However, methods to reduce the proteome to a manageable number of orthogonal entities do exist.
For example, proteins can be broken down into their constituent amino acids (AAs).
Since amino acids in protein sequences are, in general, not mutually interchangeable (the evidence for which is their sur- vival of the evolutionary pressure), they represent an orthogo- nal set for global proteome analysis.
And since all organisms try to minimize the   cost   of protein synthesis by adjusting their AA content to speciﬁc growth conditions [7], it is reason- able to assume that changes in these conditions will be reﬂected in the abundances of the component AAs.
Thus, a proteome- wide AA composition analysis can provide an aggregate ﬁn- gerprint characterizing the speciﬁc state of a given organism.
Unfortunately, the current methods for AA analysis all possess signiﬁcant drawbacks.
Edman degradation [8], for in- stance, is limited with regard to the size of polypeptide which can be interrogated.
Meanwhile, acid hydrolysis [9,10] fol- lowed by quantiﬁcation with either ninhydrin [11 13] or mass spectrometry (MS) [14 17] is limited by exposing proteins to harsh chemical treatment, which in turn completely destroys unstable AAs, e.g., tryptophan.
Even a short hydrolysis dura- tion leads to deamidation of asparagine and glutamine to aspartic acid and glutamic acid, respectively [10,18].
As will be shown below, the AA and element analyses of whole proteomes can provide valuable information on the ongoing metabolic processes.
Here, we present a novel, non- destructive method of performing such analysis on quantita- tive data obtained in expression proteomics experiments.
The entire Proteome-wide Amino aCid and Elemental composition (PACE) analysis is performed in silico, and as it can be applied to previously acquired data, it can provide fresh insights from earlier results without a requirement of new experiments.
In i.e., can be addition, this method is platform-independent, used for data generated with any mass spectrometric, and even non-mass-spectrometric (e.g., laser ﬂuorescence or antibody- based) quantitative proteomics platforms.
What relevant biological insights can PACE mapping pro- vide  At a very basic level, it can answer the question of whether two given proteomes are different better than any other known statistical method while providing a quantitative estimate of this difference and associated P value.
PACE map- ping also yields a ﬁngerprint of the dominant metabolic pro- cesses and, in some cases, even reveals their character.
For instance, PACE analysis conﬁrms that single-cell organisms deprived of a single element (e.g., sulfur) during growth exhibit depletion of this element in their proteins [7].
Analyzing both our own and published data with PACE, we investigated the question of whether this depletion is proteome-wide or is in- stead concentrated in a few highly abundant proteins.
We also used PACE to reveal which AA residues get depleted and to what degree.
Processes not involving nutrient depletion (e.g., cold or heat stress) also leave a speciﬁc mark in the PACE  domain, which subsequently can be used as a ﬁngerprint for their recognition.
As a novel and informative way of interro- gating the proteome, which combines relative simplicity, ﬂexi- bility and wide applicability, PACE has the potential of becoming a standard analytical tool in proteomics.
Results  Distribution of PACE signal in the proteome  proteome)  Until very recently, proteomics analyses were unable to reveal the entire expressed proteome due to the high dynamic range of protein expression.
Thus, in any real-life experiment, a subset of the total expressed proteome is sampled, representing the most abundant part of the proteome.
To investigate whether the partial nature of the proteomics data affects the PACE dia- gram, we analyzed a   deep proteomics   ( 50% of the ex- pressed the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp.
PCC 6803 [19].
The total list of 2000 quantiﬁed proteins was randomly split into two halves, and a PACE AA (Figure 1) and elemental histogram (Figure S1) were produced for each of the half-proteomes.
The visual simi- larity between the two histograms is conﬁrmed by correlation analysis (Figure 2  R2 P 0.8 for both correlations).
This example demonstrates that the PACE signal is distributed throughout the whole proteome, and the partial nature of real-life proteo- mics data does not affect the PACE analysis fatally.
literature  dataset  of  Detection of small differences between proteomes  To answer the question as to whether the observed proteome dif- ferences between two cellular states are statistically signiﬁcant, one typically needs to use principal component analysis (PCA) or a similar statistical method to differentiate two groups, each consisting of multiple replicate analyses.
In the absence of a pri- ori knowledge of statistics associated with protein abundances (each protein being, strictly speaking, a separate statistical en- tity), there is no easy method to assign statistical signiﬁcance to a difference, if only two proteomics datasets are available.
However, this task becomes solvable with PACE analysis, as the following example demonstrates.
In this example, a pair of measured proteomes (lists of  500 protein identities and respec- tive abundances  T1 and T2) represents two technical replicates of the same proteome B1, while a third measured proteome (B2) represents a separate biological replicate.
The protein abun- dances of the same proteome analyzed repeatedly (technical rep- licates) are affected by random, statistically independent errors in the measured abundances of individual proteins, while non- identical but biologically similar proteomes (biological repli- cates) vary in a fundamentally different way, where abundances of the proteins within the same pathway are statistically linked.
A simple comparison through the correlation coefﬁcient R gives similar values when T1 and T2 are compared (R2 = 0.9999) as well as for the similarity between T2 and B2 (R2 = 0.9989), and provides no estimate for P values of the differences (Fig- ure 2A).
The failure of standard approaches to robustly differen- tiate between the biologically unique samples as compared to technical replicates of the same sample is further demonstrated by unsupervised PCA of the data (Figure 2A).
Here, the PCA model yields a nonsensical negative Q2 value, illustrating the inability to separate these datasets from each other.
Good DM et al / Proteome-wide Amino Acid Mapping  221  Figure 1 Robustness of the PACE method The effect of randomly splitting the   sample   and   control   proteomes into two equal parts: the resulting PACE histograms of sample/ control comparison are very similar.
Figure 2 PACE detects minute differences A.
Principle component analysis (PCA) on three measured proteomes, of which two   Biorep 1-tech rep 1(B1_T1) and B1_T2   are technical replicates, and B2_T1 is another biological replicate.
B.
PACE analysis on the same data.
left: B1_T1 vs. B1_T2  right: B1_T1 vs. B2_T1.
PCA is unable to distinguish either the technical replicates or the biological replicates from each other with statistical signiﬁcance, while upon performing PACE analysis, the biological replicates are able to be teased apart with statistical signiﬁcance, thus illustrating the power of PACE to identify minute but real biological variability.
In contrast, PACE analysis of the same data allows a straightforward statistical testing of the T2/T1 and B2/T1 dif- ferences (Figure 2B).
To illustrate the method of testing, imag- ine two measured proteome datasets, A and B, the comparison of which gives a PACE AA histogram A/B.
Let us deﬁne the PACE   difference   D as a standard deviation of the 20 AA abundance values in A/B from zero.
Since the null hypothesis is that A and B represent the same proteome, the true value of D is zero if the null hypothesis is accepted.
Thus, the question  of whether A and B represent biologically different proteomes is reduced to testing whether DA/B, which is the observed value of D, is consistent with its true value being zero.
To address the latter issue, one needs to ﬁnd the probability to obtain DA/B or larger value by pure chance, i.e., to calculate P value.
Assum- ing the half-normal distribution of D (assumption arising due to the fact that D is always non-negative), P value can be cal- culated as P = 1   erf(DA/B/[p1/2Dm]), where erf is the error function and Dm is the mean value of D. The latter quantity   222  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 219 229  can be estimated by repeated random permutation of the pro- tein abundances between A and B (this method of randomiza- tion does not require a priori knowledge of the statistical properties of individual protein abundances).
In the example above, P   0.06 (no statistical signiﬁcance) for the comparison between T1 and T2, whereas P   0.007 (good statistical signif- icance) between T1 and B2.
Thus for T1 and T2 comparison, the null hypothesis (common origin) remains valid, while for T1 and B2 it should be rejected.
Therefore, PACE analysis provides a statistical evaluation of small differences between just a few measured proteome datasets, in a situation where standard statistical methods fail.
Sulfur assimilation by Escherichia coli  Sulfur is an essential nutrient and can be a growth-limiting fac- tor in freshwater environments [7].
It is also unique among the six elements most important for life  C, H, N, O, S and P, in that it is mostly protein-related, which makes it most suitable for studying proteomics effects of element availability.
More- over, sulfur is unique among the ﬁve most protein-related ele- ments  C, H, N, O and S, in that it is not found within the polypeptide backbone, but instead only in the side chains of two AAs   cysteine and methionine.
Therefore, the impact due to changes in the availability of sulfur should be easily traceable not only in the element analysis, but also at the level of the AA content of the proteome.
Indeed, there is ample evidence in the literature of the im- pact that sulfur has on the proteome.
In response to decreased sulfur levels in water, the cyanobacterium Calothrix sp.
PCC 7601 initiates the production of a methionine- and cysteine- de- pleted form of its most abundant protein phycocyanin [7].
The cyanobacterium Fremyella diplosiphon behaves in a similar way.
This response occurs over the physiological range of  sulfate concentrations likely to be encountered by the organ- ism in its natural environment, which can be viewed as a form of environmental accommodation [20].
Although phycocyanin does not take part in sulfur ﬁxation, its elevated expression is believed to affect the sulfur budget of cyanobacterial cells [5].
Other microorganisms, such as bacteria and yeast, can also re- spond to sulfur and carbon deprivation by reducing the num- ber of sulfur and carbon atoms in the sulfur assimilatory pathway and carbon assimilatory pathway, respectively [21].
One question which has as of yet remained unanswered by previous research is whether sulfur deprivation affects the whole proteome, or depletion in methionine and cysteine is only observed in the most abundant protein(s).
Another rele- vant question is to what extent each of these two AAs is af- fected.
To answer these questions, we grew E. coli strain BL21 under conditions when low sulfur or low nitrogen con- centrations started to reduce the growth rate (Figure 3).
Prote- omes of the microbes in their exponential growth phases were extracted and subjected to quantitative proteomics measure- ments.
PACE analysis followed based on  500 quantiﬁed proteins.
Not completely unexpectedly [16,20], sulfur depletion led to an overall reduction of sulfur content in the proteome, while nitrogen depletion led to reduction of nitrogen (Figure 3B).
At the AA level of analysis (left panel), the relative effects of sulfur starvation vary for cysteine and methionine, with cys- teine being relatively more depleted.
This effect can partially be explained by the fact that, in our PACE analysis, the N-terminal methionine has always been considered present, while in reality many proteins lack this residue.
It is, however, unlikely that the observed large differences between the cys- teine and methionine peaks are solely due to this phenomenon (vide infra).
In addition, it is likely that the cysteine/methionine depletion is contained throughout the proteome, and not  Figure 3 Effect of sulfur depletion and nitrogen depletion on E. coli A.
Growth curves of E. coli with respect to the level of nitrogen and sulfur content within their minimum growth media.
B.
PACE analysis of the observed proteome changes for nitrogen depletion versus sulfur depletion.
Good DM et al / Proteome-wide Amino Acid Mapping  223  Figure 4 PACE analysis of sulfur depletion and nitrogen depletion on Synechocystis PACE analysis of the observed proteome changes in Synechocystis resulting from depletion of sulfur as compared to depletion of nitrogen.
The P value for sulfur depletion peak is 8   10 7, while for nitrogen enrichment peak, P is less than 3   10 7 for the element domain.
simply in a few abundant proteins.
If the latter were true, then the error bars would be much larger.
In the nitrogen depletion, it is notable that not all nitrogen- rich AAs in the proteome are affected equally.
For example, both lysine and arginine show no statistically signiﬁcant differ- ence between N and S starvations, while both glutamine and asparagine are quite depleted in nitrogen starvation as com- pared to sulfur starvation.
This may be a manifestation of the fact that many E. coli strains preferentially catabolize these two AAs upon nitrogen starvation in glucose-ammonia mini- mal media [22].
Carbon/nitrogen assimilation by a cyanobacterium  Cyanobacteria are the only prokaryotes capable of oxygenic photosynthesis and they play a crucial role in the global car- bon/nitrogen balance.
Wegener et al.
have performed a large-scale proteomic analysis of the widely studied model cya- nobacterium Synechocystis sp.
PCC 6803 under different envi- ronmental conditions [19].
We have PACE-analyzed their dataset of approximately 2000 proteins (53% of the predicted proteome) and their abundance changes in response to envi- ronmental stress.
Most remarkable in the study was the impact of nitrogen deﬁcit (shortage of nitrate) during growth.
To ac- count for the observed proteome changes, the authors sug- gested that the cyanobacterium resorts in these conditions to an unusual pathway in nitrogen accommodation.
As an alternative method to pathway analysis, nitrogen assimilation can be investigated through PACE analysis.
In some microorganisms, proteins involved in the assimilation of carbon and sulfur are depleted in these respective elements  compared to the rest of the proteome.
Therefore, Baudouin- Cornu et al.
predicted that oligotrophic organisms could adapt to the permanent scarcity of an element by diminution of the content of that element in all proteins [22].
This prediction has been conﬁrmed in yeast, which adapts to sulfur scarcity by reducing the content of sulfur-rich proteins in the proteome [23].
However, no net reduction of carbon in the proteome has been reported in yeast, due to its acute response to carbon lim- itation in relation to yeast limited by other nutrients (N, S or P) [22].
If the nitrogen effect in cyanobacterium is similar to the sulfur effect observed in yeast, one could predict that a nitrogen deﬁcit should lead to down-regulation of nitrogen- rich proteins.
To test this hypothesis and also to investigate the sulfur effect in an organism other than yeast, we performed PACE analysis of the dataset from Wegener et al.
[19].
The ele- mental histogram (Figure 4) shows the proteome changes in the cyanobacterium grown on a nitrogen-depleted medium as compared to a sulfur-depleted medium.
Here, the sulfur peak is strongly positive, while the nitrogen peak is signiﬁcantly neg- ative.
The value of the latter on the arbitrary scale is 3.73, while random permutation of protein identities and abun- dances gives an average of 0.51.
Assuming normal statistics, the P value of the nitrogen peak is less than 3   10 7.
Similarly, the P value for the sulfur depletion peak is 8   10 7.
Thus, the effect of down-regulation of sulfur- and nitrogen-rich proteins upon the corresponding starvation, which has been previously seen in yeast [22], exists in other organisms as well.
At the AA level, sulfur depletion affected methionine in the proteome much more signiﬁcantly than cysteine, in contrast to the situation observed in E. coli (compare Figures 3 and 4).
Nitrogen depletion caused the most signiﬁcant down-regulation   224  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 219 229  Figure 5 PACE elucidates similarities between heat shock and cold shock response A.
Comparison of PACE analyses of changes within the Synechocystis proteome due to heat shock and cold shock compared to standard growth conditions.
B.
Linear correlation between cold- and heat-shock responses in the AA space.
of glutamine (Q)- and arginine (R)-containing proteins, while ly- sine (K) remained unaffected and asparagine (N) content some- what increased (Figure 4).
Therefore, it appears that the scarcity of nitrogen in the media caused a shortage of arginine, an alter- native source of nitrogen for cell growth [19].
Conversion of arginine into succinate also releases, besides glutamate and ammonia (which is also assimilated into glutamate), CO2, whose carbon is then ﬁxed by ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase oxygenase (RuBisCO) [19].
This process may explain the ob- served excess of carbon-containing proteins under nitrogen star- vation conditions (Figure 4).
Interpretation of the proteomics data at the level of individ- ual proteins has been less than straightforward [19].
Classiﬁca- tion of differentially regulated proteins according to known cellular functions yielded little insight, as the results were not correlated with observed physiological responses.
Moreover,  a large number of proteins with unknown functions showed signiﬁcant differential regulation during both depletion and recovery phases, as did many proteins associated with common housekeeping functions.
Most proteins related to photosynthe- sis and pigment biosynthesis did not show signiﬁcant changes in their abundance, although some proteins with several criti- cal functions were differentially regulated.
For example, heme oxygenase was down-regulated during nutrient depletion con- ditions [19].
This demonstrates one pitfall of straightforward interpretation of protein expression levels.
That is, although the majority of environmental perturbations had little impact on levels of proteins involved in photosynthesis, the slow growth and chlorosis indicated that the efﬁciency of photosyn- thetic reactions was nevertheless signiﬁcantly affected by these perturbations [19].
In contrast to that complex picture arising due to the intricacy of cellular mechanics and the limited   Good DM et al / Proteome-wide Amino Acid Mapping  225  Figure 6 PACE analysis of arginine deprivation on human carcinoma cell line A431 The effects of arginine deprivation on sensitive human A431 epidermoid carcinoma cells 24 h (A) and 48 h (B) after growth in arginine-free media.
knowledge of the functional roles of proteins, PACE analysis provided an aggregate, easily interpretable view on the effect of nutrient deprivation on the proteome.
Fingerprinting of cellular response  Another important aspect of PACE analysis is to provide a ﬁn- gerprint of the responses of an organism to varying environ- mental and/or other stresses.
Figure 5 demonstrates how the Synechocystis proteome responds to heat or cold stress as com- pared to normal growth in the control BG11 media.
A striking similarity (R2   0.9, corresponding to P   0.0001) of the AA domain response to these two seemingly opposite stressors was revealed.
This similarity is also observed on the elemental level (Figure S2).
One may hypothesize that this could be the result of each of these stresses being thermal in nature.
How- ever, in E. coli, heat shock and cold shock protein are tightly controlled not to be expressed simultaneously [24].
Thus the similarity in the AA and elemental domains does not necessar- ily extend to the level of individual proteins.
Therefore, the above PACE observation is intriguing and invites a more de- tailed research.
Effect of arginine deprivation on A431 human cells  Speciﬁc AA deprivation can selectively target subsets of hu- man cancers.
To study the effect of arginine deprivation, hu- man A431 epidermoid carcinoma cells were exposed to varying time intervals with arginine-deprived media.
Figure 6 provides the ﬁrst-ever view on the effect of such treatment on the proteomes after 24 h and 48 h of arginine deprivation.
Not surprisingly, a signiﬁcant drop in nitrogen is observed  for both depletion periods.
Another expected result was the down-regulation of the proteins rich with arginine.
Also as ex- pected, and again supporting the robustness of PACE analysis, the AA response patterns for each of the time points are quite similar, with a relative change of each being in the same direc- tion (either up- or down-regulated) within the experimental error.
Perhaps far more interesting than the expected results, how- ever, are the responses of those AAs which do not seem to be affected by such deprivation.
For example, though the overall level of nitrogen was reduced, only arginine was found to be down-regulated among the nitrogen-rich AAs.
This speaks to the selectivity of arginine deprivation.
Discussion  Searching for a mutually independent limited set of parameters with which to quantitatively characterize the difference(s) be- tween proteomes, we have discovered that proteome-wide ami- no acid and elemental composition analysis (PACE-analysis) possesses the required features.
Mapping the whole proteome onto 20 AAs provides a large parameter space and thus high i.e., speciﬁcity, while also exhibiting maximum sensitivity, detecting statistically signiﬁcant differences between two   identical   biological proteomes, which conventional methods based on individual proteins fail to uncover.
Recently, Choi et al.
have introduced an interesting approach to ﬁnding statis- tically signiﬁcant differences in protein abundances that works with a small number of replicates [25].
The difference in the ap- proaches is that Choi et al.
assume that different proteins in the same proteome are statistically related, but they do not take into account the identities of individual proteins.
In   226  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 219 229  Figure 7 PACE work-ﬂow Shown here is a graphical description of the work-ﬂow for PACE analysis.
The quantitative proteomics data are loaded and protein sequences are identiﬁed in the corresponding protein database.
For each sequence found, an array is created with the number of each AA or element contained within that protein.
These arrays for all proteins are summed together, using as weighing factors for relative protein abundances in n-th power (scaling factor).
The summed arrays for   sample   and   control   can then be compared, resulting in either a   relative   or   absolute   difference.
contrary, PACE analysis considers AA composition of each protein and explicitly utilizes intrinsic correlations between the abundances of proteins that share common compositional features.
These two approaches are complementary, and a sit- uation is conceivable (e.g., when all protein abundances differ by less than 50%) when PACE can detect a difference that the approach of Choi et al.
will miss.
Mapping the same dataset onto ﬁve bio-elements (C, H, N, O and S) reduces the speciﬁcity but provides clear insight into metabolic assimilation of nutrients, and can give important clues in the case of a deﬁcit of a valuable element.
Finally, PACE, being an in silico analysis, is applicable to a wide range of emerging and already published data, thus extending useful- ness of such an approach.
Good DM et al / Proteome-wide Amino Acid Mapping  227  Materials and methods  PACE analysis  The PACE approach is illustrated in Figure 7.
In the simplest case, proteomics data contain a list of protein identities and their relative abundances Asi and Aci for proteomes of   sam- ple   and   control  , respectively.
In order to avoid a systematic bias due to the differences in total protein amounts, total pro- tein abundances in all proteomes are normalized to the same value prior to PACE analysis.
Another required input is pro- tein sequence database.
For each protein i in the list, the PACE algorithm ﬁnds its AA sequence in the database and reduces it to an occurrence histogram of 20 AA residues, (1aai .
.
.
20aai).
Then, the occurrence histograms for individual proteins are summed together to a total histogram (1AAi .
.
.
20AAi).
Sum- mation occurs with a weight Wi, i.e., AAi = Wi Æ aai, where Wi ¼ A1=n ð1Þ Here, A is the relative abundance of protein, and n ( 0) is the power factor, whose function is to reduce the effect of large proteome dynamic range (P7 orders of magnitude) and ensure that contribution of each protein to the total weight is not neg- ligible.
Typically, the value of n was in the range of 3 5, reﬂect- ing the dynamic range of the measured proteome.
Note that in PACE analysis, proteins are not separated into up-/down-reg- ulated and unchanged  all protein signals are utilized, regard- less of their intensity or statistical signiﬁcance, as statistical evaluation of the results is performed at a later stage.
i  The total histograms (1AAs/c .
.
.
20AAs/c) for   sample   and  ð2Þ    control   are then compared in relative terms: jkr ¼ ððjAAs=jAAcÞ   1Þ   1000 as well as   absolute   terms, jka ¼ ðjAA   jAAcÞ   1000 ð3Þ and expressed in promil ( 0.001).
Each resultant dataset con- tains 20 numbers, both positive and negative, that show the change (relative or   absolute  ) of abundances for respective AAs in the proteome of   sample   and   control   compared to   control  .
A similar procedure is used for elemental composi- tion analysis, with lEs/c (l = 1. .
.5) replacing jAAs/c.
The magni- tudes and the error bars for the total histogram were calculated from of a set of results, each obtained from PACE analysis of a unique   sample     control   pair of replicates.
For instance, if there are two replicates for   sample   and   control  , then the four pairwise comparisons (S1/C1, S1/C2, S2/C1 and S2/C2) will give a set of four values for each histogram column.
The average of this set will be reported as the column magnitude, while standard error will be represented as its error bar.
E. coli growth and analysis  Growth Curve Analysis System (Growth Curves USA, Piscata- way, NJ) with a growth time of 24 h at 39  C. Growth was auto- matically recorded through use of optical density measurements taken at wavelength of 600 nm (OD600).
Three biological repli- cates were run for each condition.
At the end of culture, 3 mL of E. coli containing media were collected for each condition and spun down at  5000 g. The resulting pellet was rinsed with PBS and re-pelleted.
Lysis and digestion were performed as outlined previously [26].
Brieﬂy, lysis buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, one tablet of Complete Mini protease inhibitors cocktail [Roche Diagnostics, Bromma, Sweden] and 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate) was added in a volume ratio of  3:1 buffer to cell pellet.
Samples were probe-sonicated on ice   3   60 s with 90 s pause (6 s run, 3 s pause  amplitude 40%), vortexed and then centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4  C.  Protein concentration was determined using BCA assay (Thermo Scientiﬁc, Rockford, IL, USA) and 20 lg of each sample were taken for overnight trypsin digestion, following the method previously described [26].
Resulting peptides were cleaned using C18 Zip-Tips (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and samples were analyzed by LC MS/MS employing an EASY nLC (Thermo Scientiﬁc, Odense, Denmark) coupled to a Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with electron transfer dissociation (ETD) [27,28] (Thermo Scientiﬁc, Bre- men, Germany).
Survey mass spectra were acquired at 60,000 resolving power and a data-dependent top-10 method was employed, with each precursor ion being fragmented by both ETD and collision-activated dissociation (CAD) in the linear ion trap, with subsequent detection there.
Resulting .raw data were converted to Mascot generic for- mat (.mgf) ﬁles using in-house software and ETD spectra were cleaned [29,30] prior to database searching with Mascot.
CAD and ETD spectra were not separated prior to searching against a concatenated version of the SwissProt E. coli database.
The parameters employed were: peptide tolerance  10 ppm, frag- ment ion tolerance  0.6 Da, a maximum of three missed cleavages, ﬁxed modiﬁcation of carbamidomethyl on cysteine and a variable modiﬁcation of oxidation on methionine.
Search results were downloaded to a local computer as .dat ﬁles and subsequently ﬁltered to a  1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the target-decoy strategy [31].
These ﬁltered ﬁles were then merged and the retention times for sequenced pep- tides were aligned using in-house software.
This merged ﬁle was then re-searched in Mascot against a forward-only data- base.
The resulting .dat ﬁle was used by the Quanti quantiﬁca- tion algorithm [32] label-free quantiﬁcation with a minimum of three proteotypic peptides employed for calcula- tion of abundance of each protein.
PCA was performed using SIMCA-P+software (Umetrics, Sweden).
for  Arginine deprivation  E. coli BL21 stock cells were cultured in M9 minimal media.
To observe varying stress responses of the organism due to deple- tion of certain elements, speciﬁc forms of the M9 media deﬁcient in carbon (glucose), nitrogen (NH4Cl) or sulfur (MgSO4) were employed: control (none of the elements depleted), 5% of control, 1% of control, and 0% (100% depletion).
All samples were incubated in a Bioscreen C Automated Microbiology  A431 epidermoid carcinoma cells (ATCC  CRL-1555) have previously been shown to be sensitive to depletion of the con- ditionally-essential amino acid arginine [33], likely due to inac- tivity of argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS1).
Therefore, we chose here to employ these cells under such deprivation condi- tions to provide a model system for investigating the ability of PACE to tease out important biological information from experiments focused on in vitro studies of human cell lines.
228  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 219 229  A431 cells were cultured in Dulbecco s Modiﬁed Eagle s Medium (DMEM  VWR, Solna, Sweden) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (heat-inactivated at 57  C for 1 h), 1% L-glutamine, 1% streptomycin/penicillin and 1% sodium pyruvate.
Cells were cultured in a humidiﬁed atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37  C. Arginine-depleted media was obtained by adding arginase (20 units for 40 mL of media).
After cell split- ting and establishing solid growth, their growth media were re- placed with the depleted media (time = 0).
Control cells were grown in full media.
Cells were harvested after 24 and 48 h in the depleted media.
Upon reaching  75% conﬂuency, cells were trypsin-released, rinsed with PBS and pelleted prior to lysis (lysis, sample clean-up and LC/MS/MS analysis were performed as described above).
Authors  contributions  DMG and RAZ designed experiments.
DMG wrote the PACE software.
AM performed E. coli experiments  HB and DMG performed human cell line experiments.
DMG and RAZ wrote the manuscript.
All authors read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Competing interests  The authors claim no competing interests in the work presented here.
Acknowledgements  This work was supported by grants from the Swedish Research Council (Grant No.
2009-4103) as well as the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation to RZ.
DMG is thankful for a Wenner-Gren post-doctoral fellowship.
Supplementary material  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2013.
07.002.
References  [1] Graumann J, Hubner NC, Kim JB, Ko K, Moser M, Kumar C, et al.
Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) and proteome quantitation of mouse embryonic stem cells to a depth of 5111 proteins.
Mol Cell Proteomics 2008 7:672 83.
[2] de Godoy LM, Olsen JV, Cox J, Nielsen ML, Hubner NC, Frohlich F, et al.
Comprehensive mass-spectrometry-based pro- teome quantiﬁcation of haploid versus diploid yeast.
Nature 2008 455:1251 4.
[3] Good DM, Zubarev RA.
Drug target identiﬁcation from protein dynamics using quantitative pathway analysis.
J Proteome Res 2011 10:2679 83.
[4] Zubarev RA, Nielsen ML, Fung EM, Savitski MM, Kel- Margoulis O, Wingender E, et al.
Identiﬁcation of dominant  signaling pathways from proteomics expression data.
J Proteo- mics 2008 71:89 96.
[5] Schilling CH, Palsson BO.
Assessment of the metabolic capabil- ities of Haemophilus inﬂuenzae Rd through a genome-scale pathway analysis.
J Theor Biol 2000 203:249 83.
[6] Schilling CH, Schuster S, Palsson BO, Heinrich R. Metabolic pathway analysis: basic concepts and scientiﬁc applications in the post-genomic era.
Biotechnol Prog 1999 15:296 303.
[7] Mazel D, Marliere P. Adaptive eradication of methionine and light-harvesting proteins.
Nature  cysteine from cyanobacterial 1989 341:245 8.
[8] Edman P. A method for the determination of amino acid sequence  in peptides.
Arch Biochem 1949 22:475.
[9] Braconnot HM.
Sur la conversion des matie  res animales en nouvelles substances par le moyen de l acide sulfurique.
Ann Chim Phys Ser 2 1820 13:113 25.
[10] Burr GO, Gortner RA.
The humin formed by the acid hydrolysis of proteins VIII.
The condensation of indole derivatives with aldehydes.
J Am Chem Soc 1924 46:1224 46.
[11] Moore S, Stein WH.
Chromatographic determination of amino acids by the use of automatic recording equipment.
Methods Enzymol 1963 6:819 31.
[12] Alterman MA, Hunziker P. Amino acid analysis: methods and  protocols.
Totowa, New Jersey: Humana Press  2012.
[13] Cooper C, Packer N, Williams K. Amino acid analysis proto-  cols.
New York: Humana Press  2001.
[14] Bordeerat NK, Georgieva NI, Klapper DG, Collins LB, Cross TJ, Borchers CH, et al.
Accurate quantitation of standard peptides used for quantitative proteomics.
Proteomics 2009 9:3939 44.
[15] Louwagie M, Kieffer-Jaquinod S, Dupierris V, Coute Y, Bruley C, Garin J, et al.
Introducing AAA-MS, a rapid and sensitive method for amino acid analysis using isotope dilution and high-resolution mass spectrometry.
J Proteome Res 2012 11:3929 36.
[16] Kato M, Takatsu A. Amino acid analysis by hydrophilic interaction chromatography coupled with isotope dilution mass spectrometry.
Methods Mol Biol 2012 828:55 62.
[17] Mirgorodskaya OA, Korner R, Kozmin YP, Roepstorff P. Absolute quantitation of proteins by acid hydrolysis combined with amino acid detection by mass spectrometry.
Methods Mol Biol 2012 828:115 20.
[18] Zubarev RA, Chivanov VD, Hakansson P, Sundqvist BU.
Peptide sequencing by partial acid hydrolysis and high resolution plasma desorption mass spectrometry.
Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom 1994 8:906 12.
[19] Wegener KM, Singh AK, Jacobs JM, Elvitigala T, Welsh EA, Keren N, et al.
Global proteomics reveal an atypical strategy for carbon/nitrogen assimilation by a cyanobacterium under diverse environmental perturbations.
Mol Cell Proteomics 2010 9:2678 89.
[20] Gutu A, Alvey RM, Bashour S, Zingg D, Kehoe DM.
Sulfate- driven elemental sparing is regulated at the transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels in a ﬁlamentous cyanobacterium.
J Bacteriol 2011 193:1449 60.
[21] Baudouin-Cornu P, Surdin-Kerjan Y, Marliere P, Thomas D. Molecular evolution of protein atomic composition.
Science 2001 293:297 300.
[22] Bragg JG, Wagner A.
Protein carbon content evolves in response to carbon availability and may inﬂuence the fate of duplicated genes.
Proc Biol Sci 2007 274:1063 70.
[23] Fauchon M, Lagniel G, Aude JC, Lombardia L, Soularue P, Petat C, et al.
Sulfur sparing in the yeast proteome in response to sulfur demand.
Mol Cell 2002 9:713 23.
[24] Yamanaka K. Cold shock response in Escherichia coli.
J Mol  Microbiol Biotechnol 1999 1:193 202.
Good DM et al / Proteome-wide Amino Acid Mapping  229  [25] Choi H, Fermin D, Nesvizhskii AI.
Signiﬁcance analysis of spectral count data in label-free shotgun proteomics.
Mol Cell Proteomics 2008 7:2373 85.
[30] Good DM, Wenger CD, Coon JJ.
The effect of interfering ions on search algorithm performance for electron-transfer dissociation data.
Proteomics 2010 10:164 7.
[26] Good DM, Rutishauser D. Employment of complementary for body ﬂuid characterization and  dissociation techniques biomarker discovery.
Methods Mol Biol 2013 1002:223 32.
[31] Elias JE, Gygi SP.
Target-decoy search strategy for increased conﬁdence in large-scale protein identiﬁcations by mass spec- trometry.
Nat Methods 2007 4:207 14.
[27] Syka JE, Coon JJ, Schroeder MJ, Shabanowitz J, Hunt DF.
Peptide and protein sequence analysis by electron transfer dissociation mass spectrometry.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004 101:9528 33.
[28] McAlister GC, Phanstiel D, Good DM, Berggren WT, Coon JJ.
Implementation of electron-transfer dissociation on a hybrid linear spectrometer.
Anal Chem 2007 79:3525 34.  ion trap-orbitrap mass  [29] Good DM, Wenger CD, McAlister GC, Bai DL, Hunt DF, Coon JJ.
Post-acquisition ETD spectral processing for increased peptide identiﬁcations.
J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 2009 20:1435 40.
[32] Lyutvinskiy Y, Yang H, Rutishauser D, Zubarev R. In silico instrumental response correction improves precision of label-free proteomics and accuracy of proteomics-based predictive models.
Mol Cell Proteomics 2013 12:2324 31.
[33] Scott L, Lamb J, Smith S, Wheatley DN.
Single amino acid (arginine) deprivation: rapid and selective death of cultured transformed and malignant cells.
Br J Cancer 2000 83:800 10.
