Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 77 85  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics  www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb  www.sciencedirect.com  ORIGINAL RESEARCH  Interpretation, Stratiﬁcation and Evidence for Sequence Variants Aﬀecting mRNA Splicing in Complete Human Genome Sequences  Ben C. Shirley 1, Eliseos J. Mucaki 2, Tyson Whitehead 3, Paul I. Costea 4, Pelin Akan 4, Peter K. Rogan 1,2,5,*  1 Department of Computer Science, Middlesex College, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A 5B7, Canada 2 Department of Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London,  ON N6A 5C1, Canada  3 SHARCNET, London, ON N6A 5B7, Canada 4 Royal Institute of Technology, Science for Life Laboratory, Solna 17165, Sweden 5 Cytognomix Inc., London, ON N6G 4X8, Canada  Received 6 December 2012  revised 16 January 2013  accepted 21 January 2013 Available online 14 March 2013  KEYWORDS  Mutation  mRNA splicing  Information theory  Next-generation sequencing  Genome interpretation  Information theory-based methods have been shown to be sensitive and speciﬁc for pre- Abstract dicting and quantifying the effects of non-coding mutations in Mendelian diseases.
We present the Shannon pipeline software for genome-scale mutation analysis and provide evidence that the soft- ware predicts variants affecting mRNA splicing.
Individual information contents (in bits) of refer- ence and variant splice sites are compared and signiﬁcant differences are annotated and prioritized.
The software has been implemented for CLC-Bio Genomics platform.
Annotation indicates the context of novel mutations as well as common and rare SNPs with splicing effects.
Potential natural and cryptic mRNA splicing variants are identiﬁed, and null mutations are distinguished from leaky mutations.
Mutations and rare SNPs were predicted in genomes of three cancer cell lines (U2OS, U251 and A431), which were supported by expression analyses.
After ﬁltering, tractable numbers of potentially deleterious variants are predicted by the software, suitable for further laboratory investigation.
In these cell lines, novel functional variants comprised 6 17 inactivating mutations, 1 5 leaky mutations and 6 13 cryptic splicing mutations.
Predicted effects were validated by RNA-seq analysis of the three aforementioned cancer cell lines, and expression microarray analysis of SNPs in HapMap cell lines.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail: progan@uwo.ca (Rogan PK).
Introduction  Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier  The volume of human next-generation sequencing (NGS) data requiring bioinformatic analysis has necessitated development of high-performance software for genome scale assembly and analysis [1].
Genomic variations found in these analyses,  1672-0229/$ - see front matter ª 2013 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2013.01.008   78  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 77 85  particularly single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), have traditionally been interpreted in terms of amino acid modiﬁca- tions in coding regions.
Clinically-signiﬁcant non-coding vari- ants are a relatively unexplored source of pathogenic mutations and lack a general, high-throughput method to interpret their effects.
We present genome-scale software to quantify the effect of mutations in the common classes of splice donor (U1) or acceptor (U2)-type sites in a high- throughput manner.
Mutations predicted with this method will be useful for pinpointing potentially deleterious variants suit- able for further laboratory investigation.
Clinical studies have deemed the vast majority of known variants in patients with Mendelian disorders to be of uncer- tain pathogenic signiﬁcance (VUS) [2,3].
Cis mutations can af- fect protein translation, mRNA processing and initiation of transcription.
In silico methods have been developed for the ﬁrst two of these cases (e.g., [4,5]), but have only been routinely applied for protein coding changes in genome-scale applica- tions (e.g., [6]).
Many NGS studies classify mutations at only the highly conserved dinucleotides within each splice junction (e.g., [7]).
Although more sensitive methods have been devel- oped which assess other conserved sequence elements [8 12], none have been scaled for the large numbers of variants gener- ated by NGS and nor have they been validated for these data.
Exonic variants in close proximity to splice junctions but out- side of this window may be classiﬁed as synonymous, missense or nonsense substitutions, yet still have profound effects on splicing, which may be the predominant contributor to the phenotype.
Unless multiple affected patients are reported with the same mutation, the mutations are transmitted through pedigrees, and functional assays verify their effects, these vari- ants in patients are generally be classiﬁed as VUS.
mRNA splicing mutations are common in Mendelian diseases [13,14], and it is likely that they contribute to many complex disorders.
Clearly, genome-scale predictive methods that ﬁlter out benign or small changes in mRNA splicing due to sequence variation will be essential for mutation discovery in exomes, complete genomes and high-density targeted deep sequencing projects.
Examination of individual variants in the laboratory with functional assays is both expensive and inefﬁcient as many variants are not likely to be deleterious, or differ signif- icantly in their pathogenicity.
The Automated Splice Site Analysis (ASSA) [5] server eval- uates single mutations that change splice site strength with information theory-based models [15].
The average informa- tion, Rsequence, of a set of binding sites recognized by the same protein (such as U1 or U2) describes the conservation of these sequences.
Sequences are ranked according to their individual information content (Ri in bits) [15 17].
Individual informa- tion content is a portable, universal measure which allows di- rect comparison of binding sites across the genome or transcriptome, regardless of the sequence or protein recog- nizer.
Functional binding sites have Ri   0, corresponding to [18].
Strong binding sites have Ri   DG   0 kcal/mol Rsequence, while weak sites have Ri   Rsequence.
Any sequence variation may change its protein binding afﬁnity, which is re- ﬂected by a change in the computed Ri of that binding site.
A 1-bit change in information content (DRi) corresponds to a P2-fold change in binding afﬁnity (100/2DRi).
The ASSA ser- ver has been widely used and its sensitivity and speciﬁcity have previously been extensively validated in hundreds of studies of individual mutations (http://tinyurl.com/splice-server-cita-  tions).
However, it requires approximately 30 s to examine a single variant and is therefore not suitable for comprehensive analysis of whole-genome sequencing data.
The Shannon pipe- line was developed using the same mathematical approach and information weight matrices as ASSA to carry out batch infor- mation theory-based analysis of thousands of mutations from the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in Breast Cancer Information Core Database [19].
In the present study, the software has been adapted to perform a single matrix algebraic calculation across a genome with an efﬁcient state machine that signiﬁcantly in- creased computational speed over ASSA.
Here we describe this software tool and analyze predicted mutations with RNA-seq data from genomes of 3 cancer cell lines.
Results  Performance of the Shannon pipeline software  We implemented an efﬁcient algorithm for high-throughput detection and interpretation of mRNA splicing mutations based on information theory-based position weight matrices of a genome-wide set of curated splice donor and acceptor sites [20].
The present study focuses on software performance, inter- pretation of contextual changes identiﬁed from genomic anno- tations and supported by genome-scale RNA-seq data.
The strategy underlying the Shannon splicing pipeline is to evaluate many sequence changes by information analysis quickly  this is followed by implementation of a set of heuristics based on these results combined with genome annotations to distinguish normal splice sites from those with diminished binding and cryptic sites with competitive binding afﬁnities.
To assess performance, all point mutations detected in the complete genomes of the three cancer cell lines were analyzed using the pipeline.
Variants in the cell lines U2OS (osteosar- coma-derived), A431 (epidermoid squamous carcinoma-de- rived) and U251 (glioblastoma-derived) were examined and ﬁltered to create tractable sets of variants.
Predicted splice- altering mutations not found in dbSNP135 (a list of  54 mil- lion known nucleotide polymorphisms) and those with less than 1% average heterozygosity are reported (Tables S1 3).
The software processes single nucleotide variants (SNVs) to identify and annotate putative splicing mutations with sufﬁ- cient speed to analyze single or multiple genomes within a few hours.
Analysis of all single nucleotide substitutions de- tected in the genome of the U2OS cell line   211,049 variants   is completed in 1 h 12 min on an I7-based CPU in either Li- nux or Mac OSX.
The speed of a genome analysis is dependent on the number of chromosomes represented in the input data.
The state machine facilitates the analysis of all variants on a single chromosome with the highest efﬁciency because genomic data for each chromosome must be read and parsed.
A com- plete analysis of 300 variants on a single small chromosome (e.g., chromosome 22) can be completed in 5 min.
Variants dis- tributed throughout all chromosomes require at least 1 h to process.
The Shannon pipeline should be executed on a ma- chine with sufﬁcient RAM to store the entire human genome (P4 Gb).
When all chromosomes are represented, increasing the number of mutations results in an approximately linear in- crease in actual computation time, after accounting for the overhead required for memory management of genome se- quences and annotations.
For example, 2 h 35 min is required   Shirley BC et al / Genome-scale Splicing Mutation Information Analysis  79  be evidence of a splicing mutation.
In U2OS, 10 of 13 novel inactivating variants found in mutated natural splice sites met these criteria, along with 2 additional probable mutations (Table S1).
The same criteria were met by 2 of 4 (with 1 addi- tional probable) novel in U251 (Table S2), and 4 of 7 (with 1 additional probable) variants in A431 (Table S3).
inactivating  variants  Figure 1 Types of splicing mutations that affect structure and/or abundance of resulting transcripts The diagram illustrates potential outcomes of mRNA splicing mutations predicted by the Shannon pipeline.
Variation within splice donor and/or acceptor sites may lead to altered splicing events such as exon skipping (e), exonic (h) or intronic (4) cryptic site use, and/or reduction in the abundance of normally spliced mRNA forms, termed leaky mutations (s).
to analyze 1,872,893 sequence variants from the most recent data release on the Exome Variant Server (http://evs.gs.wash- ington.edu/EVS/).
The software sorts the results into categories of inactivated, leaky and cryptic splicing mutations (Figures 1 and 2).
How- ever, further in silico ﬁltering by the user is recommended to select the variants most likely to be deleterious to normal mRNA splicing.
Results are sorted according to the degree of change information (i.e., mutation severity) or by heterozy- gosity, and to deemphasize or eliminate common SNPs that af- fect mRNA splicing in cases where the phenotype is known to be rare.
Filtering of cryptic splice sites exceeding the strength of and close to adjacent natural sites of the same phase elimi- nates many predicted unused cryptic sites with changes in Ri values.
Predicted mutations in known genes with open reading frames exclude poorly characterized genes lacking HUGO-ap- proved names or encoding non-coding RNAs, and pseudo- genes.
Post-hoc ﬁltering (especially of splicing mutations) signiﬁcantly enriches for likely mutations in the genomes of these cancer cell lines by the order of 10,000 fold (Table 1).
cryptic  Comparison of predicted splicing mutations with expression data  Several variants detected in genomes of U2OS, U251 and A431, which were predicted to affect splicing, were compared to the distribution of RNA-seq reads in their respective regions of the transcriptome.
When interpreting these data, we assume that predicted mutations are present in a genetic background, in which the other parentally derived allele lacks the same var- iant (i.e., heterozygous).
Abnormal reads or exon skipping of the mutant allele is viewed in the context of a single allele and expected normal splicing of the corresponding exon.
For mutations that are predicted to inactivate a splice site, we as- sume a binomial distribution in the number of expected reads, based on the wild type allele.
Natural splice site mutations are expected to signiﬁcantly reduce the number of splice junction- spanning reads in relation to those in the adjacent exons, con- sistent with exon skipping.
In some cases, intron inclusion adjacent to a splice site variant with lower Ri value may also  Expression data support our predictions for 1 of 7 activated cryptic site variants in U2OS, 1 of 14 variants in A431 and 0 of 10 in U251.
Many of the predicted splice sites reside in intronic re- gions or alternative exons that map far upstream or downstream of constitutively expressed exons.
They are unlikely to displace constitutive isoforms, since donor site recognition is processive [21] and the increased lengths of such cryptic exons would prob- ably be suboptimal [22].
Often, these sites are associated with rare, alternatively spliced ESTs expressed in other tissues than these cell lines.
Because these variants are often extra-exonic, changes in expression must be inferred indirectly from decreased read count, intron inclusion or increased exon skipping.
Changes in reading frame from inclusion of out-of-phase intro- nic sequences may induce nonsense-mediated decay (NMD).
Reads mapping to adjacent introns are expected to be reduced in number as a result of NMD.
Sequencing reads that are con- centrated in the intronic region adjacent to exon of interest are considered support for predicted mutations.
NMD may also af- fect transcript read counts associated with severe leaky or inac- tivated natural donor sites, which produce exon skipping with frame-shifting.
Several predicted splicing mutations conﬁrmed by RNA-seq are well-known driver mutations that contribute to tumor phenotypes.
We highlight a unique natural donor site mutation within RBBP8 (NM_203291.1:c.248G   A or chr18:20529676G   A  6.2 ﬁ3.2 bits, indicating the change in the Ri value of the donor site, before and after it is mutated) in A431, a tumor suppressor gene mutated in numerous neoplasias with a role in endonucleo- lytic processing of a covalent topoisomerase-DNA complexes.
The mutation weakens but does not abolish the natural donor site from 6.2 to 3.2 bits.
A cryptic mRNA splice form using a pre-existing donor site 24 bp downstream to the weakened nat- ural site is conﬁrmed by RNA-seq (Figure 3A).
The ASSA server predicts the activation of this intronic cryptic donor site, as well as a second site of equal strength further downstream to the mu- tated donor site (Figure 3B).
There are a total of 56 reads that both encroach into the intron and overlap this variant.
Forty- one of these cover the cryptic exon splice junction of interest (the aligned reads stop at the 3.2 bit cryptic site, which is 24 nt downstream of the natural site, and continue into the next nat- ural exon).
Thirty-one junction spanning reads also contain the A-allele.
There are an additional 23 reads that cross into the in- tron, but do not extend as far as the cryptic site of interest.
In 19 cases, these reads contain the A-allele.
The remaining 4 intron- crossing reads which contain the G-allele appear to be misa- ligned, as they contain short matches (of 63 nt) to the down- stream exon.
There are an additional 2 reads that span the junction between the downstream cryptic exon junction and the adjacent exon (31 nt downstream  also 3.2 bits).
Finally, 12 reads are correctly spliced and contain the mutant A-allele, suggesting that the natural site is not completely inactivated by this nucleotide substitution, which is consistent with leaky splicing.
Changes in expression are also noted in other genes.
inactivated in U2OS (chr12:31242087T   G   DDX11 is   80  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 77 85  Sample output of the Shannon pipeline software  Figure 2 The Shannon pipeline software generates the following types of output.
A. Tabular results showing the ﬁrst 12 of 134 changes in Ri values at different genomic coordinates predicted to be signiﬁcant, after ﬁltering for cryptic splicing mutations from all variants (n = 22,197) in a complete genome sequence.
The ﬁrst ﬁlter eliminates exonic cryptic sites, the second selects cryptic sites with increased Ri values, the third ensures that the cryptic site is stronger than the corresponding natural site of the same phase and the ﬁnal ﬁlter ensures that all remaining sites exceed the minimum Ri value of a functional splice site.
B. Manhattan-like plot indicating the locations and changes in Ri of all variants which alter splice site information in a region within intron 1 of BRCA1 (chr17:41277500-41288500) from different individuals with increased breast cancer risk.
C. Custom track illustrating a cryptic splicing mutation detected in an ovarian serous carcinoma that inactivates the acceptor site of exon 4 in STXBP4, resulting in the activation of a pre-existing, in frame, alternative splice site 6 nucleotides downstream.
Table 1 Performance of Shannon pipeline for human mRNA splicing mutation prediction  Source of variants Number of variants analyzed  Running timea  U2OS cell line A431 cell line U251 cell line ESP 6500 Exomes  211,049 290,589 314,637 1,872,893  Note: aIntel I7 CPU with 16 Gb RAM.
1 h 12 min 1 h 17 min 1 h 20 min 2 h 35 min  6.89 ﬁ  11.73 bits).
DDX11 is a component of the cohesin complex which has a crucial role in chromosome segregation, and is essential for survival of advanced melanoma [23].
In  U2OS, WWOX, a tumor suppressor gene in osteosarcoma [24], contains a leaky mutation (chr16:78312497C   A  10.24 ﬁ 6.67 bits).
Both alleles of APIP, an apoptosis associ- ated gene, are inactivated in U251 (chr11:34905054G   C  9.32 ﬁ 0.54 bits).
Gene expression of APIP is down regulated in non-small cell lung carcinoma [25].
Ampliﬁcation of METTL2B, which harbors a leaky mutation in U251 (chr7:128117227G   A  5.48 ﬁ 2.47 bits), has been demon- strated in several including glioblastoma [26].
In A431, leaky mutations are also conﬁrmed in the glioblastoma-initiating gene TRRAP (chr7:98533187T   G  9.09 ﬁ 7.16 bits) [27] and USF1 (chr1:161013165G   T  4.89 ﬁ 3.59 bits), which encodes a transcription regulator  cancers,   Shirley BC et al / Genome-scale Splicing Mutation Information Analysis  81  Figure 3 Predicted mutation splicing phenotype supported by RNA-seq Predicted RBBP8 splicing mutation, chr18:20529676G   A (NM_203291.1: c.248G   A), is related to transcripts mapped to this region.
A. IVG genome browser display of read distribution at the exon 4/intron 4 junction.
Green boxes within the vertical hashed lines indicate the presence of the A allele.
B.
The natural and cryptic splice sites illustrated by sequence walkers generated on the ASSA server.
The arrow tail and head draw attention to the location and sequence of the reference and variant sequence.
The mutation reduces the strength of the natural donor site from 6.2 to 3.2 bits.
All but 3 of the 59 reads extending into the intron contain the variant allele, as indicated by the green positions within the reads.
These reads extend into the exon and terminate at the closest intronic cryptic donor site (chr18:20529700).
The mutated natural and cryptic sites are of equal strength, which explains splicing at both sites.
important for TGFb2 expression in glioblastoma [28].
SYNE2, which is mutated in a signiﬁcant percentage of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas [29], contains an inactivating splice site variant in A431 (chr14:64669514T   A  1.89 ﬁ  0.83 bits).
RRM2B, an inducible DNA repair gene that has been implicated in squamous cell carcinoma [30], contains an inactivating mutation in A431 (chr8:103250667A   C  3.6 ﬁ  15.02 bits).
SMARCD1, encoding a chromatin modu- lator that interacts with nuclear receptor transcription factors, is (chr12:50480538G   C  8.46 ﬁ  3.21 bits), and has been shown to be mutated in hep- ato- and other carcinomas [31].
inactivated  in A431  also  Several mutations were found in potential tumor-associated genes, with either suggestive or little supporting expression data.
However, defects in many of these genes have been impli- cated in various neoplasias including glioblastoma, osteosar-  coma, and epidermoid squamous carcinoma.
In general, these were predicted leaky mutations, where effects (dimin- ished read counts and exon skipping) were inferred against the confounding background of a presumably intact allele.
(NM_033084.3:c. Natural 3106-9T   A  6.0 ﬁ 3.5 bits  delayed activation of the [32]) and MDC1 DNA damage (NM_014641.2:c.2129-8G   C  6.4 ﬁ 4.7 bits  mediator of the DNA damage checkpoint and underexpressed in many cancers [33]) were found in the U251 cells.
site mutations  in FANCD2  in gliomas  response  Characterization of defective biochemical and functional pathways  Potential driver mutations affecting protein coding of genes from the A431, U2OS, and U251 cell lines have recently been   82  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 77 85  reported [34].
Functionally signiﬁcant driver mutations affecting splicing are expected to comprise many of the same pathways implicated by protein coding mutations that are predicted to be damaging.
The gene set with combined dri- ver point and copy number alteration was examined using Reactome [35].
Shannon pipeline results, supported by RNA-seq data, were added to gene sets proposed by [34] and the expanded gene set was examined with the overrep- resentation analysis tool in Reactome.
Of the genes contain- ing transcript-validated splicing mutations, both datasets were consistent in 2 of 5 pathways in A431 (interferon sig- naling and cytokine signaling in immune system), 8 of 8 pathways in U2OS (cell cycle mitotic, cell cycle, DNA repli- cation, mitotic M M/G1 phases, M phase, kinetochore cap- ture of astral microtubules, mitotic prometaphase and apoptosis) and 0 of 2 pathways in U251.
The gene set including all inactivating and leaky variants (regardless of veriﬁcation status) was found in 5 of 7 of the same path- ways in A431 (additionally, a variant was found in the sem- aphorin interaction pathway), 8 of 12 of the same pathways in U2OS and 0 of 11 pathways in U251.
In A431 and U2OS, these splicing mutation predictions enhance and strengthen the pathway analysis based on protein coding mutations alone.
Discussion  Complete genome and exome sequencing detects numerous rare, non-recurrent mutations in different individuals with the same disease diagnosis.
Making sense of genetically het- erogeneous results requires detection and interpretation of mutations in many genomes.
The identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant mutations in different driver genes, followed by a gene set or pathway analysis can reveal common, essential pathways in otherwise genetically heterogeneous diseases, such as cancer.
Incomplete detection or reclassiﬁcation of coding mutations will most likely impact the sensitivity of these analyses.
Most existing methods to predict the effects of splice site variation lack scalability, transparency or portability, with respect to their scoring systems.
Information content can be applied to any region of any adequately annotated genome.
Change in information (DRi) is a portable measure and its thermo- dynamic basis meaningfully estimates the effects of splicing variation.
By contrast, other systems (e.g., [36]) are not sui- ted for genome scale analysis and produce results that are not directly related to splice site strength.
A recent study reported the genomic, transcriptomic and protein sequences in the cell lines that were the source of the data that we analyzed [34].
It described the same single splicing mutation in the APIP gene identiﬁed in the present study, but none of the others that we predicted.
Further, there was no overlap between the genes containing predicted protein coding mutations in [34] and those indicated from the current study.
This was somewhat surprising, as we anticipated that some loss of function mutations in tumor suppressor genes would arise from compound heterozygosity.
Instead, mutant genes from both studies tended to occur in the same pathways (for U2OS and A431).
Many of our predictions were supported by the same RNA- seq data that identiﬁed only APIP [34].
Conventional splice junction mutation analysis of NGS data, which tends to  emphasize only the signiﬁcance of changes in conserved splice junction, intronic dinucleotides does not appear to be as sensi- tive or comprehensive as the information theory-based ap- proach we describe [7].
Assuming the cell line genotypes faithfully reﬂect the tumor genetics, likely driver mutations in the tumors were missed.
These genes contribute to the tumor signatures and in most instances, belong to major pathways that are dysfunctional in the tumor.
The caveat is that many of these cancer-associated genes have been uncovered in other tumor types, rather than the tumors that gave rise to the cell lines studied here.
Many of the predicted mutations that are supported by expression data make sense in light of independent studies, which have suggested the same driver genes and pathways that are defective in these tumor types [29,37 39].
We note that the recommended ﬁltering procedures eliminate and/or minimize inclusion of mutations in gene classes with no known connec- tion to neoplastic disease etiology.
The sensitivity and speciﬁc- ity of these predictions support use of the Shannon pipeline in other somatic genomic analyses, and possibly for a wider spec- trum of heritable genetic disorders.
The interpretation of potential splicing mutations in com- plete genome data is also challenging because the source of annotations, Ensembl, contains many accurate but appar- ently irrelevant genomic features.
These comprise of exons called on the basis of a single or a few ESTs with deep in- tronic locations (relative to constitutive exons) [40,41], and predicted mutant ESTs that are in fact present in non- or low expression genes (due to tissue speciﬁcity of the gene).
Where the RNA-seq data are either insufﬁcient or irrelevant, pseudogenes (or genes which are members of families con- taining pseudogenes) may contain mismapped reads for the non-functional copies that can produce false positive muta- tion calls.
Automatic ﬁltering of genes from the RNA-seq data prior to validating information theory-based predictions would signiﬁcantly simplify post hoc processing of the Shan- non pipeline.
Until such a workﬂow is available, individual predicted mutations have to be assessed manually, because cryptic sites that alter the strength of a   decoy   exon, while a technically legitimate result, is probably irrelevant as a po- tential disease-causing mutation.
Accurate genome-scale mutation analysis of bulk sequenc- ing data in a timeframe suitable for integration with prediction tools for other types of mutations will be needed to discover disease-related genes and pathways in large-scale genomic studies of many patients.
The need to distinguish the probable pathogenic from benign sequence changes has become acute [42].
Computing efﬁciency is essential for concurrent analysis of large sets of genome sequences [43].
The processing speed we have attained has distinct advantages for identifying func- tional non-coding variants detected in large multi-genomic analyses.
However, increased speed comes at the expense of diminished ability to analyze complex mutations on the ﬂy, such as insertions and deletions or multinucleotide substitu- tions.
Such variation is signiﬁcantly less common than SNPs in wild type genome and exome sequences [44], but neverthe- less can have consequences on gene function and phenotype.
The ASSA server is capable of analyzing these categories of mutations  however it is considerably slower than the Shannon pipeline (30 s per variant).
In the future, the Shannon pipeline will be integrated with the ASSA server to examine complex variants seamlessly.
Shirley BC et al / Genome-scale Splicing Mutation Information Analysis  Materials and methods  Shannon pipeline software architecture  We have implemented the Shannon pipeline software plugin using the CLC-Bio genomics developer toolkit to simplify ac- cess to this technology and interpretation by novice users.
The same plugin can be executed on a single client computer, a re- mote server or a grid system, and beneﬁts from automated software updates.
The server version uses an architecture in which a Workbench client transmits variant data to the server, which performs the computations, and returns results that can be ﬁltered and formatted on the client.
A standalone version of the fully functional Genome Workbench plugin is also avail- able.
By contrast, the splicing mutation feature that is native in CLC-Bio Genomics products is limited to detecting changes in dinucleotides at the exon boundaries, which represent fewer than 5% of all splicing mutations detected by the Shannon pipeline.
The Shannon Human Splicing Pipeline uses an efﬁcient algorithm coded in C++ to quickly analyze genome-scale data sources for information changes (Figure S1).
Methods for computing Ri and DRi values determine the dot product of an information weight matrix and the unitary sequence vec- tor for each genomic window and compare the resultant scalar values of the reference and variant sequences [45].
C++ li- braries determine the information content of a position in the reference genome and after a variant is introduced.
This method uses convolution-style sliding-window computation of all sequence changes for each complete chromosome se- quence resident in RAM.
To expedite processing, the software currently only handles SNVs   which are the most prevalent.
Future versions will handle complex multi-nucleotide muta- tions.
Changes in Ri introduced by genomic variation are com- puted by subtracting the initial Ri value of a position by the sum over a surrounding window, then adding the new value for each position (DRi).
Perl scripts wrap these C libraries and annotate output.
Integration with the CLC-Bio work- bench environment was achieved through code written in Java utilizing the CLC-Bio developer API.
This software is assem- bled as a client plugin requiring a connection to the server to execute, a server plugin and a standalone client plugin.
Two additional dependency plugins contain a modiﬁed dbSNP135 (containing only variant, rsID and overall frequency), Ensembl Exon Data (Build 66) and GRCh37/NCBI36, respectively, allowing the software to execute with no active internet con- nection and incorporates all necessary annotations required to contextualize a potential mutation.
Input ﬂat ﬁles containing sequence variants that differ from the reference genome are imported into the CLC-Bio Java environment.
The ﬁle must be either a Variant Call Format (VCF) [46] or a tab-delimited format with the following ﬁelds: [chromosome #] [unique identiﬁer] [coordinate] [reference/var- iant].
Coordinates can be hg18/NCBI36 or hg19/GRCh37.
All variants appearing in this study are hg19.
Genomic insertions and deletions (indels) present in input ﬁles are not considered for analysis.
The unique identiﬁer serves several purposes.
In- put data may be stored in a hash allowing efﬁcient annotation of individual variants or those originating from multiple exome or genome sequences.
Given the minimum startup time incurred to process each individual chromosome present in the  83 input data ( 1 h if all chromosomes present in input ﬁle), un- ique identiﬁers allow input to be combined, thus reducing total run-time and required user interaction.
Stratiﬁcation of variants  Similar to ASSA, the pipeline analysis produces summary ta- bles (e.g., Figure 2A) for different types of mutations (assum- ing each type is represented): (1) complete sets of all splicing variants, (2) mutations predicted to inactivate splice sites, (3) leaky splicing mutations that reduce but do not abolish splic- ing and (4) cryptic splice sites that are either activated, inacti- vated or reduced in strength.
We deﬁne inactivating variants as those that reduce the Ri of the affected binding site below 1.6 bits [20].
Binding sites containing a leaky variant are deﬁned as those, is decreased upon mutation to Ri   1.6.
Finally, candidate cryptic sites encompass all sites with higher afﬁnity for binding than a corresponding natural site based on comparison of their respective Ri values (see be- low).
Tabular data can be sorted by clicking the column header of each column.
Data can be exported and viewed without modiﬁcation in a spreadsheet program.
in which initial Ri  The 50 end of the ﬁrst exon and the 30 end of the last exon of a gene are not splice sites.
Therefore, the Shannon pipeline does not report mutations that affect their DRi at these posi- tions  the exception is genes that encode alternate splice forms using further upstream/downstream exons present in Ensembl 66.
Variants which alter the strength of cryptic splice sites within the ﬁrst and last exons are also considered.
Use of a strengthened cryptic donor in the ﬁrst exon or acceptor in the last exon could lead to a truncated exon.
The Shannon pipeline considers the exonic cryptic sites of the opposite polar- ity (acceptors in ﬁrst exons and donors for last exons), as their activation could potentially (but rarely) lead to the formation of a cryptic intron within these exons if a second pre-existing cryptic site of opposite polarity is present in the proper orientation.
Although the Shannon pipeline output contains a vastly re- duced number of potentially signiﬁcant variants, further ﬁlter- ing is usually necessary to obtain the ﬁnal set of functionally relevant sites.
Pipeline output is generated for variants that re- sult in DRi    1 bit.
Each variant is annotated with the dis- tance from nearest natural site, Ri of nearest natural site, location of cryptic sites (exonic or intronic), the strength of a cryptic site strength relative to the nearest natural site, gene name, information contents of the reference and variant sites, type of splice site (acceptor or donor) and rsID of SNP if cat- alogued.
The user then ﬁlters out those variants least likely to be functionally relevant.
For example, a natural site that in- creases in information content will generally not be of interest.
The increase will likely only serve to widen the gap in Ri be- tween the natural and nearby cryptic sites.
Thus, we remove those natural sites with positive DRi values as well as cryptic sites with reductions in Ri value.
Pipeline generated annota- tions that were found in the tabular output help simplify the data ﬁltering process.
To predict those variants with signiﬁcant changes, tables were ﬁltered to distinguish natural and cryptic splicing mutations (Tables S1 3).
The ﬁlters used for cryptic splicing mutations were based on criteria given in [47] (a) DRi   0, (b) either occurring within an exon or within an intron less than 300 bp from nearest natural site, (c) cryptic   84  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 77 85  Table 2 Enrichment for predicted splicing mutations after processing and ﬁltering  Cell line  A431 U251 U2OS Total  Initial variants analyzed  Novel natural site  Novel cryptic site  Natural site (SNP)a  Cryptic site (SNP)a  Overall mutation fraction (%)  290,589 314,637 211,049 816,275  16 7 22 46  13 10 9 32  13 18 13 49  3 3 4 10  0.015 0.012 0.022 0.017  Note: adbSNP135   1% heterozygosity  minor allele.
splice site Ri value exceeding the strength of the nearest natural site Ri of the same type and (d) intronic cryptic splice sites are selected 50 to the exon if acceptors and 30 to the exon, if donors.
All reported variants were further categorized according to whether they had been previously reported or were novel.
In Table 2, only novel and known variants of  1% average het- erozygosity in dbSNP are reported, which are more likely to be functionally signiﬁcant due to selection.
Nevertheless, the threshold for ﬁltering based on heterozygosity can be speciﬁed by the user.
Pipeline results are also displayed visually.
DRi and ﬁnal Ri values are plotted by chromosome location, similar to Man- hattan-style representations, for either individual chromo- somes or entire genomes (Figure 2B).
Hovering the cursor over data points generates tooltips containing information needed to ﬁnd the complete entry within the corresponding tabular data.
To locate interesting data points, a zoom func- tion allows closer inspection of the plot.
This visualization al- lows patterns to be observed and data points which stand out to be easily located and inspected more closely in a tabular for- mat or on the ASSA server.
Chromosome-speciﬁc, custom browser tracks indicating DRi values in the BED format are created during analysis.
This enables visualization of predicted mutations in the context of other genome annotations, for example, mapped reads from RNA-seq, spliced ESTs and known mRNAs.
Figure 2C dis- plays a result on the CLC Genomics Workbench browser along with the Ensembl genes v.66 track.
Experimental validation  RNA-seq analysis using published data from these cell lines [34] was used to compare our methods with expression data.
TopHat [48] was executed with the following command-line options: -g 5  solexa1.3-quals -p 8, and examined with the Integrative Genomics viewer (IGV) [49] to interrogate predic- tions made with the Shannon pipeline.
Authors  contributions  PKR conceived of and directed the project.
BCS implemented these methods, which involved modifying previous software developed by TW and EJM, creation of new modules, and integration with the CLC-Bio Genomics Workbench.
EJM created and updated genome annotation databases required by the software.
BCS and PKR compared variants predicted to be potentially deleterious with RNA-seq data provided by  PIC and PA. BCS, EJM, and PKR wrote the manuscript, which has been approved by all of the authors.
Competing interests  PKR is the inventor of US Patent 5,867,402 and founder of Cytognomix, which is developing the software presented here.
Acknowledgements  The authors would like to acknowledge support from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (Discovery Grant 371758-2009) (PKR), Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation (PKR), Compute Canada (PKR), Canadian Foundation for Innovation, Canada Research Chairs, MITACS Accelerate (BCS), the Ontario Graduate Scholarship Programs (BCS) and Cytognomix Inc. We thank Mikael Flensborg, Paul Flei- scher and Alex Andersen for assistance with CLC-Bio prod- ucts integration.
Supplementary material  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.
2013.01.008.
References  [1] Gullapalli RR, Desai KV, Santana-Santos L, Kant JA, Becich MJ.
Next generation sequencing in clinical medicine: challenges and lessons for pathology and biomedical informatics.
J Pathol Inform 2012 3:40.
[2] Kavanagh D, Anderson HE.
Interpretation of genetic variants of uncertain signiﬁcance in atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
Kidney Int 2012 81:11 3.
[3] Spurdle AB, Healey S, Devereau A, Hogervorst FB, Monteiro AN, Nathanson KL, et al.
ENIGMA  evidence-based network for the interpretation of germline mutant alleles: an international initiative to evaluate risk and clinical signiﬁcance associated with sequence variation in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes.
Hum Mutat 2012 33:2 7.
[4] Adzhubei IA, Schmidt S, Peshkin L, Ramensky VE, Gerasimova A, Bork P, et al.
A method and server for predicting damaging missense mutations.
Nat Methods 2010 7:248 9.
[5] Nalla VK, Rogan PK.
Automated splicing mutation analysis by  information theory.
Hum Mutat 2005 25:334 42.
[6] Kumar A, White TA, MacKenzie AP, Clegg N, Lee C, Dumpit RF, et al.
Exome sequencing identiﬁes a spectrum of mutation   Shirley BC et al / Genome-scale Splicing Mutation Information Analysis  85  frequencies in advanced and lethal prostate cancers.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 108:17087 92.
[7] O Roak BJ, Vives L, Fu W, Egertson JD, Stanaway IB, Phelps IG, et al.
Multiplex targeted sequencing identiﬁes recurrently mutated Science 2012 338:1619 22.  autism spectrum disorders.
genes  in  [28] Kingsley-Kallesen M, Luster TA, Rizzino A. Transcriptional regulation of the transforming growth factor-beta2 gene in glioblastoma cells.
In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim 2001 37:684 90.
[29] Stransky N, Egloff AM, Tward AD, Kostic AD, Cibulskis K, Sivachenko A, et al.
The mutational landscape of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Science 2011 333:1157 60.
[8] Churbanov A, Vorechovsky  I, Hicks C. A method of predicting changes in human gene splicing induced by genetic variants in context of cis-acting elements.
BMC Bioinformatics 2010 11:22.
[30] Sun Z, Yang P, Aubry MC, Kosari F, Endo C, Molina J, et al.
Can gene expression proﬁling predict survival for patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the lung  Mol Cancer 2004 3:35.
[9] Churbanov A, Rogozin IB, Deogun JS, Ali H. Method of predicting splice sites based on signal interactions.
Biol Direct 2006 1:10.
[31] Stephens PJ, Tarpey PS, Davies H, Van Loo P, Greenman C, Wedge DC, et al.
The landscape of cancer genes and mutational processes in breast cancer.
Nature 2012 486:400 4.
[10] Yeo G, Burge CB.
Maximum entropy modeling of short sequence motifs with applications to RNA splicing signals.
J Comput Biol 2004 11:377 94.
[32] Cappelli E, Vecchio D, Frosina G. Delayed formation of FancD2 foci in glioma stem cells treated with ionizing radiation.
J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 2012 138:897 9.
[11] Reese MG, Eeckman FH, Kulp D, Haussler D. Improved splice  site detection in Genie.
J Comput Biol 1997 4:311 23.
[12] Pertea M, Lin X, Salzberg SL.
GeneSplicer: a new computational prediction.
Nucleic Acids Res  splice  site  method 2001 29:1185 90.  for  [13] Cooper TA, Mattox W. The regulation of splice-site selection, and  its role in human disease.
Am J Hum Genet 1997 61:259 66.
[14] Lo  pez-Bigas N, Audit B, Ouzounis C, Parra G, Guigo  R. Are splicing mutations the most frequent cause of hereditary disease  FEBS Lett 2005 579:1900 3.
[15] Schneider TD.
Information content of  individual genetic  sequences.
J Theor Biol 1997 189:427 41.
[16] Shannon CE.
A mathematical theory of communication: part I.
Bell Syst Tech J 1948 27:379 423.
[33] Stewart GS, Wang B, Bignell CR, Taylor AM, Elledge SJ.
MDC1 is a mediator of the mammalian DNA damage checkpoint.
Nature 2003 421:961 6.
[34] Akan P, Alexeyenko A, Costea PI, Hedberg L, Solnestam BW, Lundin S, et al.
Comprehensive analysis of the genome tran- scriptome and proteome landscapes of three tumor cell lines.
Genome Med 2012 4:86.
[35] Vastrik I, D Eustachio P, Schmidt E, Gopinath G, Croft D, de Bono B, et al.
Reactome: a knowledge base of biologic pathways and processes.
Genome Biol 2007 8:R39.
[36] Desmet FO, Hamroun D, Lalande M, Collod-Beroud G, Claus- tres M, Beroud C. Human Splicing Finder: an online bioinfor- matics tool to predict splicing signals.
Nucleic Acids Res 2009 37:e67.
[17] Shannon CE, Weaver W. A mathematical model of communica-  [37] Hanahan D, Weinberg RA.
Hallmarks of cancer:  the next  tion.
Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press  1949.  generation.
Cell 2011 144:646 74.
[18] Shultzaberger RK, Schneider TD.
Using sequence logos and information analysis of Lrp DNA binding sites to investigate discrepancies between natural selection and SELEX.
Nucleic Acids Res 1999 27:882 7.
[19] Mucaki EJ, Ainsworth P, Rogan PK.
Comprehensive prediction of mRNA splicing effects of BRCA1 and BRCA2 variants.
Hum Mutat 2011 32:735 42.
[20] Rogan PK, Svojanovsky S, Leeder JS.
Information theory-based analysis of CYP2C19, CYP2D6 and CYP3A5 splicing mutations.
Pharmacogenetics 2003 13:207 18.
[38] Stratton MR, Campbell PJ, Futreal PA.
The cancer genome.
Nature 2009 458:719 24.
[39] Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network.
Comprehensive geno- mic characterization deﬁnes human glioblastoma genes and core pathways.
Nature 2008 455:1061 8.
[40] Curwen V, Eyras E, Andrews TD, Clarke L, Mongin E, Searle SM, et al.
The Ensembl automatic gene annotation system.
Genome Res 2004 14:942 50.
[41] Flicek P, Ahmed I, Amode MR, Barrell D, Beal K, Brent S, et al.
Ensembl 2013.
Nucleic Acids Res 2013 41:D48 55.
[21] Robberson BL, Cote GJ, Berget SM.
Exon deﬁnition may facilitate splice site selection in RNAs with multiple exons.
Mol Cell Biol 1990 10:84 94.
[42] Biesecker LG.
Opportunities and challenges for the integration of massively parallel genomic sequencing into clinical practice: lessons from the ClinSeq project.
Genet Med 2012 14:393 8.
[22] Sterner DA, Carlo T, Berget SM.
Architectural limits on split  [43] Richter BG, Sexton DP.
Managing and analyzing next-generation  genes.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1996 93:15081 5.  sequence data.
PLoS Comput Biol 2009 5:e1000369.
[23] Bhattacharya C, Wang X, Becker D. The DEAD/DEAH box for the survival of advanced  is essential  helicase, DDX11, melanomas.
Mol Cancer 2012 11:82.
[24] Del Mare S, Kurek KC, Stein GS, Lian JB, Aqeilan RI.
Role of the WWOX tumor suppressor gene in bone homeostasis and the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma.
Am J Cancer Res 2011 1:585 94.
[25] Moravcikova E, Krepela E, Prochazka J, Rousalova I, Cermak J, Benkova K. Down-regulated expression of apoptosis-associated genes APIP and UACA in non-small cell lung carcinoma.
Int J Oncol 2012 40:2111 21.
[26] Lee CH, Alpert BO, Sankaranarayanan P, Alter O. GSVD comparison of patient-matched normal and tumor aCGH proﬁles reveals global copy-number alterations predicting glioblastoma multiforme survival.
PLoS One 2012 7:e30098.
[27] Charles N, Holland EC.
The perivascular niche microenvironment  in brain tumor progression.
Cell Cycle 2010 9:3012 21.
[44] Lescai F, Bonﬁglio S, Bacchelli C, Chanudet E, Waters A, Sisodiya SM, et al.
Characterisation and validation of insertions and deletions in 173 patient exomes.
PLoS One 2012 7:e51292.
[45] Schneider TD, Rogan PK.
Computational analysis of nucleic acid  information deﬁnes binding sites.
US Patent 5,867,402  1999.
[46] Danecek P, Auton A, Abecasis G, Albers CA, Banks E, DePristo MA, et al.
The variant call format and VCFtools.
Bioinformatics 2011 27:2156 8.
[47] Rogan PK, Faux BM, Schneider TD.
Information analysis of  human splice site mutations.
Hum Mutat 1998 12:153 71.
[48] Trapnell C, Pachter L, Salzberg SL.
TopHat: discovering splice  junctions with RNA-Seq.
Bioinformatics 2009 25:1105 11.
[49] Robinson JT, Thorvaldsdo  ttir H, Winckler W, Guttman M, Lander ES, Getz G, et al.
Integrative genomics viewer.
Nat Biotechnol 2011 29:24 6.
