Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 190 197  H O S T E D   BY  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics  www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb  www.sciencedirect.com  REVIEW  Application of Next-generation Sequencing Technology in Forensic Science  Yaran Yang 1, Bingbing Xie 1,2, Jiangwei Yan 1,*  1 CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,  Beijing 100101, China  2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China  Received 1 July 2014  revised 28 August 2014  accepted 9 September 2014 Available online 14 October 2014  Handled by Andreas Keller  KEYWORDS  Forensics  Next-generation sequencing  Genomics  Degradation of DNA  Abstract Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology, with its high-throughput capacity and low cost, has developed rapidly in recent years and become an important analytical tool for many genomics researchers.
New opportunities in the research domain of the forensic studies emerge by harnessing the power of NGS technology, which can be applied to simultaneously analyzing multi- ple loci of forensic interest in different genetic contexts, such as autosomes, mitochondrial and sex chromosomes.
Furthermore, NGS technology can also have potential applications in many other aspects of research.
These include DNA database construction, ancestry and phenotypic inference, monozygotic twin studies, body ﬂuid and species identiﬁcation, and forensic animal, plant and microbiological analyses.
Here we review the application of NGS technology in the ﬁeld of forensic science with the aim of providing a reference for future forensics studies and practice.
Introduction  Since the introduction of the Sanger sequencing method in the 1970s [1], DNA sequencing technology has enabled enormous advances in molecular biology and genetics.
Several large pro- jects have been successfully completed using this technology, such as the Human Genome Project, Rice Genome Project and Swine Genome Project, as well as genome projects of many other species.
However, disadvantages of the conventional Sanger sequencing technology, including its low throughput,  * Corresponding author.
E-mail: yanjw@big.ac.cn (Yan J).
Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
high cost and operation difﬁculties, have limited its use in dee- per and more complex genome analyses [2].
The recent intro- duction of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology, with its high-throughput capacity and low cost, has largely overcome these problems, and these technologies have been applied in various ﬁelds of life sciences, including forensics [3], disease diagnosis [4], agrigenomics [5] and ancient DNA analysis [6].
In this article, the use of NGS technology in foren- sic science is reviewed with the aim of providing a reference for future frontier research and application in forensic science.
Overview of NGS technology  NGS technology refers to non-Sanger-based high-throughput DNA sequencing technology.
Millions or billions of DNA  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2014.09.001 1672-0229 ª 2014 The Authors.
Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).
Yang Y et al / Next-generation Sequencing in Forensics  191  molecules can be sequenced in parallel, thereby increasing the throughput substantially and minimizing the need for the frag- ment-cloning method often used in Sanger sequencing.
It includes second-generation sequencing technology based on loop array sequencing, which can analyze a large number of samples simultaneously, as well as third-generation sequencing technology, which can determine the base composition of single DNA molecules.
In 2005, Roche introduced the 454 Genome Sequencing System [7], the world s ﬁrst pyrosequencing-based high- throughput sequencing system.
The ﬁrst 454 Genome Sequen- cer was capable of generating approximately 200,000 reads of 110 base pairs (bp) in length (the current maximum read length is 1000 bp).
In 2007, Applied Biosystems (ABI) introduced the SOLiD second-generation sequencing system based on the oli- gonucleotide ligation technique and two-base encoding system, whereas Illumina released Solexa sequencing technology.
The Illumina and SOLiD sequencers generated much larger num- bers of reads than the 454 system (30 and 100 million reads, respectively)  nonetheless, the reads produced were only 35 bp long.
In 2010, Ion Torrent, a faster and low-cost sequen- cer based on semiconductor technology, was introduced.
This sequencer does not rely on ﬂuorescence, chemiluminescence, or enzyme cascades for sequencing signal detection.
Currently, a maximum read length of up to 400 bp can be obtained using this system.
All these new sequencing methods have led to three major improvements from the conventional technologies.
First, these technologies do not require bacterial cloning of DNA frag- ments  instead, they rely on the preparation of NGS libraries in a cell-free system.
Second, instead of hundreds of sequenc- ing reactions, they can parallelize the thousands-to-many- millions of sequencing reaction.
Third, the sequencing output is directly detected with no need for electrophoresis.
The enor- mous number of reads generated by NGS enabled the sequenc- ing of entire genomes at an unprecedented speed and thus it came to be widely used in various ﬁelds of life sciences.
How- ever, one drawback of second-generation sequencing technol- ogy is its relatively short read lengths, which has resulted in difﬁculties in subsequent sequence splicing, assembly, annota- tion and bioinformatics analysis [8].
Furthermore, standard PCR was used to randomly amplify genomic fragments during library preparation.
Due to the complex structure of genomes, factors such as secondary structure and thermal stability will affect the efﬁciency of PCR ampliﬁcation.
Therefore, the com- plete genomic sequence may not be represented in the library produced by such ampliﬁcation.
This can be problematic due to the relative deviation between ampliﬁed and non-ampliﬁed DNA molecules, resulting in potential inaccuracies in gene expression analysis.
This concern is particularly relevant for highly-expressed genes [9].
Moreover, these shortcomings have restricted the application and development of second-genera- tion sequencing technology to some extent and have necessi- tated the development of third-generation single-molecule sequencing technology [10 12].
The third-generation sequencing technology not only allows the detection of single molecules but also enables real- time sequencing.
The current leader in this ﬁeld is the PacBio RS system (Paciﬁc Biosciences), which utilizes the single-mol- ecule, real-time (SMRT) DNA sequencing technology.
SMRT sequencing is based on the sequencing-by-synthesis approach  an SMRT chip contains thousands of zero-mode waveguides,  in which the DNA polymerase molecules used to synthesize the DNA fragments of interest are attached.
Compared to sec- ond-generation sequencing, the latest SMRT technology can achieve an average read lengths of 5500 8500 bp.
Moreover, it can also directly detect epigenetic modiﬁcations such as 4-methylctosine (mC), 5-mC and 6-methyladenine (mA) [13].
Forensic application prospects of NGS technology  The application of DNA technologies in forensic investiga- tions has rendered DNA analysis an important tool in forensic science.
Compared to other ﬁelds of life sciences, forensic DNA analysis is confronted with template of low copy num- ber, highly-degraded and contaminated samples, the need for high accuracy and reproducibility, as well as time and cost considerations.
Today, the majority of forensic DNA tests employ PCR and capillary electrophoresis (CE)-based fragment analysis methods to detect length variation in short tandem repeat (STR) markers.
example,  The CE-based Sanger sequencing has been used to analyze speciﬁc regions of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) [14].
The development of miniaturized gel electrophoresis and the auto- mation of reaction gel loading and signal detection allowed the Sanger methodology to become the gold standard for DNA sequencing.
However, CE-based analysis has its limitations, for inability to analyze multiple genetic polymorphisms in a single reaction using a single workﬂow, low-resolution genotyping of current markers, loss of useful genomic information from degraded DNA samples, and low- resolution mtDNA and mixture analysis.
These limitations of ﬁrst-generation sequencing prompt the forensic scientists worldwide to explore the usefulness of NGS technology for forensic studies.
the  STR analysis  STR analysis is likely to remain the most important and commonly-used genetic technique in forensic science for the foreseeable future.
It displays multiple advantages, such as rapid and precise allele determination, low DNA template requirement, multiplex ampliﬁcation and ﬂuorescence-based detection, digitized results and utilization of the abundant genomic element, At present, more than 60 countries world- wide have established forensic DNA databases based on STRs, and these databases continue to grow rapidly.
For example, China now has more than 27 million entries in its forensic database [15].
The probability of a random match between unrelated individuals will increase if statistical analyses were based only on the 13 routinely-used Combined DNA Index System (CODIS) STR markers (i.e., CSF1PO, FGA, THO1, TPOX, VWA, D3S1358, D5S818, D7S820, D8S1179, D13S317, D16S539, D18S51 and D21S11) or 15 markers (13 CODIS loci plus D2S1338 and D19S433).
To avoid this, incor- poration of more STR markers into the common forensic typ- ing assay currently used has been recommended.
However, simultaneous detection of more STR markers would be very difﬁcult, due to the technical limitations of ﬂuorescent-based CE sequencers currently in use.
Traditional CE-based STR typing using CE is based on the detection of DNA fragment size.
Therefore, alleles of identical or similar length but of dif- ferent sequences cannot be distinguished.
Consequently, STR   192  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 190 197  mutations in complex paternity cases often cannot be resolved with traditional CE-based STR analysis.
An additional challenge for forensic DNA tests is the analysis of complex DNA mixtures comprising DNA from more than one individ- ual.
Contemporary analyses of mixed DNA samples often yield low detection rates, in crime investigations.
thus are not useful  When NGS technology was ﬁrstly introduced to genomics, it was not suitable for STR testing because the read length was generally too short.
With technological advances, the average read length has been continually increasing.
Since alleles with similar length can be easily distinguished using NGS technol- ogy and digital read count could signiﬁcantly facilitate the identiﬁcation of mixed DNA samples and analysis of complex paternity cases, some researchers have recently started using NGS technology for STR testing.
For example, a pioneer study was performed by Zajac and colleagues, who analyzed three CODIS STR loci, TPOX, CSF1PO and D18S51, using the trinucleotide threading (TnT) approach by 454 Genome Sequencing System [7,16].
Subsequently, Irwin et al.
[17] ana- lyzed 13 CODIS STR loci using the 454 GS Junior system in combination with multiplex identiﬁer technology for single source samples.
Bornman et al.
[18] went further to show that high-throughput sequencing technology can accurately iden- tify the 13 CODIS STR loci as well as the AMEL gene for not only single source but also mixed samples.
To process the forensic NGS data, Warshauer et al.
[19] developed STRait Razor, a software that can analyze the NGS data for 44 STRs, including 23 autosomal and 21 Y chromosome STRs.
In addi- tion, Van Neste et al.
[20] used Illumina s MiSeq system to establish a reference allele database to detect single source and mixed DNA samples  they observed that most locus geno- typing results were stable and reliable.
NGS technology has many potential advantages for STR analysis.
These include high throughput, low cost, simulta- neous detection of large numbers of STR loci on both auto- somes and sex chromosomes, and the ability to distinguish alleles with similar length or digital read count.
NGS technol- ogy would therefore signiﬁcantly facilitate the identiﬁcation of mixed DNA samples and analysis of complex paternity cases, and ultimately greatly increase the efﬁciency and cost-effective- ness of legal cases.
Mitochondrial genome analysis  mtDNA has proved to be a useful forensic tool in cases involving low amounts of DNA or wherein the maternal lineage needs to be investigated, due to its characteristics of small size, multiple copies, maternal inheritance, high mutation rate and lack of recombination.
Currently, forensic mtDNA analyses usually detect only polymorphisms within a hypervariable region.
However, for mtDNA to be used as a genetic haplotype marker, additional polymorphic loci are required to increase the discrimination power of identiﬁ- cation.
Therefore, NGS technology has the potential to greatly assist in the analysis of whole mitochondrial sequences.
With the increased application of NGS technology in vari- ous ﬁelds, the cost of equipment and reagents has decreased markedly.
Parallel sequencing technology, which allows for simultaneous analysis of multiple samples, has also led to  cost-effectiveness.
For instance, the number of picotiter plates used in the GS-FLX instrument has increased from 2 to 16, and each channel can simultaneously analyze 192 samples using multiplex identiﬁer (MID) technology.
Furthermore, Binladen et al.
[21] used a primer coding technique and produced 256 tagged primers for use in multiple parallel sequencing, allowing 256 samples to be sequenced in a single run.
Moreover, Gunnarsdo  ttir et al.
[22] used NGS technology to sequence whole mitochondrial genomes of 109 Filipino indi- viduals at the same time and obtained on average  55   cover- age per sequence, with  1% missing data per sequence.
Human mtDNA heteroplasmy is common and hetero- plasmy of cells from different tissues within a single individual has also been observed [23].
mtDNA heteroplasmy is one of the factors affecting the performance of forensic mitochondrial analysis.
The detection of heteroplasmy at the whole mito- chondrial genome level has been reported [24], supporting the advantages of using NGS to detect mitochondrial hetero- plasmy, including high accuracy and sensitivity, high through- put, low cost, and simple operation [25].
In a separate study, multiple mitochondrial hypervariable regions, an autosomal STR locus (D18S51) and a Y chromosome STR locus (DYS389I/II) were simultaneously examined using the 454 GS Junior system.
The results demonstrated that a mixing ratio of two DNA sources as low as 1:250 can be detected, and the authors concluded that by increasing the sequencing coverage, a mixing ratio of 1:1000 might be detectable as well [26].
To compare the haplotypes deﬁned by using NGS tech- nology at the whole mitochondrial genome level with conven- tional Sanger sequencing, 64 whole mitochondrial genome sequences were analyzed.
The results showed differences in  0.02 % of nucleotides using these two methods and that approximately two-thirds of the differences were observed in or around homopolymeric stretches, since these areas were prone to sequencing errors [27].
To evaluate the reproducibility between samples that were sequenced twice with NGS, Mik- kelsen et al.
[28] reported that using the 454 NGS method, 95% of the reads was sequenced correctly in homopolymers of up to 6 bases if the results were carefully and visually inspected.
the GM9947A component of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) human mtDNA SRM-2392 standard reference was detected in this study.
Previously-unreported  heteroplasmy  in  Y chromosome analysis  Genetic markers on the Y chromosome have assumed a valu- able role within forensic molecular biology.
Most commonly, Y-STRs are used to unambiguously resolve the male compo- nent of DNA mixtures when a high female background is pres- ent, or to reconstruct paternal relationships between male individuals.
Using NGS technology, more than 10 million nucleotides of the Y chromosome were compared between two male individuals who shared the same ancestor 13 gener- ations ago [29].
Four genetic differences were detected, sug- gesting that Y chromosome sequencing could solve the problem of distinguishing between mixed male samples from the same parent.
In addition, Van Geystelen et al.
[30,31] developed AMY-tree using Y chromosome single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and successfully veriﬁed the differences between 118 unrelated male individuals from 109 different geo-   Yang Y et al / Next-generation Sequencing in Forensics  193  graphical regions.
This study demonstrated that AMY-tree can determine Y chromosome pedigrees and identify unknown Y-SNPs from different geographical regions.
Forensic microbiological analysis  Microbial forensics is a new discipline developed by the Fed- eral Bureau of Investigation (FBI) after the Anthrax attack on 18 September 2001 in the USA.
It is based on the fast and accurate detection and identiﬁcation of microorganisms founded at biological crime, with the aim of tracing the source of the microbe [32].
Because microbiological terrorist attack could lead to serious consequences, forensic microbio- logical analysis has been attracting considerable attention [33].
Using whole-genome sequencing by the SOLiD system in a real investigative case, Cummings et al.
[34] identiﬁed suspects by sequencing four strains each of Bacillus anthracis and Yersinia pestis at a cost of only $1000 and reported that this would be reduced to less than $50 if the HiSeq 2000 sys- tem were used.
Brenig et al.
[35] used the 454 sequencing system to identify biological traces using deep sequencing and metagenomic anal- ysis and indicated that the method can be used for the forensic identiﬁcation of biological traces.
Fierer et al.
[36] examined the bacteria left by human skin on the surface of contact objects by using an NGS-based metagenomic method and showed that the bacteria left by human skin possess sufﬁcient DNA information for forensic analysis.
A study by Lilje et al.
[37] investigated the criteria for soil metagenome data management and database searching.
Eleven samples collected from different environments (forests, ﬁelds, grasslands and an urban park) with different microbial ﬂora were sequenced using the Roche/454 platform.
The results demonstrated that 18S rRNA gene marker analysis could be used to create and run a ﬁltered database, which was very com- putationally efﬁcient and ﬂexible.
Similarly, Giampaoli et al.
[38] successfully applied a metabarcoding approach to forensic and environmental soil samples, allowing accurate and sensi- tive analysis of the DNA of microﬂora, plants, metazoa and protozoa.
All the studies described above demonstrate that NGS has the advantages of high throughput, multiplexing capability and accuracy, which makes it suitable for rapid whole-genome typing of microbial pathogens during forensic or epidemiolog- ical investigation.
Rare polymorphisms can be reliably detected by analyzing every base of the genome, thus giving forensic data higher resolution and greater accuracy.
It is expected that a high-quality forensic microbial database will soon become a reality and aid in the fast and accurate identi- ﬁcation of criminals and biological terrorists.
Animal and plant DNA analysis  Species identiﬁcation is one of most important components of forensic practice.
For example, in some cases of poaching [39] and trading of endangered species [40], it has been used to pro- vide important information and assist in police investigations.
In the food industry, identiﬁcation of the species present in meat products can be achieved [41], and in archeology, human remains can be distinguished from non-human remains [42].
At  present, most DNA typing methods for species determination are based on PCR ampliﬁcation using species-speciﬁc primers for single species.
However, forensic scientists are often faced with situations in which no a priori species information is available.
The development of NGS technology has allowed DNA typing to be used in more projects involving species iden- tiﬁcation [43,44].
For example, Cheng et al.
recently identiﬁed plants and animals in traditional Chinese medicines using a cost-effective and efﬁcient next-generation deep sequencing method [45].
Ancestry studies and phenotypic inferences  Information embedded within the human genome may pro- vide insights into personal characteristics such as ethnicity [46], physical and physiological characteristics and age [47,48].
In forensic studies, characteristics inferred from investigations DNA analysis make it possible for criminal to evolve from the   passive comparison   into the   active search   stages.
In criminal cases where a possible suspect and database information are unavailable, it is possible to rapidly narrow down the potential suspects by using ances- try studies and phenotypic inference derived from a DNA sample.
For example, in the 2004 Madrid train bombings, source population of the suspects was inferred by using 34 autosomal SNPs related to the ancestry of population [49].
Other studies reported SNPs closely related to colors of the iris [50] and hair [51] with an accuracy of 90%.
Klimen- tidis et al.
[52] investigated facial features using DNA test and association analysis and validated their results using facial reconstruction (molecular photo ﬁtting).
The results demonstrated that there is a relationship between social and biological measures of race/ethnicity but that it is far from perfect.
In all these studies, only commercial SNP chip scanning were used.
If NGS technology for whole-genome sequencing were applied in these cases, more information and accuracy would be obtained.
Epigenetic analysis  DNA sequencing analysis is a powerful tool in forensic identi- ﬁcation [53].
Recently, a number of studies have suggested that epigenetic markers can also have various applications in foren- sic science.
For example, evidence supports that epigenetic markers can be used to distinguish monozygotic (MZ) twins [54], predict tissue type [55] and accurately determine the age of a DNA donor [56].
Epigenetic approaches based on NGS technology include whole-genome bisulﬁte sequencing [57], methylation beadchips, reduced representation bisulﬁte sequencing [58] and methylated DNA immunoprecipitation sequencing [59].
These sequencing methods require large amounts of DNA  their ability to use trace DNA samples will therefore be crucial to the success of forensic epigenetic analy- sis.
Interestingly, extremely low amounts of starting DNA (100 pg) were successfully analyzed through genome-wide ampliﬁcation of a bisulﬁte-modiﬁed DNA template, followed by quantitative methylation detection using pyrosequencing [60].
Additionally, another encouraging study performed bisul- ﬁte genomic DNA sequencing with micro-volume blood spot samples [61].
194  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 190 197  MZ twin studies continue to be a hot topic in the ﬁeld of forensic science.
As both individuals have exactly the same DNA sequence, conventional genotyping approaches such as STR, SNP, sex chromosome STR, and mtDNA analyses can- not tell them apart.
In 2014, Weber-Lehmann et al.
[62] described how identiﬁcation of extremely-rare mutations by ultra-deep NGS can differentiate between MZ twins, suggest- ing a solution to paternity and forensic cases involving MZ twins.
Li et al.
[54] used Illumina Human Methylation Bead- Chip technology to examine the DNA methylation status of 27,578 CpG sites from 22 MZ twins.
As a result, they ﬁltered 92 signiﬁcantly-methylated CpG sites, representing potential targets for epigenetic studies aimed at distinguishing between MZ twins.
In 2010, the BGI and twin research group Twin- sUK at King s College, London, co-sponsored epigenetic research projects using NGS technology to conduct an in-depth study aimed at capturing the subtle differences in epi- genetic signals from 5000 pairs of twins [63].
The research out- comes are likely to be highly applicable in the forensic identiﬁcation of MZ twins.
MicroRNA analysis  Although mRNA analysis has become a well-established tech- nique in many forensic laboratories, microRNAs (miRNAs) have only recently been introduced to forensic science.
miR- NAs are a class of endogenous small RNA molecules 18 24 nucleotides in length.
Owing to their small size, resistance to degradation and tissue-speciﬁc or highly tissue-divergent expression, they are suitable for forensic body ﬂuid identiﬁca- tion, species identiﬁcation and post-mortem interval (PMI) inference analysis [64].
Currently, analysis of miRNA is mostly achieved by real-time PCR and biochip technology, whereby only known miRNA sequences can be analyzed.
In 2009, Han- son et al.
[65] introduced miRNA proﬁling to forensic science and showed that 452 miRNAs were genotyped via the quanti- tative PCR method from forensic samples.
In another study, the expression levels of 718 miRNAs in semen, saliva, venous blood, menstrual blood and vaginal secretions were proﬁled on a microarray [66].
Among them, 14 differentially-expressed                          TTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGTGGGACTGAGC                   CCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAAAAGACACTTTTTCTTCT  Database  TACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC TT  ATAA ACTGGCCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAG TT  TT  TT  TT  TT  TT  TT  TT  AA  AA  AA  AA  AA  STR- SNPs  MicroRNAs   GGGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCGCTCGGCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGA AAGACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAAAA TAAA TAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACT TT GGCCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGTGGGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCGC TCGGCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAAAAGACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAA TATAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACTGGCCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGTG TT GGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCGCTCGGCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAAAA GACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAAAA TAAA TAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACTGG TT AAGACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAAAA TAAA TAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACTT TGGCCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGTGGGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCG CTCGGCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAAAAGACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACA ATATAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACTGGCCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGT TT GGGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCGCTCGGCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAA AAGACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAAAA TAAA TAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACT TT GGCCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGTGGGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCGC TCGGCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAAAAGACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAA TATAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACTGGCCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGTG TT GGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCGCTCGGCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAAAA GACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAAAA TAAA TAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACTGG TT CCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGTGGGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCGCTCG GCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAAAAGACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAACGTG AAGACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAAAA TAAA TAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACTT TGGCCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGTGGGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCG CTCGGCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAAAAGACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACA ATATAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACTGGCCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGT TT GGGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCGCTCGGCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAA AAGACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAAAA TAAA TAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACT TT GGCCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGTGGGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCGC TCGGCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAAAAGACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAA TATAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACTGGCCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGTG TT GGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCGCTCGGCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAAAA GACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAAAA TAAA TAA ACAAAACACGGAGTTTGCC ATAA ACTGG TT CCGTTTTCAGGGCGCAGGTCGGTGGGACTGAGCACATCGCGTGGTGCGCTCG GCGCCACCGTCTGTCTGCAGAAAAGACACTTTTTCTTCTTTGTGGCACAACGTG  AA  AA  AA  AA  AA  AA  AA  AA  TT  TT  TT  TT  TT  TT  Mixed stains  Multiple  STRs  Mitochondrial   genome  Monozygotic   twins  Microbiology  Ancestry   and  phenotypic   infererence  Animals  and plants  Y   chromosome  Forensic analysis by next-generation sequencing  Figure 1 The introduction of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology that is much cheaper and more rapid than the classic Sanger sequencing method has revolutionized our thinking about scientiﬁc strategies in forensic research.
NGS will potentially inﬂuence many aspects of forensic science, including short tandem repeats (STRs) and microRNA analysis, monozygotic twin and mixed stain recognition, Y chromosome and mitochondrial whole-genome studies, forensic microbiological analysis, multiple species identiﬁcation, and ancestry and phenotype inference.
More importantly, high-throughput screening techniques have generated large amounts of data, facilitating a systematic understanding of relationships between molecular components.
Therefore, comprehensive genome-wide analysis, in combination with the techniques of genomics, proteomics, transcriptomics and epigenomics, will provide new insights in the ﬁeld of applied forensics.
Yang Y et al / Next-generation Sequencing in Forensics  195  miRNAs were identiﬁed, which could serve as potential candi- dates for body ﬂuid identiﬁcation.
Using NGS technology, millions of miRNA sequences can be rapidly analyzed to iden- tify organ- and developmental stage-speciﬁc expression, as well as miRNA expression in different disease states, thus provid- ing a powerful tool for forensic analysis.
Conclusion  In practical forensic science, DNA samples are usually limited and often cannot fulﬁll the requirements of simultaneously analyzing multiple loci on different chromosomes in mitochon- drial genome [67 69].
This may result in difﬁculties in provid- ing sufﬁcient information and can limit their use as legal evidence.
In addition, mixed stain identiﬁcation and complex paternity cases cannot be solved with traditional STR genotyp- ing strategies.
NGS technology not only meets these require- ments but can also potentially be applied in many areas of research, including DNA database construction, ancestry and phenotypic inference, MZ twin studies, body ﬂuid and species identiﬁcation, and forensic microbiological analysis (Figure 1).
In forensic science, standard STR typing provides sufﬁcient discrimination power for most applications, and most countries have already established large-scale forensic DNA databases for resolving crimes based on STR technology.
Although the use of whole-exome or whole-genome sequencing could provide more information for forensic analyses, considering the compatibility and cost, NGS  technology would not likely soon replace conventional STR typing.
Forensic scientists performed custom-designed target- enrichment panels to analyze STR loci.
However, these meth- ods only covered some of the currently-common used loci in forensic studies [16 18].
With the development of NGS tech- nology, it is likely that its cost will rapidly decrease and NGS kits for forensic application will soon be commercially available.
This will allow the simultaneous detection of multi- ple STR loci on both autosomes and sex chromosomes, anal- ysis of mitochondrial genome polymorphisms and analysis of SNPs related to ancestry and physical and psychological char- acteristics, providing important information for forensic inves- tigations (Figure 2).
Using these methods, NGS is capable of providing data on loci across the genome.
As law enforcement agencies have started to share information, multiple interna- tional databases have recognized the need to analyze addi- tional in a single run and have expanded their locus database.
These expanded locus sets have improved the efﬁ- ciency of law enforcement investigations, where a suspect was identiﬁed or the database yielded a match.
When neither a suspect nor a hit exists, additional information from evidence samples might provide valuable clues regarding the phenotype of the offender, who may be out of custody and at risk of re- offending.
loci  Although NGS technology appears to have an important role in future forensic studies, more work is required to fully achieve this goal, which includes overcoming problems with low-template library preparation, error rate, type estimations and issues with NGS data processing and mining.
Guidelines  NGS  Autosome  Likelihood ratio =   Biological evidence from criminal scene  Sex   chromosome  Mitochondrial   Epigenetic  Figure 2 Diverse range of information can be obtained by NGS of biological evidence samples collected from crime scenes Through applying NGS technology, multiple results can be obtained simultaneously from biological evidence samples collected from crime scenes, such as STRs, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of autosomes, sex chromosomes and mitochondrial genomes, as well as epigenetic information.
By integrating all the information, the evidence samples can be used not only for suspect identiﬁcation but also for inferring the criminal suspects  physical, psychological and geographical characteristics, as well as the source population.
196  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 190 197  for the application of NGS in forensic science also need to be generated.
With the technical advances of NGS technology and continuous translational efforts of forensic scientists, we believe that NGS technology is likely to become an easily accessible routine method in forensic practice.
Competing interests  The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
Acknowledgements  The authors thank Dr. Hongzhu Qu and Dr. Xiangdong Fang for critical reading and Miss Nan Ding for ﬁgure preparation.
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.
81172909 and 81330073).
References  [1] Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR.
DNA sequencing with chain- terminating inhibitors.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1977 74:5463 7.
[2] Fullwood MJ, Wei CL, Liu ET, Ruan Y. Next-generation DNA for transcriptome and  sequencing of paired-end tags (PET) genome analyses.
Genome Res 2009 19:521 32.
[3] Weber-Lehmann J, Schilling E, Gradl G, Richter DC, Wiehler J, Rolf B.
Finding the needle in the haystack: differentiating   identical   twins in paternity testing and forensics by ultra-deep next generation sequencing.
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2014 9:42 6.
[4] McCarthy JJ, McLeod HL, Ginsburg GS.
Genomic medicine: a decade of successes, challenges, and opportunities.
Sci Transl Med 2013 5:189sr4.
[5] Goddard ME, Hayes BJ.
Mapping genes for complex traits in domestic animals and their use in breeding programmes.
Nat Rev Genet 2009 10:381 91.
[6] Poinar HN, Schwarz C, Qi J, Shapiro B, Macphee RD, Buigues B, et al.
Metagenomics to paleogenomics: large-scale sequencing of mammoth DNA.
Science 2006 311:392 4.
[7] Margulies M, Egholm M, Altman WE, Attiya S, Bader JS, Bemben LA, et al.
Genome sequencing in microfabricated high- density picolitre reactors.
Nature 2005 437:376 80.
[8] van Dijk EL, Auger H, Jaszczyszyn Y, Thermes C. Ten years of Trends Genet  technology.
sequencing  next-generation 2014 30:418 26.
[9] Karn T. High-throughput gene expression and mutation proﬁling: current methods and future perspectives.
Breast Care (Basel) 2013 8:401 6.
[10] Derrington IM, Butler TZ, Collins MD, Manrao E, Pavlenok M, Niederweis M, et al.
Nanopore DNA sequencing with MspA.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107:16060 5.
[11] Luan B, Peng H, Polonsky S, Rossnagel S, Stolovitzky G, Martyna G. Base-by-base ratcheting of single stranded DNA through a solid-state nanopore.
Phys Rev Lett 2010 104:238103.
[12] Eid J, Fehr A, Gray J, Luong K, Lyle J, Otto G, et al.
Real-time DNA sequencing from single polymerase molecules.
Science 2009 323:133 8.
[13] Murray IA, Clark TA, Morgan RD, Boitano M, Anton BP, Luong K, et al.
The methylomes of six bacteria.
Nucleic Acids Res 2012 40:11450 62.
[14] Rizzi E, Lari M, Gigli E, De Bellis G, Caramelli D. Ancient DNA studies: new perspectives on old samples.
Genet Sel Evol 2012 44:21.
[15] Proceedings of the 4th national symposium on forensic DNA inspection technology & 2012 international symposium on new  advances in forensic genetics.
Fuzhou, China.
December 9 12, 2012.
[16] Zajac P, Oberg C, Ahmadian A.
Analysis of short tandem repeats  by parallel DNA threading.
PLoS One 2009 4:e7823.
[17] Irwin J, Just R, Scheible M, Loreille O. Assessing the potential of next generation sequencing technologies for missing persons identiﬁcation efforts.
Forensic Sci Int Genet Suppl Ser 2011 3:447 8.
[18] Bornman DM, Hester ME, Schuetter JM, Kasoji MD, Minard- Smith A, Barden CA, et al.
Short-read, high-throughput sequenc- ing technology for STR genotyping.
Biotechniques 2012:1 6.
[19] Warshauer DH, Lin D, Hari K, Jain R, Davis C, LaRue B, et al.
STRait Razor: a length-based forensic STR allele-calling tool for use with second generation sequencing data.
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2013 7:409 17.
[20] Van Neste C, Vandewoestyne M, Van Criekinge W, Deforce D, Van Nieuwerburgh F. My-Forensic-Loci-queries (MyFLq) frame- work for analysis of forensic STR data generated by massive parallel sequencing.
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2014 9:1 8.
[21] Binladen J, Gilbert MT, Bollback JP, Panitz F, Bendixen C, Nielsen R, et al.
The use of coded PCR primers enables high- throughput sequencing of multiple homolog ampliﬁcation prod- ucts by 454 parallel sequencing.
PLoS One 2007 2:e197.
[22] Gunnarsdottir ED, Li M, Bauchet M, Finstermeier K, Stoneking M. High-throughput sequencing of complete human mtDNA genomes from the Philippines.
Genome Res 2011 21:1 11.
[23] Cao Y, Wan LH, Gu LG, Huang YX, Xiu CX, Hu SH, et al.
Heteroplasmy in human mtDNA control region.
Fa Yi Xue Za Zhi 2006 22:190 2.
[24] Li M, Schonberg A, Schaefer M, Schroeder R, Nasidze I, Stoneking M. Detecting heteroplasmy from high-throughput sequencing of complete human mitochondrial DNA genomes.
Am J Hum Genet 2010 87:237 49.
[25] Tang S, Huang T. Characterization of mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy using a parallel sequencing system.
Biotechniques 2010 48:287 96.
[26] Holland MM, McQuillan MR, O Hanlon KA.
Second generation sequencing allows for mtDNA mixture deconvolution and high resolution J 2011 52:299 313.  heteroplasmy.
Croat Med  detection  of  [27] Parson W, Strobl C, Huber G, Zimmermann B, Gomes SM, Souto L, et al.
Evaluation of next generation mtGenome sequencing using the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM).
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2013 7:543 9.
[28] Mikkelsen M, Frank-Hansen R, Hansen AJ, Morling N. Mas- sively parallel pyrosequencing of the mitochondrial genome with the 454 methodology in forensic genetics.
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2014 12:30 7.
[29] Xue Y, Wang Q, Long Q, Ng BL, Swerdlow H, Burton J, et al.
Human Y chromosome base-substitution mutation rate measured by direct sequencing in a deep-rooting pedigree.
Curr Biol 2009 19:1453 7.
[30] Van Geystelen A, Decorte R, Larmuseau MH.
Updating the Y- chromosomal phylogenetic tree for forensic applications based on whole genome SNPs.
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2013 7:573 80.
[31] Van Geystelen A, Decorte R, Larmuseau MH.
AMY-tree: an algorithm to use whole genome SNP calling for Y chromosomal phylogenetic applications.
BMC Genomics 2013 14:101.
[32] McEwen SA, Wilson TM, Ashford DA, Heegaard ED, Kourn- ikakis B. Microbial forensics for natural and intentional incidents of animals.
Rev Sci Tech 2006 25:329 39.  infectious disease  involving  [33] Beecher DJ.
Forensic application of microbiological culture analysis to identify mail intentionally contaminated with Bacillus anthracis spores.
Appl Environ Microb 2006 72:5304 10.
[34] Cummings CA, Bormann Chung CA, Fang R, Barker M, Brzoska P, Williamson PC, et al.
Accurate, rapid and high-throughput detection of strain-speciﬁc polymorphisms in Bacillus anthracis   Yang Y et al / Next-generation Sequencing in Forensics  197  and Yersinia pestis by next-generation sequencing.
Investig Genet 2010 1:5.
[35] Brenig B, Beck J, Schutz E. Shotgun metagenomics of biological stains using ultra-deep DNA sequencing.
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2010 4:228 31.
[36] Fierer N, Lauber CL, Zhou N, McDonald D, Costello EK, Knight R. Forensic identiﬁcation using skin bacterial communi- ties.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 107:6477 81.
[37] Lilje L, Lillsaar T, Ra  tsep R, Simm J, Aaspo  llu A.
Soil sample metagenome NGS data management for forensic investigation.
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2013 4:e35 6.
[38] Giampaoli S, Berti A, Di Maggio RM, Pilli E, Valentini A, Valeriani F, et al.
The environmental biological signature: NGS proﬁling for forensic comparison of soils.
Forensic Sci Int 2014 240:41 7.
[39] An J, Lee MY, Min MS, Lee MH, Lee H. A molecular genetic approach for species identiﬁcation of mammals and sex determi- nation of birds in a forensic case of poaching from South Korea.
Forensic Sci Int 2007 167:59 61.
[40] Eurlings MC, Lens F, Pakusza C, Peelen T, Wieringa JJ, Gravendeel B. Forensic identiﬁcation of Indian snakeroot (Rau- volﬁa serpentina Benth.
ex Kurz) using DNA barcoding.
J Forensic Sci 2013 58:822 30.
[41] Ali ME, Hashim U, Kashif M, Mustafa S, Che Man YB, Abd Hamid SB.
Development of swine-speciﬁc DNA markers for biosensor-based authentication.
Genet Mol Res 2012 11:1762 72.  halal  [42] Malmstrom H, Stora J, Dalen L, Holmlund G, Gotherstrom A.
Extensive human DNA contamination in extracts from ancient dog bones and teeth.
Mol Biol Evol 2005 22:2040 7.
[43] Hajibabaei M, Shokralla S, Zhou X, Singer GA, Baird DJ.
Environmental barcoding: a next-generation sequencing approach for biomonitoring applications using river benthos.
PLoS One 2011 6:e17497.
[44] Hancock-Hanser BL, Frey A, Leslie MS, Dutton PH, Archer FI, Morin PA.
Targeted multiplex next-generation sequencing: advances in techniques of mitochondrial and nuclear DNA sequencing for population genomics.
Mol Ecol Resour 2013 13:254 68.
[45] Cheng X, Chen X, Su X, Zhao H, Han M, Bo C, et al.
DNA extraction protocol for biological ingredient analysis of Liuwei Dihuang Wan.
Bioinformatics 2014 12:137 43.
Proteomics  Genomics  [46] Shriver MD, Smith MW, Jin L, Marcini A, Akey JM, Deka R, et al.
Ethnic-afﬁliation estimation by use of population-speciﬁc DNA markers.
Am J Hum Genet 1997 60:957 64.
[47] Eiberg H, Troelsen J, Nielsen M, Mikkelsen A, Mengel-From J, Kjaer KW, et al.
Blue eye color in humans may be caused by a perfectly associated founder mutation in a regulatory element located within the HERC2 gene inhibiting OCA2 expression.
Hum Genet 2008 123:177 87.
[51] Han JL, Kraft P, Nan H, Guo Q, Chen C, Qureshi A, et al.
A genome-wide association study identiﬁes novel alleles associated with pigmentation.
PLoS Genet 2008 4:e1000074.
color  skin  hair  and  [52] Klimentidis YC, Shriver MD.
Estimating genetic ancestry pro-  portions from faces.
PLoS One 2009 4:e4460.
[53] Jeffreys AJ, Brookﬁeld JF, Semeonoff R. Positive identiﬁcation of an immigration test-case using human DNA ﬁngerprints.
Nature 1985 317:818 9.
[54] Li C, Zhao S, Zhang N, Zhang S, Hou Y.
Differences of DNA methylation proﬁles between monozygotic twins  blood samples.
Mol Biol Rep 2013 40:5275 80.
[55] Frumkin D, Wasserstrom A, Budowle B, Davidson A. DNA methylation-based forensic tissue identiﬁcation.
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2011 5:517 24.
[56] Bocklandt S, Lin W, Sehl ME, Sanchez FJ, Sinsheimer JS, Horvath S, et al.
Epigenetic predictor of age.
PLoS One 2011 6:e14821.
[57] Grunau C, Clark SJ, Rosenthal A. Bisulﬁte genomic sequencing: systematic investigation of critical experimental parameters.
Nucleic Acids Res 2001 29:E65 5.
[58] Meissner A, Gnirke A, Bell GW, Ramsahoye B, Lander ES, Jaenisch R. Reduced representation bisulﬁte sequencing for comparative high-resolution DNA methylation analysis.
Nucleic Acids Res 2005 33:5868 77.
[59] Weber M, Davies JJ, Wittig D, Oakeley EJ, Haase M, Lam WL, et al.
Chromosome-wide and promoter-speciﬁc analyses identify sites of differential DNA methylation in normal and transformed human cells.
Nat Genet 2005 37:853 62.
[60] Paliwal A, Vaissiere T, Herceg Z. Quantitative detection of DNA methylation states in minute amounts of DNA from body ﬂuids.
Methods 2010 52:242 7.
[61] Xu H, Zhao Y, Liu Z, Zhu W, Zhou Y, Zhao Z. Bisulﬁte genomic sequencing of DNA from dried blood spot microvolume samples.
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2012 6:306 9.
[62] Weber-Lehmann J, Schilling E, Gradl G, Richter DC, Wiehler J, Rolf B.
Finding the needle in the haystack: Differentiating   identical   twins in paternity testing and forensics by ultra-deep next generation sequencing.
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2014 9:42 6.
[63] Yang X, Jiao R, Yang L, Wu LP, Li YR, Wang J. New- generation high-throughput technologies based  omics  research strategy in human disease.
Yi Chuan 2011 33:829 46.
[64] Courts C, Madea B. Micro-RNA   A potential for forensic  science  Forensic Sci Int 2010 203:106 11.
[65] Hanson EK, Lubenow H, Ballantyne J. Identiﬁcation of foren- sically relevant body ﬂuids using a panel of differentially expressed microRNAs.
Anal Biochem 2009 387:303 14.
[66] Zubakov D, Boersma AW, Choi Y, van Kuijk PF, Wiemer EA, Kayser M. MicroRNA markers for forensic body ﬂuid identiﬁ- cation obtained from microarray screening and quantitative RT- PCR conﬁrmation.
Int J Legal Med 2010 124:217 26.
[48] Wei YL, Li CX, Li SB, Liu Y, Hu L. Association study of monoamine oxidase A/B genes and schizophrenia in Han Chinese.
Behav Brain Funct 2011 7:42.
[67] Hawkins TL, Detter JC, Richardson PM.
Whole genome ampli- ﬁcation-applications and advances.
Curr Opin Biotechnol 2002 13:65 7.
[49] Phillips C, Prieto L, Fondevila M, Salas A, Gomez-Tato A, Alvarez-Dios J, et al.
Ancestry analysis in the 11-M Madrid bomb attack investigation.
PLoS One 2009 4:e6583.
[50] Walsh S, Liu F, Ballantyne KN, van Oven M, Lao O, Kayser M. IrisPlex: a sensitive DNA tool for accurate prediction of blue and brown eye colour in the absence of ancestry information.
Forensic Sci Int Genet 2011 5:170 80.
[68] Kwok PY.
Making  random ampliﬁcation  predictable in whole  genome analysis.
Trends Biotechnol 2002 20:411 2.
[69] Wells D, Sherlock JK, Handyside AH, Delhanty JD.
Detailed chromosomal and molecular genetic analysis of single cells by whole genome ampliﬁcation and comparative genomic hybridisa- tion.
Nucleic Acids Res 1999 27:1214 8.
