Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 29 33  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics  www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb  www.sciencedirect.com  REVIEW  Recent Advances in Computational Methods for Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Data Processing  Xin Gao *  Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia  Received 22 October 2012  revised 12 December 2012  accepted 28 December 2012 Available online 11 January 2013  KEYWORDS  Nuclear magnetic resonance  Protein structure  Computational methods  Bioinformatics  Abstract Although three-dimensional protein structure determination using nuclear magnetic res- onance (NMR) spectroscopy is a computationally costly and tedious process that would beneﬁt from advanced computational techniques, it has not garnered much research attention from special- ists in bioinformatics and computational biology.
In this paper, we review recent advances in com- putational methods for NMR protein structure determination.
We summarize the advantages of and bottlenecks in the existing methods and outline some open problems in the ﬁeld.
We also dis- cuss current trends in NMR technology development and suggest directions for research on future computational methods for NMR.
Introduction  local chemical and geometric environments, different nuclei resonate at different frequencies.
Since frequency is a magnetic ﬁeld-dependent measure, it is often converted into a relative frequency with respect to a reference frequency.
Such relative frequencies are referred to as chemical shifts.
The resonances of nuclei that are close in Euclidean space couple, either through covalent bonds or through space.
NMR experiments capture such coupling.
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the main methods for determining three-dimensional (3D) struc- tures of proteins [1].
The underlying idea for NMR protein structure determination is that if a large number of distance constraints are known between atom pairs of a target protein, the conformational space of possible protein structures will be restricted to a few structures [2].
The physical principle of NMR structure determination is that when a certain isotope (e.g., 1H, 13C or 15N) is placed in a strong magnetic ﬁeld, the nucleus will absorb electromagnetic radiation at a frequency that is characteristic of the isotope.
Depending on different  * Corresponding author.
E-mail: xin.gao@kaust.edu.sa (Gao X).
The outputs from NMR experiments are NMR spectra, which are, mathematically speaking, multi-dimensional matri- ces.
The indices for each dimension are the discrete chemical shift values of a certain nucleus, and the entries of the matrices are the intensity values of the coupling.
For instance, 15N- HSQC is one of the most commonly-used NMR spectra.
It captures the coupling between the backbone nitrogen (N) and the hydrogen (H) that is attached to this nitrogen.
For a protein with n amino acids, there are (n p) expected peaks in the 15N-HSQC spectrum, where p is the number of proline (Pro) in the protein.
However, the amine groups in the side chains of some amino acids are also visible in the 15N-HSQC spectrum, such as arginine (Arg), asparagine (Asn) and gluta- mine (Gln).
To eliminate the peaks of these side chains, 1672-0229/$ - see front matter ª 2013 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Published by Elsevier Ltd and Science Press.
All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2012.12.003  Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier   30  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 29 33  information from different spectra needs to be combined.
There are additional sources of error in NMR spectra, includ- ing missing signals, chemical shift degeneracy, sample impu- rity, water bands, artifacts and experimental errors [2].
All of these sources of error need to be taken into account.
Another important NMR spectrum is the nuclear Overha- user enhancement (NOE) spectrum, which is a through-space experiment that captures certain atoms that are close to each other in the Euclidean space.
Here,  close  often refers to a dis- tance smaller than 6 A  .
Thus, the NOE spectrum is a through- space spectrum and each peak in the NOE spectrum provides a distance constraint that can reduce the conformational space of possible protein structures.
In contrast to NOE that provides short-range interactions ( 6 A  ), there are experiments that can provide long-range information.
One example is residual dipolar couplings (RDCs), which provides long-range orientational information relative to an external alignment tensor [3 5].
Another example is paramagnetic relaxation enhancement (PRE) [6,7].
PRE ef- fect can be detected in large magnetic moment of protons and unpaired electron up to 35 A  .
Traditionally, determination of NMR protein structure mainly follows the four-step process described by Wu  thrich [1].
After the spectra are collected, the four steps involve peak picking, resonance assignment, NOE assignment and structure calculation.
The peak picking step takes the through-bond and through-space NMR spectra as inputs and identiﬁes peaks in these spectra.
The peaks of certain through-bond spectra are then used to assign the chemical shift values to the correspond- ing atoms of the protein, which is the so-called resonance assign- ment step.
After resonance assignment, mapping between the chemical shift values and the indices of the atoms is built.
Such mapping is applied to interpret the NOE peaks and extract dis- tance constraints.
Since the chemical shift values of all the atoms of the protein are distributed within a small range, overlaps in chemical shift values are expected.
Thus, the interpretation of the NOE peaks can be ambiguous.
The structure calculation step takes the distance constraints (both ambiguous and unam- biguous) to determine the ﬁnal structure(s) of the protein.
Most NMR labs process NMR data either manually or semi-automatically with the help of visualization tools.
The en- tire process is computationally costly and time-consuming.
Re- cently, attention has been paid to developing computational methods that can signiﬁcantly accelerate the NMR data pro- cessing and reduce the errors introduced by manual process- ing.
However, NMR is still a new ﬁeld to the computational community.
Even in the ﬁeld of bioinformatics and computa- tional biology, computational problems in NMR structure determination have not been well studied.
Here, we review some recent advances in computational methods for NMR protein structure determination.
Peak picking  The goal of the peak picking step is to identify peaks, i.e., the chemical shift coordinates of the coupling nuclei, in any given spectrum.
This is the key step in the entire NMR protein struc- ture determination process because the following steps are all built upon this step [8,9].
The automated peak picking problem was ﬁrst studied two decades ago [10].
Expected properties of peak shapes, such as the symmetry property, were used to  identify peaks.
Since then, a variety of computational methods have been utilized, including peak-property-based methods [11,12], machine learning methods [13 16], and spectra-decom- position-based methods [17 19].
Recently, image processing techniques have been applied to the peak picking problem and they have demonstrated promis- ing performance [20,21].
Alipanahi et al.
proposed a multi-stage method, PICKY, to automatically identify peaks from a given set of N H-rooted NMR spectra [20].
PICKY considers an NMR spectrum as an image and estimates the noise level by estimating the variance in local neighborhoods, which is based on the assumption that the noise is white Gaussian noise.
All the  pixels  of the image, i.e., data points of the spectrum, that have intensity values lower than the estimated noise level are believed to contain no signal and are thus removed.
The disconnected components of the remaining spectrum are identiﬁed, some of which may contain a number of peaks due to peak overlapping or inaccuracy in the estimation of the noise level.
The compo- nents are further decomposed to smaller ones by checking the levels of overlapping of adjacent local maxima.
Rank-one sin- gular value decomposition (SVD) is applied to each small com- ponent to identify peaks, which can eliminate false local maxima in the component.
Finally, cross-referenced informa- tion between spectra that share common nuclei, such as 15N and 1H, is used to reﬁne the peak lists.
Another contribution of [20] is to propose a benchmark set that contains 32 2D and 3D spectra extracted from eight proteins.
This is the most com- prehensive data set to date for the peak picking problem.
Although PICKY demonstrated signiﬁcantly better perfor- mance than previous peak picking methods, it has two bottle- necks.
PICKY is not sensitive enough to replace manual peak picking in the sense that weak peaks may be eliminated in the denoising step of PICKY if they have intensity values lower than the estimated noise level.
On the other hand, the number of false positives is high in PICKY peak lists due to the fact that PICKY ranks peaks by intensity values, which can be badly biased.
WaVPeak was developed to overcome these two bottlenecks [21].
Like PICKY, WaVPeak is also based on image processing techniques.
Speciﬁcally, WaVPeak uses wavelets.
Wavelets are mathematical functions that cut data into different frequency components.
Each component is then studied with a resolution matched to its scale.
WaVPeak applies multi-dimensional wave- lets to the NMR spectra to smooth the spectra.
In contrast to PICKY, WaVPeak aims to eliminate noise from the data points instead of eliminating noisy data points.
This can preserve the shapes of the peaks, including the weak ones.
Furthermore, WaVPeak ranks the peaks by their estimated volumes.
On PICKY s benchmark set, WaVPeak showed signiﬁcantly higher sensitivity and included a smaller number of false positives than did PICKY.
To be more speciﬁc, WaVPeak achieved an average of 88% recall value and 74% precision value.
One remaining problem in automatic peak picking is how to select true peaks from a large number of predicted peaks [9].
If a set of spectra is available for a target protein, the peak lists for these spectra can be used as cross-checks for each other [20,22].
For instance, the chemical shifts of 15N and 1H in a true peak in a CBCA(CO)NH spectrum are expected to be visible in the 15N-HSQC spectrum of the same protein and they can be cross-checked.
It is also possible to select the true peaks of a single spectrum.
To do so, Abbas et al.
cast the peak selection problem as a multiple testing problem in statistics [22].
They ﬁrst converted the peak ranking criterion,   Gao X / Recent Advances in Computational NMR Data Processing  31  such as intensity or volume, into a P-value.
They then applied a Benjamini Hochberg algorithm to control the false discovery rate (FDR) and select the true peaks.
Their method can be potentially applied to different bioinformatic problems in which true predictions must be differentiated from a large number of false ones, such as protein function annotation [23].
However, the Benjamini Hochberg algorithm only selects a  cutting point  in the ranked peak list.
Its performance there- fore depends on the quality of the ranking criteria.
Designing a ranking measure that is better than volume or symmetry still remains an open problem in peak picking.
Resonance assignment  After the peaks are identiﬁed, the peak lists from the through- bond spectra are ﬁrst combined to assign the chemical shift values to the corresponding atoms of the protein.
For reso- nance assignment, the peaks that share common nuclei, 15N and 1H, are ﬁrst grouped into spin systems.
The spin systems are then assigned to the residues of the protein using both in- ter-residue and intra-residue information contained in the spin systems.
Ideally, there are n spin systems to be assigned to n residues.
However, due to incomplete peak picking, there are often missing spin systems, missing chemical shifts in spin sys- tems and false spin systems, which make the resonance assign- ment problem practically difﬁcult.
A variety of computational methods have been explored to solve the resonance assignment problem, including search algorithms [24 27], maximum inde- pendent set algorithms [28], sequential algorithms [29,30], logic algorithms [31], fragment-based algorithms [32,33] and optimi- zation algorithms [34 37].
Many target proteins of NMR experiments have closely homologous structures that are stored in the protein data bank (PDB) [38].
Depending on whether the homologous structures are utilized to assist the assignment process, resonance assign- ment methods can be classiﬁed as either ab initio or structure- based assignments.
To make an assignment method practically useful, the method has to be error-tolerant because the input peak lists or spin systems could contain missing or false information.
Another major difﬁculty is caused by chemical shift degeneracy, that is, the same nucleus may have slightly different chemical shift values in different spectra.
This introduces ambiguities in the assignment process, especially for large proteins and proteins containing residues with similar chemical shift values, such as all-a proteins, which is a class of structural domains in which the secondary structure is composed entirely of a-helices.
IPASS was developed as an error-tolerant assignment method that automatically takes picked peaks as inputs [34].
IPASS is built based on the optimization techniques.
The peaks from different spectra are ﬁrst grouped into spin systems by a two-round algorithm that can eliminate the effects of chemical shift degeneracy.
The spin systems are then evaluated by a probabilistic model to calculate the probability of being assigned to different residues.
After that, the problem becomes one of ﬁnding the mapping between the spin system set and the residue set.
Finding the optimal mapping, however, is NP-hard in the worst case.
IPASS formulates the problem as an integer linear programming (ILP) formulation.
For most of the cases, the probabilistic model can reduce the search space to a reasonable size in which state-of-the-art ILP solvers can ﬁnd the optimal solutions.
Tycko and Hu, on the other hand,  solved the resonance assignment problem in a completely probabilistic manner [30].
They formulated the assignment problem as a local search problem and developed a Monte Carlo simulated annealing algorithm to explore the assignment search space.
In this way, they could handle chemical shift degeneracy and missing/false chemical shifts in spin systems.
When close homology to the target protein can be found in PDB, the problem becomes more tractable.
Jang et al.
pro- posed the structure-based assignment problem and developed a general integer linear programming framework to solve the problem [35,36].
Their method simultaneously assigns back- bone chemical shifts and interprets NOE peaks.
The underly- ing idea is that given the homologous structure, a contact graph can be built in which each node is a residue and each edge denotes a pair of residues that are closer than 6 A  in Euclidean space.
A similar graph can also be built based on spin systems and the NOE peaks that are associated with such spin systems.
In this graph, each node is a spin system and each edge represents two spin systems that are associated by an NOE peak.
The goal is to ﬁnd the common edge matching be- tween the two graphs that maximizes the matching scores.
Their method was highly accurate, even when automatically picked peaks were used as the inputs.
The performance of all the aforementioned methods, how- ever, largely depends on the accuracy of amino acid typing and secondary structure prediction of spin systems.
Probabilistic models have been built based on statistics from the Biological Magnetic Resonance Bank (BMRB) [39], to predict amino acid and secondary structure types of spin systems to reduce the search space [34,35,40].
However, the accuracy of such models remains modest, which leaves room for improvement.
NOE assignment and structure calculation  NOE assignment and structure calculation are often combined together to calculate ﬁnal structures [34,41 44].
A widely used method is the CYANA package [43].
CYANA is based on lo- cal search techniques, i.e., simulated annealing by molecular dynamics simulations in the torsion angle space.
However, CYANA requires manually processed assignments and NOE peaks to accurately determine the ﬁnal structures.
To make the structure calculation more error-tolerant, Gao et al.
devel- oped AMR (automated NMR protocol) [2,34].
AMR is an end-to-end computational pipeline that consists of the peak picking module, PICKY, the resonance assignment module, IPASS, and the NOE assignment and structure calculation module, FALCON-NMR [45].
Given a target protein and its resonance assignment, FALCON-NMR ﬁrst searches for homologs of the protein in PDB.
If homologs are found, it re- ﬁnes the structure by encoding chemical shift information.
Otherwise, it makes an ab initio prediction of the structure of the protein.
The chemical shifts are used to search for frag- ments of the target protein, from which the backbone angle distributions are extracted.
An order-nine hidden Markov model (HMM) is built to sample the conformational space.
It has been shown recently that little information is worthwhile beyond the residues that are more than nine residues apart [46].
The sampled structures are thus ranked by the ambiguous NOE constraints and the top ones are selected to generate fragments for the next iteration.
FALCON-NMR works in an iterative manner until convergence.
32  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 29 33  The main bottleneck to ab initio protein structure calcula- tion methods is that the size of the search space is intractable.
Although the aforementioned methods use chemical shift information to signiﬁcantly reduce the search space, they do not work well on large proteins.
Besides, NMR information has mainly been used in the scoring function and the fragment selection parts of such methods.
A method that can encode the chemical shift information to direct the search procedure may give better scalability.
Automated structure determination from spectra  The ultimate goal for all the aforementioned efforts is to greatly accelerate, and even fully automate, the currently time-consuming NMR protein structure determination pro- cess, i.e., from the set of NMR spectra to the ﬁnal 3D structure of the protein.
Despite the large number of computational methods developed for different steps of the NMR data pro- cessing procedure, a crucial question is that whether the   iso- lated   methods can be combined into a pipeline to work together.
In fact, this is one of the most important questions for the general bioinformatics ﬁeld.
In bioinformatics, a com- plex problem is often decomposed into smaller ones or consec- utive steps.
Computational efforts can usually solve the smaller problems relatively well.
However, such methods are devel- oped independently of each other and often have different assumptions, inputs and outputs, and error tolerant levels.
From a user point of view, it is very difﬁcult to make a correct combination of the methods to solve the big problem.
As mentioned in the previous section, Gao et al.
developed a fully automated pipeline, AMR, as a proof-of-concept [2].
PICKY was applied to identify peaks from a set of six spectra, including 15N-HSQC, HNCO or HNCA, CBCA(CO)NH, HNCACB, HCCONH-TOCSY and N-NOESY [20].
The six peak lists were then used to cross check to remove false positives.
The reﬁned peak lists were fed into IPASS for resonance assign- ment [34].
IPASS was speciﬁcally developed to deal with highly noisy and incomplete peak lists generated by automatic peak picking methods.
The resonance assignment was then applied to assign NOE peaks.
FALCON-NMR was used to calculate the ﬁnal 3D structure by using both chemical shift information and distance constraints [34].
AMR was applied on the spectrum sets of four proteins and generated ﬁnal structures within 1.5 A  to the experimentally determined ones.
Another successful at- tempt is FLYA [47,44], which uses AUTOPSY as the peak pick- ing tool [17], GARANT as the chemical shift assignment tool [48], ARIA as the NOE assignment tool [49] and CYANA as the structure calculation tool [43].
Outlook  Despite of some progress in developing computational meth- ods for NMR data processing, the main bottlenecks to analysis of NMR spectroscopy data remain, i.e., solving structures of large proteins and solving loop structures.
If the target protein is a large protein, the number of atoms will be higher and the spectra will become more crowded.
On the other hand, if the target protein contains ﬂexible loops, their peaks tend to have weak intensities and sometimes overlap with each other.
To overcome these bottlenecks, efforts have been extended in three directions.
First, NMR spectrometers with stronger mag-  netic ﬁelds, such as 950 MHz, have been developed and uti- lized in labs.
Such machines can generate spectra with much higher resolutions and their peaks are more concentrated.
Sec- ond, higher-dimensional NMR experiments have been devel- oped and used.
Up to now, 6D spectra have been used in practice [50].
Far fewer overlapping peaks are expected in higher-dimensional spectra.
Third, 13C-labeled spectra can be used to replace traditional 1H-labeled proteins to reduce the number of peaks signiﬁcantly and thus reduce ambiguities.
Any of these directions will require computational efforts to extend the current methods or develop novel methods to deal with new types of data, especially for the peak picking step and the structure calculation step.
Conclusion  Here, we have brieﬂy reviewed recent advances in computa- tional methods for NMR protein structure determination, which is a relatively new ﬁeld of inquiry for bioinformaticians and computational biologists.
We have provided a summary of the advantages to and bottlenecks in existing methods and out- lined some open questions.
We have also discussed current trends in the development of NMR technologies and have pointed out directions for the development of future computa- tional methods.
Competing interests  None declared.
Acknowledgements  We are grateful to Ahmed Abbas, Babak Alipanahi, Cheryl Arrowsmith, Vladimir B. Bajic, Frank Balbach, Dongbo Bu, Meghana Chitale, Logan Donaldson, Jianhua Huang, Richard Jang, Bing-Yi Jing, Emre Karakoc, Daisuke Kihara, Xinbing Kong, Ming Li, Shuai Cheng Li, Zhi Liu, Mehdi Maadooliat, Mario Messih and Jinbo Xu for their contributions to the pro- jects discussed in this review.
We thank Virginia Unkefer for editorial work on the manuscript.
This work was supported by the GRP-CF award (Grant No.
GRP-CF-2011-19-P-Gao- Huang) and a GMSV-OCRF award from King Abdullah Uni- versity of Science and Technology (KAUST).
References  [1] Wu  thrich K. NMR of proteins and nucleic acids.
New York:  John Wiley and Sons  1986.
[2] Gao X.
Towards automating protein structure determination from NMR data.
PhD dissertation.
University of Waterloo  2009.
[3] Tjandra N, Omichinski JG, Gronenborn AM, Clore GM, Bax A.
Use of dipolar 1H 15N and 1H 13C couplings in the structure determination of magnetically oriented macromolecules in solu- tion.
Nat Struct Biol 1997 4:732 8.
[4] Clore GM.
Accurate and rapid docking of protein protein complexes on the basis of intermolecular nuclear overhauser enhancement data and dipolar couplings by rigid body minimi- zation.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000 97:9021 5.
[5] Bax A, Kontaxis G, Tjandra N. Dipolar couplings in macromolec- ular structure determination.
Methods Enzymol 2001 339:127 74.
Gao X / Recent Advances in Computational NMR Data Processing  33  [6] Solomon I.
Relaxation processes in a system of two spins.
Phys  Rev 1955 99:559.
[7] Clore GM, Iwahara J.
Theory, practice and applications of paramagnetic relaxation enhancement for the characterization of transient low-population states of biological macromolecules and their complexes.
Chem Rev 2009 109:4108 39.
[8] Li M. Can we determine a protein structure quickly  J Comput Sci  Technol 2010 25:95 106.
[9] Gao X.
Mathematical approaches to the NMR peak-picking  problem.
J Appl Comput Math 2012 1:1.
[10] Kleywegt GJ, Boelens R, Kaptein R. A versatile approach toward the partially automatic recognition of cross peaks in 2D 1H NMR spectra.
J Magn Reson 1990 135:288 97.
[11] Garrett DS, Powers R, Gronenborn AM, Clore GM.
A common sense approach to peak picking in two-, three-, and four- dimensional spectra using automatic computer analysis of contour diagrams 1991.
J Magn Reson 2011 213:357 63.
[12] Johnson BA, Blevins RA.
NMR view: a computer program for the visualization and analysis of NMR data.
J Biomol NMR 1994 4:603 14.
[13] Corne SA, Jognson AP, Fisher J.
An artiﬁcial neural network for classifying cross peaks in two dimensional NMR spectra.
J Magn Reson 1992 100:256 66.
[14] Carrara EA, Pagliari F, Nicolini C. Neural networks for the peak- picking of nuclear magnetic resonance spectra.
Neural Netw 1993 7:1023 32.
[15] Rouh A, Louis-Joseph A, Lallemand J. Bayesian signal extraction  from noisy FT NMR spectra.
J Biomol NMR 1994 4:505 18.
[16] Antz C, Neidig KP, Kalbitzer HR.
A general Bayesian method for an automated signal class recognition in 2D NMR spectra combined with a multivariate discriminant analysis.
J Biomol NMR 1995 5:287 96.
[17] Koradi R, Billeter M, Engeli M, Gu  ntert P, Wu  thrich K. Automated peak picking and peak integration in macromolecular NMR spectra using AUTOPSY.
J Magn Reson 1998 135:288 97.
[18] Orekhov VY, Ibraghimov IV, Billeter M. MUNIN: a new approach to multi-dimensional NMR spectra interpretation.
J Biomol NMR 2001 20:49 60.
[19] Korzhneva DM, Ibraghimov IV, Billeter M, Orekhov VY.
MUNIN: application of three-way decomposition to the analysis of heteronuclear NMR relaxation data.
J Biomol NMR 2001 21:263 8.
[20] Alipanahi B, Gao X, Karakoc E, Donaldson L, Li M. PICKY: a novel SVD-based NMR spectra peak picking method.
Bioinfor- matics 2009 25:i268 75.
[21] Liu Z, Abbas A, Jing B, Gao X. WaVPeak: picking NMR peaks through wavelet-based smoothing and volume-based ﬁltering.
Bioinformatics 2012 28:914 20.
[22] Abbas A, Kong X, Liu Z, Jing B, Gao X.
Automatic peak selection by a Benjamini Hochberg-based algorithm.
PLoS One 2013 8:e53112.
[23] Messih MA, Chitale M, Bajic VB, Kihara D, Gao X.
Protein domain recurrence and order can enhance prediction of protein functions.
Bioinformatics 2012 28:i444 50.
[24] Zimmerman DE, Kulikowski CA, Huang Y, Feng W, Tashiro M, Shimotakahara S, et al.
Automated analysis of protein NMR assignments using methods from artiﬁcial intelligence.
J Mol Biol 1997 269:592 610.
[25] Coggins BE, Zhou P. PACES: protein sequential assignment by Biomol NMR  exhaustive  search.
J  computer-assisted 2003 26:93 111.
[26] Volk J, Herrmann T, Wu  thrich K. Automated sequence-speciﬁc protein NMR assignment using the memetic algorithm MATCH.
J Biomol NMR 2008 41:127 38.
[27] Lemak A, Steren CA, Arrowsmith CH, Llina  s M. Sequence speciﬁc resonance assignment via Multicanonical Monte Carlo search using an ABACUS approach.
J Biomol NMR 2008 41: 29 41.
[28] Wu KP, Chang JM, Chen JB, Chang CF, Wu WJ, Huang TH, et al.
RIBRA   an error-tolerant algorithm for the NMR backbone assignment problem.
J Comput Biol 2006 13:229 44.
[29] Wan X, Lin G. CISA: combined NMR resonance connectivity information determination and sequential assignment.
IEEE/ ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform 2007 4:336 48.
[30] Tycko R, Hu KN.
A Monte Carlo/simulated annealing algorithm for sequential resonance assignment in solid state NMR of uniformly labeled proteins with magic-angle spinning.
J Magn Reson 2010 205:304 14.
[31] Masse JE, Keller R. Autolink: automated sequential resonance assignment of biopolymers from NMR data by relative-hypoth- esis-prioritization-based J Magn Reson 2005 174:133 51.  simulated  logic.
[32] Gu  ntert P, Salzmann M, Braun D, Wu  thrich K. Sequence-speciﬁc NMR assignment of proteins by global fragment mapping with the program MAPPER.
J Biomol NMR 2000 18:129 37.
[33] Jung YS, Zweckstetter M. Mars robust automatic backbone  assignment of proteins.
J Biomol NMR 2004 30:11 23.
[34] Alipanahi B, Gao X, Karakoc E, Li SC, Balbach F, Donaldson L, et al.
Error tolerant NMR backbone resonance assignment and automated structure generation.
J Bionform Comput Biol 2011 9:15 41.
[35] Jang R, Gao X, Li M. Towards automated structure-based NMR resonance assignment.
Lect Notes Comput Sci 2010 6044:189 207.
[36] Jang R, Gao X, Li M. Towards fully automated structure-based NMR resonance assignment of 15N-labeled proteins from auto- matically picked peaks.
J Comput Biol 2011 18:347 63.
[37] Jang R, Gao X, Li M. Combining automated peak tracking in SAR by NMR with structure-based backbone assignment from 15N-NOESY.
BMC Bioinformatics 2012 13:S4.
[38] Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland G, Bhat TN, Weissig H, et al.
The protein data bank.
Nucleic Acids Res 2000 28:235 42.
[39] Ulrich EL, Akutsu H, Doreleijers JF, Harano Y, Ioannidis YE, Lin  J, et al.
BioMagResBank.
Nucleic Acids Res 2008 36:D402 8.
[40] Pons JL, Delsuc MA.
RESCUE: an artiﬁcial neural network tool for the NMR spectral assignment of proteins.
J Biomol NMR 1999 15:15 26.
[41] Herrmann T, Gu  ntert P, Wu  thrich K. Protein NMR structure determination with automated NOE-identiﬁcation in the NOESY spectra using the new software ATNOS.
J Biomol NMR 2002 24:171 89.
[42] Gronwald W, Kalbitzer HR.
Automated structure determination of proteins by NMR spectroscopy.
Prog Nucl Magn Reson Spectrosc 2003 44:33 96.
[43] Gu  ntert P. Automated NMR structure calculation with CYANA.
Methods Mol Biol 2004 278:353 78.
[44] Gu  ntert P. Automated structure determination from NMR  spectra.
Eur Biophys J 2009 38:129 43.
[45] Li SC, Bu D, Xu J, Li M. Fragment-HMM: a new approach to  protein structure prediction.
Protein Sci 2008 17:1925 34.
[46] Maadooliat M, Gao X, Huang JZ.
Assessing protein conforma- tional sampling methods based on bivariate lag-distributions of backbone angles.
Brief Bioinform 2012. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ bib/bbs052.
[47] Lo  pez-Me  ndez B, Gu  ntert P. Automated protein structure deter- mination from NMR spectra.
J Am Chem Soc 2006 128:13112 22.
[48] Bartels C, Billeter M, Gu  ntert P, Wu  thrich K. Automated sequence-speciﬁc NMR assignment of homologous proteins using the program GARANT.
J Biomol NMR 1996 7:207 13.
[49] Nilges M, Macias MJ, O Donoghue SI, Oschkinat H. Automated NOESY interpretation with ambiguous distance restraints: the reﬁned NMR solution structure of the pleckstrin homology domain from beta-spectrin.
J Mol Biol 1997 269:408 22.
[50] Fiorito F, Hiller S, Wider G, Wu  thrich K. Automated resonance assignment of proteins: 6D APSY-NMR.
J Biomol NMR 2006  35:27 37.
