Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 198 209  H O S T E D   BY  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics  www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb  www.sciencedirect.com  REVIEW  Pharmacogenomics of Cisplatin Sensitivity in Non-small Cell Lung Cancer  Maimon C. Rose 1,#, Elina Kostyanovskaya 1,#, R. Stephanie Huang 2,*  1 Biological Sciences Division, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA 2 Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA  Received 18 September 2014  revised 11 October 2014  accepted 13 October 2014 Available online 28 October 2014  Handled by Xiangdong Fang  KEYWORDS  Cisplatin  Non-small cell lung cancer  Biomarker  Nucleotide excision repair  Copper transport  Glutathione S-transferase  Abstract Cisplatin, a platinum-based chemotherapeutic drug, has been used for over 30 years in a wide variety of cancers with varying degrees of success.
In particular, cisplatin has been used to treat late stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) as the standard of care.
However, therapeutic outcomes vary from patient to patient.
Considerable efforts have been invested to identify biomark- ers that can be used to predict cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC.
Here we reviewed current evidence for cisplatin sensitivity biomarkers in NSCLC.
We focused on several key pathways, including nucleotide excision repair, drug transport and metabolism.
Both expression and germline DNA variation were evaluated in these key pathways.
Current evidence suggests that cisplatin-based treatment could be improved by the use of these biomarkers.
Introduction  Lung and bronchus cancer is the leading cause of cancer mor- tality worldwide, responsible for 1.59 million deaths in 2012 [1].
It is also the leading cause of cancer deaths in the US with a predicted 159,260 deaths in 2014 [2].
About 85% of all lung cancers are non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), whereas the remaining 15% are small cell lung cancer [3].
The standard of care for advanced (stages III and IV) NSCLC is cisplatin in combination with 1 3 of the following drugs including paclitaxel, gemcitabine, docetaxel, vinorelbine, irinotecan and  * Corresponding author.
E-mail: rhuang@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu (Huang RS).
# Equal contribution.
Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
pemetrexed, and concurrent radiotherapy for stage IIIB NSCLC patients [4].
Despite efforts to improve efﬁcacy of therapy, the 5-year survival rate for NSCLC over all stages is still only 17% [5].
While many patients initially respond to cisplatin-based chemotherapy, others show intrinsic or acquired non-response [3].
Considerable efforts have been dedicated to the study of biomarkers for cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC in order to improve therapeutic efﬁcacy.
In this review we will focus on three key pathways that are known to be associated with the effect of cisplatin on NSCLC.
These three pathways/classes of enzymes are: nucleotide excision repair (NER), which represents drug targets  copper transport- ers, which play a role in drug uptake  and glutathione S-trans- ferases (GSTs), which play a role in drug metabolism.
For each of these pathways we reviewed current evidence for the use of mRNA expression and protein expression levels as biomarkers for cisplatin sensitivity.
In addition, we discussed single  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2014.10.003 1672-0229 ª 2014 The Authors.
Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).
Rose MC et al / Cisplatin Pharmacogenomics in NSCLC  199  nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these key genes and evi- dence for their involvement in cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC.
General mechanism of action for cisplatin  intrastrand crosslinks,  Cisplatin is thought to enter the cell through a combination of passive uptake and active transport such as through the copper transporters [6].
Once in the cell, cisplatin becomes aquated and positively charged.
It is then able to interact with and intercalate tumor DNA, forming cross-links and unwinding the helix  such DNA damage results in inhibition of DNA rep- lication, eventually triggering apoptosis and necrosis (Figure 1) [7,8].
Platinating agents can form four types of links on DNA, i.e., monoadducts (which typically become intrastrand cross- links), interstrand crosslinks and DNA-protein crosslinks [8].
In addition to DNA, cisplatin is able to react with thiol-containing compounds such as gluta- thione [8].
By forming glutathione adducts, cisplatin is detoxi- ﬁed, which reduces efﬁcacy.
After forming adducts with DNA, the cisplatin molecules activate the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress pathway (also known as the unfolded protein response), thereby activating apoptotic caspases [8].
Sensitivity to cisplatin is known to be mediated by multiple different mechanisms likely working synergistically to prevent, detect and remove DNA adducts formed by cisplatin.
In this review we focused on NER, copper transport and GSTs as proxies for drug action, uptake and metabolism, respectively (Figure 1).
Our goal is to present a broad picture of cisplatin s mechanism of action while simultaneously examining each of these path- ways in detail for their role in cisplatin sensitivity.
Such adducts, in addition to other less common crosslinks, are known to be detected and excised by NER [11].
Further, strong evidence for signiﬁcant pharmacogenomic associations exists for genes involved in the NER pathway, indicating treatment could be improved by clinical assessments of the genes in the NER pathway.
NER mechanism of action  The exact mechanism of action underlying the role of NER in sensitivity to cisplatin has been discussed at length elsewhere [12,13] and is not reviewed in detail in the present article.
In brief, NER is responsible for the detection and removal of bulky DNA adducts by means of ssDNA excision.
There exist two distinct modes for the detection of DNA damage within NER  global genomic NER (GG-NER) and transcription coupled NER (TC-NER).
These two modes are identical in essence except for damage detection.
While GG-NER requires the use of xero- derma pigmentosum complementation group C (XPC) and deafness/dystonia proteins (DDP) to actively detect damage, TC-NER is passively activated when RNA polymerase stalls at the damage site.
Furuta and colleagues found that cisplatin sensitivity is mediated through TC-NER exclusively [14], while Rosell et al.
reported that there is evidence for both modes of NER modulating cisplatin resistance [15].
After damage detec- tion, excision repair cross-complementation group 1 (ERCC1) forms a complex with xeroderma pigmentosum complementa- tion group F (XPF) and creates an incision  23 nucleotides upstream from the DNA adduct.
Cell lines defective in ERCC1 or XPF are approximately 40 times more sensitive to cisplatin [16], indicating that this step is critical in cisplatin sensitivity.
NER and cisplatin sensitivity  ERCC1 and cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC  Over 90% of DNA adducts formed by cisplatin are 1,2-intra- strand d(GpG) [9] or 1,2-intrastrand d(ApG) crosslinks [9,10].
Schematic diagram of cisplatin s mechanism of action  Figure 1 The three representative pathways discussed in the text are illustrated, including drug action, uptake and metabolism.
ATP7A and ATP7B, ATPase, copper transporting, alpha polypeptides A and B  CTR1 and CTR2, copper transporters 1 and 2  ERCC1, excision repair cross-complementation group 1  GSTM1 and P1, glutathione S-transferases Mu 1 and pi 1  XPA, XPD and XDF, xeroderma pigmentosum complementation groups A, D and F.  ERCC1 is the rate-limiting protein in the NER pathway and has therefore been a subject of many studies attempting to explain cisplatin resistance.
The ﬁrst report on ERCC1 s role in cisplatin resistance came from Dabholkar and colleagues in cells harvested from ovarian cancer tissue.
Tissues from patients whose tumors showed clinical resistance to cisplatin levels of ERCC1 mRNA exhibited signiﬁcantly higher (P = 0.026) [17].
Since then, there have been a variety of reports indicating that ERCC1 mRNA and protein expression levels in tumors are indicative of cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC.
Some researchers have measured cisplatin sensitivity directly by means of cell viability tests after treatment.
Take- naka and colleagues reported that high protein expression level of ERCC1 is signiﬁcantly correlated with low cisplatin chemo- sensitivity (P = 0.04) using tumor biopsies collected from 41 NSCLC patients before treatment [18].
Wang and colleagues used an ATP-based tumor chemosensitivity array (ATP- TCA) to assess cell viability and found that increasing levels of ERCC1 mRNA expression were correlated negatively with cisplatin sensitivity in primary tumor cells collected from 20 NSCLC patients (P = 0.001) [19].
A similar study, using the WHO tumor combination cisplatin/gemcitabine treatment, found that while there is a signiﬁcant correlation between higher response rates and low expression levels of ERCC1 mRNA in pretreatment primary NSCLC tumor specimens, there was no signiﬁcant difference in ERCC1 mRNA levels detected between responding and non-responding tumors after the treatment [20].
The authors  guidelines  response  and a   200  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 198 209  of this study hypothesized that the lack of signiﬁcant correla- tion of post-treatment ERCC1 expression with overall response is not contradictory to the above studies  rather, the pretreatment levels of ERCC1 expression are a good indi- cator for cisplatin chemosensitivity.
This hypothesis was tested in a phase III trial of 346 NSCLC patients, where treatment was customized based on the pretreatment levels of ERCC1 mRNA expression in the patients.
Speciﬁcally, patients with high level ERCC1 expression were treated with docetaxel plus gemcitabine, whereas patients with low ERCC1 expression received docetaxel plus cisplatin.
The signiﬁcantly higher response rates were observed in the docetaxel plus cisplatin group (P = 0.02) [21].
Other studies also corroborated the link between ERCC1 expression levels and sensitivity to cisplatin in NSCLC patients including a study of the link between ERCC1 expression levels in 761 NSCLC tumors and efﬁcacy (pro- longed survival) of cisplatin-based adjuvant chemotherapy (P = 0.009) [22] (Table 1).
However, ERCC1 is not a perfect biomarker for cisplatin sensitivity, as a number of studies found a lack of correlation between the two.
Wachters and colleagues reported no signif- icant correlation between ERCC1 expression levels and tumor response in group of 33 stage III/IV NSCLC patients [46].
Similarly, Booton et al.
found no signiﬁcant relationship between ERCC1 mRNA expression and cisplatin sensitivity in a group of 66 stage III/IV NSCLC patients [47].
One expla- nation for the lack of signiﬁcant correlation is that these stud- ies are based on patients treated with combination therapy including cisplatin.
The addition of other drugs, such as gem- citabine or docetaxel, on tumor response can be a confounding factor.
Another study by Glaysher and colleagues used an ATP-TCA to assess chemosensitivity in 49 surgically-resected NSCLC tumor samples and ﬁt multiple-regression models to explain sensitivity based on multiple gene expression proﬁles.
Their model did not ﬁnd ERCC1 expression to be a signiﬁcant explanatory variable for cisplatin resistance compared to the other genes present [48].
This result is surprising considering the evidence above, but given the method that the models in that study were constructed with, it is possible that some com- bination of other predictive genes do better together than ERCC1 expression does alone.
A few other studies which  failed to ﬁnd a correlation between ERCC1 expression and cisplatin sensitivity suffer from similar drawbacks (i.e., con- founds from additional drugs other than cisplatin, models not speciﬁc to ERCC1 expression, or inconsistency in ERCC1 expression quantiﬁcation methods used [49,50]) and do not constitute sufﬁcient evidence to rebut those studies that do ﬁnd a signiﬁcant link.
Considering the large amount of evidence cited above in contrast to the limited contradictory evidence, we conclude that ERCC1 expression is a potentially reliable biomarker for cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC patients when reliable detection techniques are available.
This conclusion is supported by a comprehensive and comparative review, which considered many different factors (including the biomarkers discussed in this review) and concluded that the strongest evidence for increased resistance in NSCLC to platinating agents is the expression of ERCC1 [51].
With this connection in mind, there have been many studies attempting to link SNPs in ERCC1 with cisplatin sensitivity  however, ﬁndings are often contradictory.
SZ Wei et al.
performed a meta-analysis of 12 datasets from 556 NSCLC patients consisting of genotypes and clinical outcomes to cis- platin treatment and found a signiﬁcant correlation between overall response rate (ORR) and the rs11615 polymorphism (Table 2) [52].
Similarly, HB Wei et al.
performed a meta- analysis on 11 datasets and conﬁrmed the ﬁndings of SZ Wei and colleagues [53].
However, Yu et al.
performed a similar meta-analysis of 1252 NSCLC patients and concluded there was no signiﬁcant link between this polymorphism and response to cisplatin treatment [54].
They claimed that their study more accurately represented the underlying data and that it had greater statistical power due to larger sample size.
Possible explanations for these discrepancies include con- founders like race, age, smoker status.
Clearly there is a need for a more comprehensive study of ERCC1 polymorphisms in relation to cisplatin response.
XP family genes and cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC  Also involved in the NER pathway is the family of XP genes and their encoded proteins.
Although it is well recognized that  Table 1 Gene expression correlation with cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC  Gene name  ERCC1 XPA CTR1  ATP7A  ATP7B  GSTP1  Correlation between expression and sensitivity ﬂ ﬂ       ﬂ ﬂ ﬂ ﬂ ﬂ ﬂ  Evidence  Clinical study conducted in 761 patients Human lung cancer cell lines Clinical study conducted in 54 patients Human small cell lung cancer cell lines Yeast and mouse cell lines Clinical study conducted in 89 patients Human NSCLC cell lines Clinical study conducted in 104 patients 60 human tumor cell lines including NSCLC NSCLC xenografts Cell lines, tumor samples and clinical study tracking expression and survival Animal cell lines and human breast cancer cell lines Human lung cancer cell line  Refs.
[21,22] [23 25] [26] [27] [28,29] [30] [30,31] [32] [33,34] [35] [36 42]  M ﬂ  STM1  [43,44] [45] Note: Increase and decrease in cisplatin sensitivity in response to increased gene expression are indicated with   and ﬂ, respectively  whereas M indicates that cisplatin sensitivity did not change regardless of alterations in gene expression.
Rose MC et al / Cisplatin Pharmacogenomics in NSCLC  Table 2 Evidence for correlation of germline genetic variants with cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC  Variant ID  Host gene  Eﬀect  Evidence  rs11615 rs13181  ERCC1 XPD  rs7851395 rs12686377 rs1695  CTR1 CTR1 GSTP1  rs1138272  GSTP1  GSTM1*0  GSTM1  rs560018  GSTM4  T/T genotype associated with low sensitivity A/C and C/C genotypes associated with high sensitivity in Caucasian populations and low sensitivity in Asian populations Associated with low sensitivity in Asian population Associated with low sensitivity in Asian population G allele associated with favorable response  A/G + G/G genotypes more likely to be responders Ala/Val or Val/Val genotype associated with greater median survival Null genotype associated with increased sensitivity compared to non-null A/G genotype associated with decreased survival G/G genotype associated with decreased sensitivity  Conﬂicting meta-analyses of clinical studies Meta-analysis of clinical studies  Clinical study conducted in 282 patients Clinical study conducted in 282 patients Conﬂicting evidence: various clinical studies and one meta-analysis Clinical studies  Meta-analysis of clinical studies  Clinical study in 973 lung cancer patients 100 lymphoblastoid cell lines  201  Refs.
[52 54] [55]  [56] [56] [3,57 61]  [3,61]  [62]  [63] [63]  the XP family of genes play a critical role in NER, there is little evidence that expression levels of most XP- proteins are corre- lated with sensitivity to cisplatin.
Perhaps the best evidence is in XPA.
XPA is known to be involved in both DNA damage detection in GG-NER and recruiting NER repair proteins (e.g., ERCC1/XPF complex) to the site of damage.
Wu and colleagues found in two separate studies that by transfecting line with antisense XPA RNA, a human lung cancer cell mRNA levels of XPA are reduced and sensitivity to cisplatin as measured by an MTT metabolic assay is increased [64,23].
Similarly, Zhang and colleagues showed that by silencing XPA expression in a cisplatin-resistant NSCLC cell line, sensi- tivity to cisplatin is increased [24].
Another study found that by modulating HIF1a, a transcription factor known to bind to the XPA promoter, XPA expression levels can be increased or decreased, thereby decreasing or increasing cisplatin resis- tance, respectively [25].
Finally, Rosenberg and colleagues found that by transfecting a human lung cancer line with a virus expressing a truncated version of the XPA protein, sensi- tivity to cisplatin can be increased [65].
Although these ﬁndings in cell lines warrant further investigation, the lack of clinical evidence to date decreases the level of enthusiasm in using the XP family proteins as markers for cisplatin sensitivity (Table 1).
Certain SNPs in XP family genes have shown promise in cis- platin sensitivity prediction.
Speciﬁcally, rs13181 located in the coding region for XPD has been intensively studied for its effect on both lung cancer risk and cisplatin sensitivity.
Qin et al.
performed a meta-analysis of 24 studies on platinum- based chemotherapy for NSCLC patients and found that when the analysis was stratiﬁed by race, the A/C and C/C genotypes were signiﬁcantly associated with favorable objective response in Caucasian populations, but among Asian populations they found an association with the same polymorphisms and decreased progression-free survival [55] (Table 2).
SNPs in other XP family genes have garnered some preliminary evi- dence for their use as biomarkers of cisplatin sensitivity, but comprehensive meta-analysis or large-cohort studies have not been done in order to achieve sufﬁcient statistical power.
The lack of correspondence between mRNA/protein expression studies and genetic variation studies along with the multiple contradictory ﬁndings in sufﬁciently-powered analyses indicates that the relationship between genotype and response may not be a simple one-to-one function.
A more nuanced approach which looks at multiple SNPs within the  NER pathway in conjunction has been shown to be a poten- tially-powerful tool in predicting cisplatin sensitivity [57].
Copper transporters and cisplatin sensitivity  As discussed above, sensitivity to cisplatin is multifactorial and the relative contribution of different pathways is still not well elucidated.
However, it has long been noted that cisplatin- resistant cells tend to exhibit decreased intracellular drug accumulation [66].
A recent study has established a signiﬁcant correlation between intracellular platinum buildup and reduction in tumor size [67].
It was previously thought that the dominant mode for cisplatin s entry into tumor cells was through passive diffusion [66], but growing evidence has sup- ported the role of copper transporters in the active inﬂux and efﬂux of cisplatin [67].
Mechanism of action of copper transporters  Copper serves an important role in biological processes as a cofactor for many enzymes.
The intake of copper is thought to be mediated by the protein human copper transporter 1 (hCTR1) encoded by the CTR1 (or SLC31A) gene [68].
The copper is then chaperoned by ATX1, CCS and COX17 to ATPase, copper transporting, alpha polypeptide A and B (ATP7A and ATP7B), Copper-zinc superoxide dismutase and cytochrome C oxidase, respectively [69].
Excessive intra- cellular copper has been found to be regulated by two proteins, ATP7A [70] and ATP7B [71].
While the role of this pathway has been extensively studied with regard to copper transporta- tion, only in the past decade and a half has attention been paid to the role it might play in cisplatin transport and sensitivity.
Safaei and Howell [69] reviewed evidence based on cross-resis- tance between copper and platinum drugs to demonstrate that CTR1 and ATP7A/ATP7B play an important role in the active regulation of intracellular Pt agents and corresponding sensitivity.
Kuo et al.
additionally reviewed the structural- functional and mechanistic aspects of these transporters [6].
CTR1/CTR2 and cisplatin sensitivity  The main body of work on the effects of copper transporters on cisplatin sensitivity has been done mostly in cancers other than NSCLC.
However, it is becoming clear that these effects   202  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 198 209  are analogous across different cancer types.
We therefore include evidence in cancers other than NSCLC, as one can likely extrapolate between the various diseases.
CTR1 was ﬁrst shown to be related to cisplatin uptake and sensitivity in strains of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae in two studies.
CTR1 knockout yeast strains were shown to have a twofold reduction in cisplatin uptake and cytotoxic effect of cisplatin compared to wild-type CTR1 strains [28].
These results were conﬁrmed in yeast and extended to mouse cell lines [29].
Con- sidering the highly-conserved nature of the copper transport pathway, these ﬁndings lead researchers to investigate the effects of CTR1 in humans.
Song et al.
demonstrated that at least one strain of a cisplatin-resistant small cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell line exhibited reduced levels of CTR1 mRNA compared to a cisplatin-sensitive cell line.
They further showed that CTR1-transfected SCLC cells had an increase in cisplatin sensitivity [27].
Holzer et al.
showed that in murine embryonic lines, CTR1 deﬁciency was associated with ﬁbroblast cell decreased accumulation of and increased resistance to cisplatin [72].
Zisowsky et al.
similarly showed that cisplatin-resistant cervical and ovarian cancer cell lines exhibited reduced levels of cisplatin accumulation and 1.5 1.8 fold reduction in CTR1 mRNA expression [73].
These experimental results have been reproduced in a number of subsequent studies [74 76].
Ishida et al.
provided one of the ﬁrst studies of the clinical importance of CTR1 mRNA expression.
They found in two separate studies involving 15 (P = 0.016) and 91 (P = 0.003) patients that high expression of CTR1 mRNA was correlated with increased disease-free survival in advanced ovarian cancer when treated with platin-based therapy [77].
response,  chemotherapy  progression-free  Chen et al.
extended these results to NSCLC and found that in pre-treatment samples from 54 advanced NSCLC patients treated with cisplatin or carboplatin, high CTR1protein expression level was a signiﬁcant prognostic factor for favor- able survival (P = 0.01) and overall survival (P = 0.047) [26].
In an intrigu- ing pilot study, Fu et al.
found that by pretreating patients with a copper-lowering agent in order to re-sensitize plati- num-resistant ovarian cancer tumors, four out of ﬁve patients exhibited increased response to carboplatin.
The proposed method of action of this copper-lowering agent is that high levels of copper cause a down-regulation of CTR1 and that by removing some of the extracellular copper, CTR1 will be up-regulated and allow for greater inﬂux of carboplatin into tumor cells [78].
These results are promising in terms of using CTR1 as a prognostic indicator for cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC.
How- ever, more clinical evidence is needed before any conclusions can be drawn.
Ivy et al.
recently suggested that although CTR1 expression is correlated with platinum uptake, the major entry pathway of platinum-based agents cannot be saturated by excessive platinum [79].
Hall et al.
reviewed effects of cellu- lar accumulation of platinum-based drugs on sensitivity and argued that the ability of CTR1 to transport platinating agents is tissue-speciﬁc and that there is a possibility that the platinum transported by CTR1 is not cytotoxic [80].
Overall, studies about the impact of CTR1 on cisplatin sensitivity are largely lacking in NSCLC.
While we may be able to extrapolate from studies in other cancers, their use is limited.
Clearly more studies are needed to elucidate the potential role of CTR1 as a biomarker or target for treatment, but there is compelling evidence that warrants larger and more powerful studies.
CTR2 is located close to CTR1 on the human chromosome arm 9q32  however, their respective mRNAs exhibit 0% homology and their proteins share 33% protein identity [81].
Less intensively-studied than CTR1, CTR2 has recently been shown to also have an impact on cisplatin sensitivity, albeit in the opposite manner of CTR1.
Blair et al.
found that knock- down of CTR2 increased uptake of cisplatin and cytotoxicity in cell lines of mouse embryo ﬁbroblasts.
They further found a signiﬁcant correlation between CTR2 mRNA and protein levels and cisplatin sensitivity in six ovarian cancer cell lines [82].
Further studies in cancer cell lines [83] and some prelimin- ary clinical studies (reviewed by Ohrvik et al.)
[84] provided some evidence for the role of CTR2 in cisplatin sensitivity.
However, to date there are no studies of CTR2 in NSCLC.
Therefore we cannot draw conclusions regarding the impact of CTR2 on cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC at the current time.
ATP7A/ATP7B and cisplatin sensitivity  As mentioned above, both ATP7A and ATP7B are involved in the efﬂux of copper from mammalian cells.
In contrast to CTR1, which is expressed in nearly every tissue in the body, ATP7B is mainly expressed in the liver, kidney and brain, while ATP7A is expressed in most tissues aside from the liver [69].
Mutations in ATP7A and ATP7B are the causes of Men- kes [70] and Wilson s disease [71], respectively.
Deﬁciency in copper efﬂux is the main cause of excessive copper accumula- tion in these two diseases, which leads to the hypothesis that these efﬂux genes may be involved in the efﬂux of cisplatin as well.
Samimi and colleagues found that an increase in ATP7A expression in post-treatment tumor samples is associ- ated with poor in ovarian cancer patients (P = 0.0057) [85].
In another study, they found that increased expression of ATP7A is correlated with resistance to cisplatin in ovarian cancer cell lines, but not with decreased accumula- tion of intracellular platinum [86].
survival  Similar results have been observed in NSCLC.
Li et al.
found that a cisplatin-resistant NSCLC cell line that expressed signiﬁcantly higher levels of ATP7A mRNA and protein than the sensitive parental cell line can be partially re-sensitized by silencing ATP7A with siRNA.
They further found that the presence of ATP7A in pretreatment tumor samples from 89 NSCLC patients was associated with worse response to cis- platin-based chemotherapy, compared to patients negative for ATP7A (P = 0.001) [30].
Recently Song et al.
identiﬁed miR-495, an miRNA that directly targets ATP7A.
They found that overexpression of miR-495 negatively regulates ATP7A and can partially restore cisplatin sensitivity in a cisplatin- resistant NSCLC cell line [31].
This ﬁnding provides an intriguing possibility for a cisplatin-sensitivity biomarker, but conclusive evidence is currently lacking.
ATP7B was ﬁrst proposed to be related to cisplatin sensitiv- ity by Komatsu et al.
when they found that human epidermoid carcinoma cell lines transfected with ATP7B exhibited a 9-fold increase in resistance to cisplatin and a decrease in cisplatin accumulation [87].
Nakayama et al.
found that the presence of ATP7B mRNA and protein in samples collected from 104 ovarian cancer patients was a signiﬁcant prognostic factor for chemotherapy (P = 0.048) [32].
In a broad study of 60 cancer cell lines, Konkimalla et al.
assessed the levels of 55 candidate  cisplatin-based  response  poor  to   Rose MC et al / Cisplatin Pharmacogenomics in NSCLC  203  transporter genes for association with cisplatin resistance.
They found that among 17 genes exhibiting signiﬁcant correla- tion (including CTR1), ATP7B had the lowest P value at 0.0006 [33].
Inoue and colleagues were the ﬁrst to establish the positive correlation between ATP7B mRNA levels and cis- platin resistance in NSCLC tumor samples (P = 0.015) [34].
Recently the same correlation was demonstrated in vivo by cor- relating ATP7B mRNA (P = 0.0389) protein (P = 0.0357) expression levels with cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC xenografts [35].
These ﬁndings are promising but do not constitute sufﬁcient evidence to conclude that ATP7B is a reliable biomarker for cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC.
and  At  the present  time, research into potential germline polymorphisms in copper transport genes as biomarkers for cisplatin sensitivity is limited by the lack of potential candi- date SNPs in those genes [88].
A recent meta-analysis of pharmacogenomics examined the use of platinum-based ther- apy for the treatment of NSCLC, no genes involved in the copper transport pathway were examined [3].
There is one study on the effects of SNPs in CTR1 on cisplatin sensitivity.
Xu et al.
found that in 282 Chinese Han NSCLC patients treated with platinum-based chemotherapy, two SNPs, in CTR1 were correlated with rs7851395 and rs12686377, (P   0.05, both platinum resistance and overall survival Table 2) [56].
No studies were reported that relate SNPs in ATP7A/ATP7B to cisplatin sensitivity.
However, in one study involving 203 Japanese cancer patients, Fukushima- Uesaka et al.
identiﬁed 38 and 61 genetic variations in ATP7A and ATP7B, respectively [89].
While this study does not provide us with any insights into cisplatin treatment in NSCLC, it provides researchers with some potential candi- date SNPs to evaluate.
GST and cisplatin sensitivity  Finally, we review the role of GSTs, a class of phase II drug metabolizing enzymes, in the efﬁcacy of cisplatin.
GSTs are involved in detoxiﬁcation of cisplatin and aid in the formation of (inactive) platinum-glutathione conjugates, which can be excreted or further metabolized due to their now-increased solubility (see Figure 1) [58,88].
The rationale behind investi- gating GSTs is that patients with null or deﬁcient GST function may experience decreased platin detoxiﬁcation and an increased sensitivity to cisplatin, possibly as a result of increased active cisplatin concentrations.
The focus in the liter- ature has been primarily on GST pi 1 (GSTP1) because it is expressed in different human epithelial tissues and is   the most abundant GST isoform in the lung   [58,90,91].
GSTM genes have also been widely investigated, in part due to their highly polymorphic nature (see section below).
Here we discuss the expression and genetic polymorphisms of genes in the GSTP and GSTM families and their associations with cisplatin sensitivity.
GST mechanism of action  The mechanism of action of GSTs is relatively simple.
Aquated cisplatin can bind to DNA to form adducts  however aquated cisplatin can also be inactivated via conjugation with glutathione [88].
Glutathione is conjugated to substrates, such as platinum, through the action of GSTs.
These  glutathione-platinum conjugates have increased solubility and can be excreted by the ATP-binding cassette, subfamily C (ABCC) transporter family [63,88].
GSTP1 and cisplatin sensitivity  Previous research on GSTP1 focused on distinguishing human lung cancer cell lines.
In 1988, using Northern blot hybridiza- tion analysis, Nakagawa et al.
found that the levels of GSTP1 mRNA were signiﬁcantly higher in 3 NSCLC cell lines, com- pared to SCLC cell lines [36].
Using a colony forming assay to establish the IC50s for cisplatin for various cell lines, they found that the IC50 of the SCLC were 3 6.67 times lower than those for NSCLC cell lines.
High sensitivity in SCLC cell lines was correlated with low levels of GSTP1 mRNA expression [36].
These results suggested that low levels of GSTP1 might be responsible for higher cisplatin sensitivity.
In 1997, Arai et al.
showed that patients with GSTP1-negative tumors had signiﬁcantly better response than patients with GSTP1-positive tumors [37].
Their study involved 60 patients (49 men and 11 women) who had previously untreated and unresected NSCLC.
These patients received cisplatin and etoposide and tumor response was assessed when maximum tumor reduction was clinically observed.
66.7% (16/24) of patients with GSTP1-negative tumors were partially responsive, compared to 25% (9/36) of patients with GSTP1-positive tumors.
They concluded that there is a signiﬁcant correlation between the chemotherapy response and GSTP1 expression (characterized by immunohistochemical staining and validated by RT-PCR) (P = 0.0019) [37].
A similar study by the same group repli- cated their initial ﬁndings: Patients with negative GSTP1 expression were more likely to be partial responders or have a higher response rate than patients with positive GSTP1 expression (GSTP1-positive tumors) [38].
It is worth noting that both studies had recruited more males than females, whereas gender could be a potential confounding variable in response.
To validate and further elucidate this relationship, Hida et al.
examined 11 NSCLC cell lines established from patients who had not previously undergone treatment and observed increased GSTP1 expression in cell lines with a higher IC50 for cisplatin-based chemotherapy [39].
However, this associa- tion disappeared for cell lines derived from patients who had previously received some combination chemotherapy (includ- ing cisplatin-based chemotherapy).
Furthermore, cell lines established from patients before and after chemotherapy showed no increase in the amount of GSTP1 protein.
Cell lines with acquired resistance to cisplatin also showed no increase in the amount of GSTP1 protein.
Taken together, these results conﬁrm the observation of Arai and colleagues, but also imply that GSTP1 may play a role in innate, but not acquired resistance of tumors.
Hirano et al.
analyzed GSTP1 levels from 126 surgically- resected NSCLC tumors as well as in two normal and cisplatin-resistant cultured lung cancer cell lines, H69 and PC14 [40].
In the H69 cells, they observed an increase in GSTP1 expression in the resistant strain compared to the par- ent strain.
In addition, they found GSTP1-negative patients than GSTP1-positive showed signiﬁcantly higher survival patients when treated with platinum-based adjuvant therapy (P = 0.0219).
This is only true in those NSCLC patients   204  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 198 209  who received postoperative adjuvant therapy  as opposed to patients who received no treatment after resection, indicating that GSTP1 expression is associated with survival only in patients treated with cisplatin.
Similarly, Allen et al.
found that higher GSTP1 nuclear staining was signiﬁcantly associated with decreased survival in stage I and II squamous cell carcinomas, a subtype of NSCLC (n = 40, P = 0.02) [41].
Cytoplasmic staining showed a similar trend, although it did not reach statistical signiﬁcance (P = 0.15).
This is not surprising since the proposed mecha- nism of action for GSTs is in the nucleus.
In contrast to Hir- ano et al.
s work, they found no signiﬁcant correlation between GSTP1 staining and survival for other histological types of NSCLC.
The discrepancy could be explained by the failure of Hirano et al.
to differentiate between histopatholo- gical cell types in their analysis.
Rosell et al.
analyzed expression of GSTP1 in mRNA iso- lated from pretreatment biopsies of patients with metastatic NSCLC [42].
In contrast to the previous studies, there were no differences in response observed by treatment arms when broken down by GSTP1 expression.
The authors also found that GSTP1 was not associated with time to progression or survival.
The lack of association could be explained by the low GSTP1 expression in late stage metastatic lung cancer.
It would be consistent with Allen and colleagues  ﬁndings that GSTP1 expression is signiﬁcant only in stages I and II for squamous cell carcinoma.
Interestingly, it has been shown that inhibition of nuclear transport of GSTP results in increased sensitivity to cisplatin in colon, glioblastoma and lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (a histopathological subtype of NSCLC) [41].
These results are promising  however, based on low cis- platin-glutathione conjugation rates, a recent study by Pek- lak-Scott et al.
concluded that cisplatin resistance attributed to GSTP1 is not caused by cisplatin conjugation, but rather modulation of other signaling pathways [92].
In a review of glutathione-related enzymes, Tew suggests that the association between GSTP1 expression and cisplatin sensitivity is likely a by-product of pleiotropic stress as opposed to an active mech- anism [93].
The precise nature of the relationship between GSTP1 expression and cisplatin sensitivity is still unclear, but their association has been observed consistently and may serve as a useful biomarker.
two such polymorphisms:  Genetic polymorphisms in GSTP1 have been studied to greater extent than its expression both for susceptibility to var- ious cancers and for sensitivity to anticancer drugs.
Here we discuss rs1695 and rs1138272 (Table 2).
Among the studies reviewed below, there are dispa- rate results.
Some studies conﬁrmed a general trend for the association of rs1695 with decreased cisplatin sensitivity, while a number of other studies found that this SNP is associated with favorable response and increased survival.
Yet other stud- ies found that the association is insigniﬁcant.
There is evidence that the rs1138272 is associated with prolonged survival.
Polymorphism rs1695 is a substitution of a wild type A allele to a G allele, which results in an amino acid substitution of a valine to an isoleucine.
Such substitution affected the con- jugate ability of GSTP1 to various substrates including plati- nating agents [94,95] and decreased GSTP1 activity in a gene/dose-dependent manner [94].
Sun et al.
analyzed 113 Chinese Han patients that were diagnosed with stage IIIA-IV histologically-conﬁrmed NSCLC  and were on one of three platinum-based chemotherapies at 4 loci using a gel-based DNA microarray genotyping method [58].
They conclude that the presence of rs1695 variant differed signiﬁcantly between responders and non-responders.
After adjusted for various factors (gender, age at diagnosis, chemo- therapy regimens), the odds ratio for response was 2.881 (P = 0.022) for those carrying at least one variant allele.
In other words, patients carrying the G variant allele at this locus were more likely to be cisplatin responders.
Similar observa- tions were also reported in a recent study by Zhou and col- leagues.
They examined two SNPs including rs1695 using blood samples from 111 stage IV Chinese NSCLC patients treated with platinum-based therapy [59].
The authors found that rs1695 variant allele was associated with favorable response (adjusted P = 0.0005).
A meta-analysis of 24 publications performed independently by 2 groups on 11 polymorphisms in 8 genes found that rs1695 was signiﬁcantly associated with favorable response to platinum-based chemotherapy, although the effect was moderate and was only observed in Asian populations (P = 0.0002) the is worth nothing that sub group that conﬁrmed this consisted only of two publications [58,59].
platinum-based  [3].
However,  chemotherapy  to  it  ratio  (hazard  survival  decreased  However, other studies found opposite direction SNP association.
Wu et al.
analyzed 13 SNPs in cisplatin-related pathways, including rs1695, in 229 patients with stage IIIB or IV NSCLC receiving ﬁrst-line cisplatin-based chemother- apy.
The variant allele of rs1695 was signiﬁcantly associated with (HR) = 1.99, P = 0.015)  however, such association was not signiﬁcant after adjusting for multiple comparisons [57].
Similarly, Booton et al.
analyzed 4 known polymorphisms, including rs1695 and rs1138272, in exons 5 and 6 of GSTP1 in 108 patients, and found each addition of a *B allele, deﬁned by the authors as having both one variant rs1695 and one variant 1138272 allele, resulted in a non-signiﬁcant inferior tumor response and survival, quantiﬁed by a 22% increased risk of death, com- pared to those who had wild type alleles of rs1695 and rs1138272 [60].
Furthermore, patients with variant rs1138272 demonstrated greater median survival and a reduction in HR of death of 0.56, which has not been addressed by other authors.
It is worth noting that one of the treatment arms involves carboplatin and docetaxel (as opposed to cisplatin, mitomycin and ifosfamide or cisplatin, mitomycin and vinblas- tine)  however, despite the use of carboplatin in one of the treatment arms, they found no signiﬁcant difference between treatment arms [60].
The lack of signiﬁcance of the *B allele may be a result being underpowered.
In combination with the study by Wu and colleagues, these results warrant further investigation of rs1695.
Lu et al.
genotyped 424 and 425 stage III or IV NSCLC patients treated with platinum-based chemotherapy for GSTP1 genotypes in exon 5 and exon 6, respectively [61].
In contrast to all aforementioned studies, they found that GSTP1 SNPs were not associated with survival.
However, multivariate analysis revealed a positive association between rs1138272 variant and prolonged survival compared to wild type with an adjusted HR of 0.75.
This effect was only observed for male patients younger than 62.
The authors stated that the lack of follow-up clinical data and treatment information prevent them from concluding that rs1138272 is correlated with cis- platin response.
Of note, the authors did not specify any drug   Rose MC et al / Cisplatin Pharmacogenomics in NSCLC  205  regimen for the patients, but simply asserted that these patients were likely on some form of platinum-based chemotherapy because it is the accepted standard of care.
Given the lack of information on treatment arms and newly-found association with gender and age, it is unclear how useful this study is.
The discrepancy in these studies could be attributed by small sample sizes (lack of power) as well as heterogeneity of tumors, patients and treatments [88].
Alternatively, given sin- gle polymorphisms have no signiﬁcant associations after adjusting for multiple comparison, the effect of individual polymorphisms may be simply minimal to modest [57].
Using survival tree analysis and/or joint analysis of multiple variants, Wu et al.
suggest there is a signiﬁcant gene dosage effect and a polygenic analytical approach should be used to predict clini- cal outcomes.
Combining the above evidence, it seems that rs1695 is asso- ciated with favorable response to cisplatin and may be useful as a biomarker for predicting clinical outcomes on its own or in combination with other biomarkers  i.e., as part of a polygenic predictive analysis for patients.
There are several indications that variant rs1138272 may be associated with greater median survival  however, conclusive data are lacking.
Both rs1695 and rs11138272 would beneﬁt from further anal- ysis with larger sample sizes and homogenous populations in terms of treatment regimen and histopathological tumor type are needed to conclude what role they play in cisplatin response in NSCLC patients.
GSTM and cisplatin sensitivity  Similar to the GSTP family of genes, the GSTM genes encode proteins involved in detoxiﬁcation of xenobiotics.
Its function with respect to NSCLC and cisplatin sensitivity is multifaceted as it is potentially a determinant of both susceptibility to NSCLC and response to cisplatin [96].
There are 5 genes in GSTM family: GSTM1 through GSTM5.
It is known that different proteins in the GST Mu (GSTM) family bind specif- ically to substrates such as the mutagen benzo[a]pyrene or the anticancer bis-chloroethylnitrosourea (BCNU) [96].
However, little has been done in studying the effect of GSTM expression on cisplatin sensitivity.
alkylating  agent  The little evidence available generally indicates GSTM expression does not have a signiﬁcant effect on cisplatin.
For example, three early studies found no link between GSTM expression and cisplatin resistance.
Saburi et al.
found no increase in GSTM expression in two cisplatin-resistant Chinese hamster ovary cell lines compared to their parent cell lines [97].
Townsend et al.
showed that a breast cancer cell line over- expressing GSTM proteins exhibited no resistance to cisplatin, among a number of other drugs [43].
Waxman and colleagues monitored expression of different GST mRNAs in the livers of adult male rats and observed no change in GSTM expression in response to treatment with cisplatin [44].
However, a num- ber of more recent studies have indicated that GSTM protein expression may have a signiﬁcant association with cisplatin sensitivity.
Watson et al.
showed that there is a signiﬁcant down-regulation of the GSTM3 and GSTM4 genes (4.84 and 3.13-fold decrease) in a cisplatin-resistant breast cancer cell line compared to the non-resistant parent cell line as measured by expression microarray analysis and real-time RT-PCR [98].
The same group of investigators conﬁrmed these ﬁndings for  is  GSTM3 using the same cell line and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry [99].
In an intriguing meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies, Wheeler et al.
showed that in 608 lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) across seven panels that represent diverse world populations, rs10431718, a SNP within an eQTL targeting GSTM1, signiﬁcantly associated with cisplatin IC50 (P = 0.017), indicating that the regulation of the expression of GSTM1 has a signiﬁcant effect on cisplatin sensitivity [100].
There also exists compelling evidence from rational drug design studies of GSTM1 s importance in cisplatin sensitivity.
One such study by Wang and colleagues found that by using a novel GST inhibitor which acts on GSTM1, sensitivity to cis- platin in a lung cancer cell line increased with a 2.7-fold decrease in IC50.
They further conﬁrmed their ﬁndings by depleting those cells of GSTM1 with a speciﬁc siRNA and observed a 1.4-fold decrease in cisplatin IC50 [45].
While some of the recent evidence is promising, it is still largely indirect and contradicts earlier direct studies.
Therefore, more evidence is needed to elucidate the role of GSTM expression in cisplatin sensitivity.
Genes in the GSTM family are highly polymorphic.
Four functional alleles have been observed in GSTM1, including GSTM1*A, GSTM1*B, GSTM1*0 and GSTM1*1   2.
The ﬁrst two correspond to catalytically-identical proteins (incor- porating lysine and asparagine, respectively), while the latter two correspond to a deleted allele and a duplicated gene, respectively [101].
No known genetic polymorphisms had been reported for GSTM2 and GSTM5 yet, whereas GSTM3 and GSTM4 each have two distinct alleles (GSTM3*A and GSTM3*B  and GSTM4*A and GSTM4*B, respectively) [101].
The highly polymorphic nature has made GSTM genes the target of many studies.
However, many of those studies have been focused on the relationship between GSTM geno- type and susceptibility to cancer [101].
It is likely that GSTM genes play a role both in cancer susceptibility, by detoxifying potential carcinogen, and in drug sensitivity, by deactivating anticancer compounds.
The null genotype of GSTM1 has been of particular interest as it occurs in roughly half of the human population with large variation across ethnic populations [102].
A meta-analysis of 90 studies from 1990 to 2009 of associations between 170 genetic polymorphisms and lung cancer outcome found that GSTM1*0, the null genotype, was signiﬁcantly associated with worse overall survival [103].
However, this conclusion was based on only two studies [104,105].
In particular, only one study had the majority of their patient population treated with cisplatin (70 out of 81 total patients), and the cisplatin treat- ment was in conjunction with etoposide.
Furthermore, this study included 20 SCLC patients, which makes extrapolation to NSCLC patients difﬁcult.
More recent evidence has come to light, which indicates that the GSTM1 null genotype is asso- ciated with improved response to platinum-based therapy [62].
Yang and Xian conducted a meta-analysis incorporating 455 NSCLC patients treated with platinum-based therapy with a known GSTM1 genotype.
They found that compared to the non-null genotype, the null genotype is signiﬁcantly associated with good response (odds ratio = 1.77, 95% CI = 1.19 2.62).
Nonetheless, it is worth noting that this association holds in East-Asian patients, but not among Caucasian patients [62].
Other GSTM polymorphisms have been less intensively studied vis-a  -vis cisplatin sensitivity.
Moyer et al.
provided   206  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 198 209  one such study.
They genotyped samples from 973 lung cancer patients (17% as SCLC) for SNPs from glutathione pathway related genes and found that rs560018, located on GSTM4, is signiﬁcantly associated with improved survival (P = 0.002).
They further found that in 100 LCLs treated with cisplatin, the same SNP is associated with cisplatin IC50 (P = 0.019) [63].
Evidence for both expression and genetic polymorphisms in the GSTM family associated with cisplatin sensitivity is currently lacking, but further investigation is warranted, especially with regard to the GSTM1 null genotype.
Conclusion  In summary, we have discussed three representative pathways related to cisplatin sensitivity in NSCLC.
Within the NER pathway, ERCC1 expression appears to be a promising candi- date for a cisplatin sensitivity biomarker.
While expression of other genes may be similarly predictive of cisplatin sensitivity, current evidence is inconclusive.
Within the copper transport pathway, there is varying degrees of evidence available for CTR1, ATP7A and ATP7B to support their use as biomarkers, but are a promising set of genes to consider.
Current evidence is conﬂicting on the potential use of GST-related biomarkers.
Looking ahead, we would propose larger and more powerful studies on the use of ERCC1 as a cisplatin sensitivity biomarker as it is currently the most promising lead.
Competing interests  The authors have declared no competing interests.
Acknowledgements  RSH receives support from the NIH/NIGMS (Grant Nos.
U01GM61393 and K08GM089941), NIH/NCI (Grant No.
R21 CA139278), University of Chicago Cancer Center Sup- port Grant (Grant No.
P30 CA14599), Breast Cancer SPORE Career Development Award (Grant No.
CA125183) and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the NIH (Grant No.
UL1RR024999) of the United States.
References  [1] WHO cancer factsheet.
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/fact-  sheets/fs297/en/   2014 [accessed 25.05.14].
[2] American Cancer  facts 2014.
Atlanta: American Cancer Society  2014.
Society.
Cancer  and  ﬁgures  [3] Yin JY, Huang Q, Zhao YC, Zhou HH, Liu ZQ.
Meta-analysis on pharmacogenetics of platinum-based chemotherapy in non small (NSCLC) patients.
PLoS One 2012 7:e38150.
cancer  lung  cell  [4] National Cancer Institute.
Non-small cell lung cancer treatment.
http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/treatment/non- small-cell-lung/healthprofessional/page10   25.05.14].
2014  [accessed  [5] Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, Jemal A.
Cancer statistics, 2014.
CA  Cancer J Clin 2014 64:9 29.
[6] Kuo MT, Chen HH, Song IS, Savaraj N, Ishikawa T. The roles of copper transporters in cisplatin resistance.
Cancer Metastasis Rev 2007 26:71 83.
[7] van der Straaten T, Mullenders L, Guchelaar HJ.
Pharmacoge- netics of cancer and DNA repair enzymes.
In: Vengrova S, editor.
DNA repair and human health [internet].
Richard- son: Intech  2011. p. 597 612.
[8] Rabik CA, Dolan ME.
Molecular mechanisms of resistance and toxicity associated with platinating agents.
Cancer Treat Rev 2007 33:9 23.
[9] Huang JC, Zamble DB, Reardon JT, Lippard SJ, Sancar A. HMG-domain proteins speciﬁcally inhibit the repair of the major DNA adduct of the anticancer drug cisplatin by human excision nuclease.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1994 91:10394 8.
[10] Fichtinger-Schepman AM, van der Veer JL, den Hartog JH, Lohman PH, Reedijk J. Adducts of the antitumor drug cis- diamminedichloroplatinum(ii) with DNA   formation, identiﬁ- cation, and quantitation.
Biochemistry 1985 24:707 13.
[11] Zamble DB, Mu D, Reardon JT, Sancar A, Lippard SJ.
Repair of cisplatin-DNA adducts by the mammalian excision nuclease.
Biochemistry 1996 35:10004 13.
[12] Kartalou M, Essigmann JM.
Mechanisms of resistance to cisplatin.
Mutat Res Fundam Mol Mech Mutagen 2001 478:23 43.
[13] Rosell R, Lord RV, Taron M, Reguart N. DNA repair and cisplatin resistance in non-small-cell lung cancer.
Lung Cancer 2002 38:217 27.
[14] Furuta T, Ueda T, Aune G, Sarasin A, Kraemer KH, Pommier Y. Transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair as a deter- minant of cisplatin sensitivity of human cells.
Cancer Res 2002 62:4899 902.
[15] Rosell R, Taron M, Barnadas A, Scagliotti G, Sarries C, Roig B. Nucleotide excision repair pathways involved in Cisplatin resistance lung cancer.
Cancer Control 2003 10:297 305.  in non-small-cell  [16] De Silva IU, McHugh PJ, Clingen PH, Hartley JA.
Defects in interstrand cross-link uncoupling do not account for the extreme sensitivity of ERCC1 and XPF cells to cisplatin.
Nucleic Acids Res 2002 30:3848 56.
[17] Dabholkar M, Vionnet J, Bostickbruton F, Yu JJ, Reed E. Messenger-RNA levels of XPAC and ERCC1 in ovarian-cancer tissue correlate with response to platinum-based chemotherapy.
J Clin Invest 1994 94:703 8.
[18] Takenaka T, Yoshino I, Kouso H, Ohba T, Yohena T, Osoegawa A, et al.
Combined evaluation of Rad51 and ERCC1 expressions for sensitivity to platinum agents in non-small cell lung cancer.
Int J Cancer 2007 121:895 900.
[19] Wang L, Wei J, Qian X, Yin H, Zhao Y, Yu L, et al.
ERCC1 and BRCA1 mRNA expression levels in metastatic malignant effusions is associated with chemosensitivity to cisplatin and/or docetaxel.
BMC Cancer 2008 8:97.
[20] Lord RV, Brabender J, Gandara D, Alberola V, Camps C, Domine M, et al.
Low ERCC1 expression correlates with prolonged survival after cisplatin plus gemcitabine chemotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer.
Clin Cancer Res 2002 8:2286 91.
[21] Cobo M, Isla D, Massuti B, Montes A, Sanchez JM, Provencio M, et al.
Customizing cisplatin based on quantitative excision repair cross-complementing 1 mRNA expression: a phase III trial in non-small-cell lung cancer.
J Clin Oncol 2007 25:2747 54.
[22] Olaussen KA, Dunant A, Fouret P, Brambilla E, Andre F, Haddad V, et al.
DNA repair by ERCC1 in non-small-cell lung cancer and cisplatin-based adjuvant chemotherapy.
N Engl J Med 2006 355:983 91.
[23] Fan W, Zhang HL, Wu XM.
Enhancement effect of nucleotide excision repair gene xeroderma pigmentosum group A antisense RNA on sensitivity of human lung adenocarcinoma cell line A549 to cisplatin.
Chin J Cancer 2005 24:403 7.
Rose MC et al / Cisplatin Pharmacogenomics in NSCLC  207  [24] Zhang Q, Wu JX, Wei YP, Hao JQ, Huang SY, Dong L. Effect of XPA expression on the chemotherapy sensitivity of A549/ DDP cells.
Chin J Cell Mol Immunol 2012 28:1182 4.
[25] Liu Y, Bernauer AM, Yingling CM, Belinsky SA.
HIF1 alpha regulated expression of XPA contributes to cisplatin resistance in lung cancer.
Carcinogenesis 2012 33:1187 92.
[26] Chen HH, Yan JJ, Chen WC, Kuo MT, Lai YH, Lai WW, et al.
Predictive and prognostic value of human copper transporter 1 (hCtr1) in patients with stage III non-small-cell lung cancer receiving ﬁrst-line platinum-based doublet chemotherapy.
Lung Cancer 2012 75:228 34.
[27] Song IS, Savaraj N, Siddik ZH, Liu PM, Wei YJ, Wu CJ, et al.
Role of human copper transporter Ctr1 in the transport of platinum-based antitumor agents in cisplatin-sensitive and cisplatin-resistant cells.
Mol Cancer Ther 2004 3:1543 9.
[28] Lin XJ, Okuda T, Holzer A, Howell SB.
The copper transporter CTR1 regulates cisplatin uptake in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Mol Pharmacol 2002 62:1154 9.
[29] Ishida S, Lee J, Thiele DJ, Herskowitz I. Uptake of  the anticancer drug cisplatin mediated by the copper transporter Ctr1 in yeast and mammals.
Proc Natl Acad of Sci U S A 2002 99:14298 302.
[30] Li ZH, Qiu MZ, Zeng ZL, Luo HY, Wu WJ, Wang F, et al.
Copper-transporting P-type adenosine triphosphatase (ATP7A) is associated with platinum-resistance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
J Transl Med 2012 10:21.
[31] Song L, Li Y, Li W, Wu S, Li Z. MiR-495 enhances the sensitivity of non-small cell lung cancer cells to platinum by modulation of copper transporting P-type adenosine triphos- phatase A (ATP7A).
J Cell Biochem 2014 115:1234 42.
[32] Nakayama K, Kanzaki A, Terada K, Mutoh M, Ogawa K, Sugiyama T, et al.
Prognostic value of the Cu-transporting ATPase in ovarian carcinoma patients receiving cisplatin-based chemotherapy.
Clin Cancer Res 2004 10:2804 11.
[33] Konkimalla VB, Kaina B, Efferth T. Role of transporter genes in  cisplatin resistance.
In Vivo 2008 22:279 83.
[34] Inoue Y, Matsumoto H, Yamada S, Kawai K, Suemizu H, Gika M, et al.
ATP7B expression is associated with in vitro sensitivity to cisplatin in non-small lung cancer.
Oncol Lett 2010 1:279 82.  cell  [35] Nakagawa T, Inoue Y, Kodama H, Yamazaki H, Kawai K, Suemizu H, et al.
Expression of copper-transporting P-type adenosine triphosphatase (ATP7B) correlates with cisplatin resistance in human non-small cell lung cancer xenografts.
Oncol Rep 2008 20:265 70.
[36] Nakagawa K, Yokota J, Wada M, Sasaki Y, Fujiwara Y, Sakai M, et al.
Levels of glutathione S transferase pi mRNA in human lung cancer cell lines correlate with the resistance to cisplatin and carboplatin.
Jpn J Cancer Res 1988 79:301 4.
[37] Arai T, Yasuda Y, Takaya T, Yoshimi N, Ito H, Fujiwara H. Correlation between the immunohistochemical and mRNA expression of glutathione S-transferase-pi and cisplatin plus etoposide chemotherapy response in patients with untreated primary non-small cell lung cancer.
Int J Oncol 1997 11:127 31.
[38] Arai T, Yasuda Y, Takaya T, Hayakawa K, Toshima S, Shibuya C, et al.
Immunohistochemical expression of glutathione trans- ferase-pi in untreated primary non-small-cell lung cancer.
Cancer Detect Prev 2000 24:252 7.
[39] Hida T, Ariyoshi Y, Kuwabara M, Sugiura T, Takahashi T, Hosoda K, et al.
Glutathione S-transferase pi levels in a panel of lung cancer cell lines and its relation to chemo-radiosensitivity.
Jpn J Clin Oncol 1993 23:14 9.
[40] Hirano T, Kato H, Maeda M, Gong YB, Shou YN, Nakamura M, et al.
Identiﬁcation of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy responders in non-small cell lung cancer by novel biomarker.
Int J Cancer 2005 117:460 8.
[41] Allen TC, Granville LA, Cagle PT, Haque A, Zander DS, Barrios R. Expression of glutathione S-transferase pi and  glutathione synthase correlates with survival in early stage non- small cell carcinomas of the lung.
Hum Pathol 2007 38:220 7.
[42] Rosell R, Scagliotti G, Danenberg KD, Lord RV, Bepler G, Novello S, et al.
Transcripts in pretreatment biopsies from a three-arm randomized trial lung cancer.
Oncogene 2003 22:3548 53.  in metastatic non-small-cell  [43] Townsend AJ, Tu CP, Cowan KH.
Expression of human mu or alpha class glutathione S-transferases in stably transfected human MCF-7 breast cancer cells: effect on cellular sensitivity to cytotoxic agents.
Mol Pharmacol 1992 41:230 6.
[44] Waxman DJ, Sundseth SS, Srivastava PK, Lapenson DP.
Gene- speciﬁc oligonucleotide probes for alpha, mu, pi, and microsomal rat glutathione S-transferases: analysis of liver transferase expression and its modulation by hepatic enzyme inducers and platinum anticancer drugs.
Cancer Res 1992 52:5797 802.
[45] Wang CH, Wu HT, Cheng HM, Yen TJ, Lu IH, Chang HC, et al.
Inhibition of glutathione S-transferase M1 by new gabo- sine analogues is essential for overcoming cisplatin resistance in lung cancer cells.
J Med Chem 2011 54:8574 81.
[46] Wachters FM, Wong LS, Timens W, Kampinga HH, Groen HJ.
ERCC1, hRad51, and BRCA1 protein expression in relation to tumour response and survival of stage III/IV NSCLC patients treated with chemotherapy.
Lung Cancer 2005 50:211 9.
[47] Booton R, Ward T, Ashcroft L, Morris J, Heighway J, Thatcher N. ERCC1 mRNA expression is not associated with response and survival after platinum-based chemotherapy regimens in advanced non-small J Thorac Oncol 2007 2:902 6.  lung cancer.
cell  [48] Glaysher S, Yiannakis D, Gabriel FG, Johnson P, Polak ME, Knight LA, et al.
Resistance gene expression determines the in vitro chemosensitivity of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
BMC Cancer 2009 9:1 17.
[49] Friboulet L, Olaussen KA, Pignon JP, Shepard FA, Tsao MS, Graziano S, et al.
ERCC1 isoform expression and DNA repair in non-small cell lung cancer.
N Engl J Med 2013 368: 1101 10.
[50] Schneider JG, Farhadfar N, Sivapiragasam A, Geller M, Islam S, Selbs E. Commercial laboratory testing of excision repair cross-complementation group 1 expression in non-small cell lung cancer.
Oncologist 2014 19:459 65.
[51] Stewart DJ.
Tumor and host factors that may limit efﬁcacy of chemotherapy in non-small cell and small cell lung cancer.
Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2010 75:173 234.
[52] Wei SZ, Zhan P, Shi MQ, Shi Y, Qian Q, Yu LK, et al.
Predictive value of ERCC1 and XPD polymorphism in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer receiving platinum- based chemotherapy: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Med Oncol 2011 28:315 21.
[53] Wei HB, Hu J, Shang LH, Zhang YY, Lu FF, Wei M, et al.
A meta-analytic review of ERCC1/MDR1 polymorphism and chemosensitivity to platinum in patients with advanced non- small cell lung cancer.
Chin Med J (Engl) 2012 125:2902 7.
[54] Yu D, Shi J, Sun T, Du X, Liu L, Zhang X, et al.
Pharmaco- genetic role of ERCC1 genetic variants in treatment response of platinum-based chemotherapy among advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients.
Tumor Biol 2012 33:877 84.
[55] Qin Q, Zhang C, Yang X, Zhu H, Yang B, Cai J, et al.
Polymorphisms in XPD gene could predict clinical outcome of platinum-based chemotherapy for non-small cell lung cancer patients: a meta-analysis of 24 studies.
PLoS One 2013 8:e79864.
[56] Xu X, Duan L, Zhou B, Ma R, Zhou H, Liu Z.
Genetic polymorphism of copper transporter protein 1 is related to platinum resistance in Chinese non-small cell lung carcinoma patients.
Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2012 39:786 92.
[57] Wu X, Lu C, Ye Y, Chang J, Yang H, Lin J, et al.
Germline genetic variations in drug action pathways predict clinical outcomes in advanced lung cancer treated with platinum-based chemotherapy.
Pharmacogenet Genomics 2008 18:955 65.
208  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 12 (2014) 198 209  [58] Sun N, Sun X, Chen B, Cheng H, Feng J, Cheng L, et al.
MRP2 and GSTP1 polymorphisms and chemotherapy response in advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
Cancer Chemother Phar- macol 2010 65:437 46.
[59] Zhou F, Yu Z, Jiang T, Lv H, Yao R, Liang J.
Genetic polymorphisms of GSTP1 and XRCC1: prediction of clinical outcome of platinum-based chemotherapy in advanced non- small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients.
Swiss Med Wkly 2011 141:w13275.
[60] Booton R, Ward T, Heighway J, Ashcroft L, Morris J, Thatcher N. Glutathione S-transferase P1 isoenzyme polymorphisms, platinum-based chemotherapy, and non-small cell lung cancer.
J Thorac Oncol 2006 1:679 83.
[61] Lu C, Spitz MR, Zhao H, Dong Q, Truong M, Chang JY, et al.
Association between glutathione S-transferase pi polymorphisms and survival lung carcinoma.
Cancer 2006 106:441 7.  in patients with advanced nonsmall cell  [62] Yang Y, Xian L. The association between the GSTP1 A313G and GSTM1 null/present polymorphisms and the treatment response of the platinum-based chemotherapy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients: a meta-analysis.
Tumor Biol 2014 35:6791 9.
[63] Moyer AM, Sun Z, Batzler AJ, Li L, Schaid DJ, Yang P, et al.
Glutathione pathway genetic polymorphisms and lung cancer survival after platinum-based chemotherapy.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2010 19:811 21.
[64] Wu XM, Fan W, Xu SW, Zhou YK.
Sensitization to the cytotoxicity of cisplatin by transfection with nucleotide excision repair gene xeroderma pigmentosum group A antisense RNA in human cells.
Clin Cancer Res lung 2003 9:5874 9.  adenocarcinoma  [65] Rosenberg E, Taher MM, Kuemmerle NB, Farnsworth J, Valerie K. A truncated human xeroderma pigmentosum com- plementation group a protein expressed from an adenovirus sensitizes human tumor cells to ultraviolet light and cisplatin.
Cancer Res 2001 61:764 70.
[66] Gately DP, Howell SB.
Cellular accumulation of the anticancer  agent cisplatin: a review.
Br J Cancer 1993 67:1171 6.
[67] Kim ES, Lee JJ, He G, Chow CW, Fujimoto J, Kalhor N, et al.
Tissue platinum concentration and tumor response in non-small- cell lung cancer.
J Clin Oncol 2012 30:3345 52.
[68] Zhou B, Gitschier J. HCTR1: a human gene for copper uptake identiﬁed by complementation in yeast.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1997 94:7481 6.
[69] Safaei R, Howell SB.
Copper transporters regulate the cellular pharmacology and sensitivity to Pt drugs.
Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 2005 53:13 23.
[70] Holzer AK, Manorek GH, Howell SB.
Contribution of the major copper inﬂux transporter CTR1 to the cellular accumu- lation of cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin.
Mol Pharmacol 2006 70:1390 4.
[71] Zisowsky J, Koegel S, Leyers S, Devarakonda K, Kassack MU, Osmak M, et al.
Relevance of drug uptake and efﬂux for cisplatin sensitivity of cells.
Biochem Pharmacol 2007 73:298 307.  tumor  [72] Larson CA, Blair BG, Safaei R, Howell SB.
The role of the mammalian copper transporter 1 in the cellular accumulation of platinum-based drugs.
Mol Pharmacol 2009 75:324 30.
[73] Larson CA, Adams PL, Jandial DD, Blair BG, Safaei R, Howell SB.
The role of the N-terminus of mammalian copper trans- porter 1 in the cellular accumulation of cisplatin.
Biochem Pharmacol 2010 80:448 54.
[74] Kalayda GV, Wagner CH, Jaehde U. Relevance of copper transporter 1 for cisplatin resistance in human ovarian carci- noma cells.
J Inorg Biochem 2012 116:1 10.
[75] Ishida S, McCormick F, Smith-McCune K, Hanahan D. Enhancing tumor-speciﬁc uptake of the anticancer drug cisplatin with a copper chelator.
Cancer Cell 2010 17:574 83.
[76] Fu S, Naing A, Fu C, Kuo MT, Kurzrock R. Overcoming platinum resistance through the use of a copper-lowering agent.
Mol Cancer Ther 2012 11:1221 5.
[77] Ivy KD, Kaplan JH.
A re-evaluation of the role of hCTR1, the human high-afﬁnity copper transporter, in platinum-drug entry into human cells.
Mol Pharmacol 2013 83:1237 46.
[78] Hall MD, Okabe M, Shen DW, Liang XJ, Gottesman MM.
The role of cellular accumulation in determining sensitivity to platinum-based chemotherapy.
Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2008 48:495 535.
[79] Wee NK, Weinstein DC, Fraser ST, Assinder SJ.
The mamma- lian copper transporters CTR1 and CTR2 and their roles in development and disease.
Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2013 45:960 3.
[80] Blair BG, Larson CA, Safaei R, Howell SB.
Copper transporter the cellular accumulation and cytotoxicity of  2 regulates Cisplatin and Carboplatin.
Clin Cancer Res 2009 15:4312 21.
[81] Huang CP, Fofana M, Chan J, Chang CJ, Howell SB.
Copper transporter 2 regulates intracellular copper and sensitivity to cisplatin.
Metallomics 2014 6:654 61.
[82] Ohrvik H, Thiele DJ.
The role of Ctr1 and Ctr2 in mammalian copper homeostasis and platinum-based chemotherapy.
J Trace Elem http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ j.jtemb.2014.03.006.
2014.
Med  Biol  [83] Vulpe C, Levinson B, Whitney S, Packman S, Gitschier J.
Isolation of a candidate gene for Menkes disease and evidence that it encodes a copper-transporting ATPase.
Nat Genet 1993 3:7 13.
[84] Bull PC, Thomas GR, Rommens JM, Forbes JR, Cox DW.
The Wilson disease gene is a putative copper transporting p-type ATPase similar to the Menkes gene.
Nat Genet 1993 5: 327 37.
[85] Samimi G, Varki NM, Wilczynski S, Safaei R, Alberts DS, Howell SB.
Increase in expression of the copper transporter ATP7A during platinum drug-based treatment is associated with poor survival in ovarian cancer patients.
Clin Cancer Res 2003 9:5853 9.
[86] Samimi G, Safaei R, Katano K, Holzer AK, Rochdi M, Tomioka M, et al.
Increased expression of the copper efﬂux transporter ATP7A mediates resistance to cisplatin, carboplatin, and oxaliplatin in ovarian cancer cells.
Clin Cancer Res 2004 10:4661 9.
[87] Komatsu M, Sumizawa T, Mutoh M, Chen ZS, Terada K, Furukawa T, et al.
Copper-transporting P-type adenosine triphosphatase (ATP7B) is associated with cisplatin resistance.
Cancer Res 2000 60:1312 6.
[88] Hildebrandt MA, Gu J, Wu X. Pharmacogenomics of platinum- based chemotherapy in NSCLC.
Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2009 5:745 55.
[89] Fukushima-Uesaka H, Saito Y, Maekawa K, Kurose K, Sugiyama E, Katori N, et al.
Genetic polymorphisms of copper- and platinum drug-efﬂux transporters ATP7A and ATP7B in Japanese patients.
Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 2009 24:565 74.  cancer  [90] Anttila S, Hirvonen A, Vainio H, Husgafvel-Pursiainen K, localization of in human lung.
Cancer Res  Hayes JD, Ketterer B. Immunohistochemical glutathione S-transferases 1993 53:5643 8.
[91] Terrier P, Townsend AJ, Coindre JM, Triche TJ, Cowan KH.
An immunohistochemical study of pi-class glutathione S-trans- ferase expression in normal human tissue.
Am J Pathol 1990 137:845 53.
[92] Peklak-Scott C, Smitherman PK, Townsend AJ, Morrow CS.
Role of glutathione S-transferase P1 1 in the cellular detoxiﬁ- cation of cisplatin.
Mol Cancer Ther 2008 7:3247 55.
[93] Tew KD.
Glutathione-associated enzymes in anticancer drug-  resistance.
Cancer Res 1994 54:4313 20.
[94] Watson MA, Stewart RK, Smith GB, Massey TE, Bell DA.
Human glutathione S-transferase P1 polymorphisms: relation-   Rose MC et al / Cisplatin Pharmacogenomics in NSCLC  209  ship to lung tissue enzyme activity and population frequency distribution.
Carcinogenesis 1998 19:275 80.
[95] Allan JM, Wild CP, Rollinson S, Willett EV, Moorman AV, Dovey GJ, et al.
Polymorphism in glutathione S-transferase P1 is associated with susceptibility to chemotherapy-induced leuke- mia.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 98:11592 7.
[96] Hayes JD, Pulford DJ.
The glutathione S-transferase supergene family: regulation of GST and the contribution of the isoenzymes to cancer chemoprotection and drug resistance.
Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 1995 30:445 600.
[97] Saburi Y, Nakagawa M, Ono M, Sakai M, Muramatsu M, Kohno K, et al.
Increased expression of glutathione S-transfer- ase gene in cis-diamminedichloro-platinum(ii)-resistant variants of a Chinese hamster ovary cell line.
Cancer Res 1989 49:7020 5.
[98] Watson MB, Lind MJ, Smith L, Drew PJ, Cawkwell L. Expression microarray analysis reveals genes associated with in vitro resistance to cisplatin in a cell line model.
Acta Oncol 2007 46:651 8.
[99] Smith L, Welham KJ, Watson MB, Drew PJ, Lind MJ, Cawkwell L. The proteomic analysis of cisplatin resistance in breast cancer cells.
Oncol Res 2007 16:497 506.
[100] Wheeler HE, Gamazon ER, Stark AL, O Donnel PH, Gorsic LK, et al.
Genome-wide meta-analysis identiﬁes variants asso- ciated with platinating agent susceptibility across populations.
Pharmacogenomics J 2013 13:35 43.
[101] Hayes JD, Strange RC.
Glutathione S-transferase polymorphisms and their biological consequences.
Pharmacology 2000 61:154 66.
[102] Lin HJ, Han CY, Bernstein DA, Hsiao W, Lin BK, Hardy S. Ethnic distribution of the glutathione transferase mu-1-1 (GSTM1) null genotype in 1473 individuals and application to bladder-cancer susceptibility.
Carcinogenesis 1994 15:1077 81.
[103] Horgan AM, Yang B, Azad AK, Amir E, John T, Cescon DW, et al.
Pharmacogenetic and germline prognostic markers of lung cancer.
J Thorac Oncol 2011 6:296 304.
[104] Sweeney C, Nazar-Stewart V, Stapleton PL, Eaton DL, Vaughan TL.
Glutathione S-transferase M1, T1, and P1 polymorphisms and survival among lung cancer patients.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 2003 12:527 33.
[105] Gonlugur U, Pinarbasi H, Gonlugur TE, Silig Y.
The association between polymorphisms in glutathione S-transferase (GSTM1 and GSTT1) and lung cancer outcome.
Cancer Invest 2006 24:497 501.
