Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 133 134  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics  www.elsevier.com/locate/gpb  www.sciencedirect.com  PREFACE  Gene Regulatory Networks in the Genomics Era  Matthew Loose 2, Roger Patient 3, Xiangdong Fang 1,*, Hongxing Lei 1,*  1 CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,  Beijing 100101, China  2 Institute of Genetics, Queen s Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK 3 The Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK  Available online 3 June 2013  The precise regulation of gene expression is critical to the nor- mal development and biological function of all organisms.
Dysregulation of gene expression during early development can result in a spectrum of failures ranging from minor defects to the termination of development.
In adult life, dysregulation can lead to the uncontrolled cell proliferation of cancer or pro- grammed cell death leading to neurodegenerative diseases.
The regulation of gene expression is controlled by multiple systems with more being discovered.
The immediate regulators are transcription factors which bind to speciﬁc sequences in the promoter or enhancer regions of individual genes.
The activity of transcription factors can be regulated by the presence of other transcription factors and cofactors, methylation status of the promoter or enhancer region, accessibility of the DNA due to the local compactness of the chromatin and various modiﬁcations of the histone tails.
Transcribed mRNAs are then subject to degradation before being translated into protein products, during which microRNAs play a major role [1].
In this special issue, we present recent advances in the elucidation of gene regulatory networks (GRNs).
After the completion of the human genome project, people realized that even excluding the repetitive sequences, protein coding regions are only a small portion of the whole genome.
To explore the functional roles of the   junk   regions, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) started the encyclopedia  * Corresponding authors.
E-mail: fangxd@big.ac.cn (Fang X), leihx@big.ac.cn (Lei H).
Peer review under responsibility of Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier  of DNA elements (ENCODE) project in 2003, which has gen- erated vast amounts of functional data for non-protein coding regions over the past 10 years.
In this issue, Qu and Fang provide a short review of the history and current status of the ENCODE project [2].
Enhancers are DNA elements directly involved in the regu- lation of gene expression.
Enhancers can be located near cod- ing regions or far away.
The activity of enhancers with respect to gene expression depends on the speciﬁc tissues and/or devel- opmental stages, as a consequence of the presence or absence of transcription factors and the epigenetic modiﬁcations of the enhancers themselves.
In this issue, Wang et al.
review computational efforts to identify spatially and temporally ac- tive enhancers using the recently available ENCODE data [3].
The activity of enhancers requires the presence of mediator complexes.
Mediator complexes are large protein complexes which bind to transcription factors, RNA polymerase II and various transcription regulators such as non-coding RNAs.
Mediator complexes are essential for transcription, and defects in mediator complexes have been associated with severe dis- eases.
In this issue, Grueter presents a review of the role of mediator complexes in cardiac development and disease [4].
We have also included two original research articles in this special issue.
Bickhart and Liu use a bioinformatics approach to identify approximately 380,000 putative transcription factor binding sites in the cattle genome, validating a subset of them and demonstrating their speciﬁcity [5].
This work paves the way for comparison of GRNs between cattle and other mam- malian model systems.
In order to construct complex interac- tion and regulatory networks, Sun et al.
incorporate information from multiple sources, including protein-protein interaction databases, pathway databases, transcription factor target gene predictions and microRNA target gene predictions to generate regulatory networks from an input gene set [6].
1672-0229/$ - see front matter ª 2013 Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Genetics Society of China.
Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.gpb.2013.05.004   134  Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 11 (2013) 133 134  Roger Patient, PhD, Professor of Develop- mental Genetics at Oxford University and Deputy Director of the MRC Molecular Haematology Unit in the Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine on the John Radcliffe Hospital site, UK.
Ongoing research projects in his lab include deﬁning the transcriptional networks that programme hematopoietic stem cells during embryonic development, and the embryonic signalling pathways that lay these programmes down.
A similar approach to development of the myocardium is being taken.
He has served as Deputy Chair of the MRC Molecular and Cellular Medicine Board and a member of the British Heart Foundation Chairs and Programme Grants Committee.
He has been elected to EMBO.
of  Xiangdong Fang, MD, PhD, Professor of CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy Sciences, China.
Dr. Fang received his Doctor degree from Nanfang Medical University in Guangzhou, China and postdoctoral training from the Medical School at University of Washington in Seattle, USA.
Dr. Fang s current research interest is focused on the epigenetic regulation of eukaryotic genes, especially the delineation of the molecular mechanism of genetic diseases and carcinomas using various omics techniques based on different high-throughput sequencing platforms.
Hongxing Lei, PhD, Professor of CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China.
Dr. Lei received his PhD degree from the Department of Biochemistry at Kansas State University and postdoctoral training from the Genome Center at UC Davis, USA.
Dr. Lei has been working in the ﬁeld of computational biology.
Current research in his lab is mainly focused on the understanding of the complex interac- tion and regulatory networks in neurological disorders such as Alzheimer s disease.
The resources from both works are available online.
In addi- tion, Li et al.
present a summary of the discovery of biomark- ers for lupus nephritis from serum and urine employing genomic approaches [7].
The elucidation and study of GRNs is a fast evolving ﬁeld.
Recently, RNA methylation has emerged as yet another layer of regulation [8].
With the rapid development and application of genomic technologies, we anticipate that many new layers of regulatory complexity will emerge.
In the meantime, it be- comes increasingly important to understand the complex rela- tionships between genes and how changes in GRNs can result in phenotypic change.
Acknowledgements  We would like to thank Dr. M. Madan Babu from Labora- tory of Molecular Biology, University of Cambridge and Dr. Maggie W. Patient for their great help in organizing this special issue on Gene Regulatory Networks.
References  [1] Li T, Cho WCS.
MicroRNAs: mechanisms, functions and progress.
Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 2012 10:237 8.
[2] Qu H, Fang X.
A brief review on the human encyclopedia of DNA elements (ENCODE) project.
Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 2013 11:135 41.
[3] Wang C, Zhang MQ, Zhang Z. Computational identiﬁcation of active enhancers in model organisms.
Genomics Proteomics Bio- informatics 2013 11:142 50.
[4] Grueter CE.
Mediator complex dependent regulation of cardiac development and disease.
Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 2013 11:151 57.
[5] Bickhart DM, Liu GE.
Identiﬁcation of candidate transcription factor binding sites in the cattle genome.
Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 2013 11:195 8.
[6] Sun J, Pan Y, Feng X, Zhang H, Duan Y, Lei H. IBIG: an integrative network tool for supporting human disease mechanism studies.
Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 2013 11:166 71.
[7] Li Y, Fang X, Li QZ.
Biomarker proﬁling for lupus nephritis.
Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 2013 11:158 65.
[8] Niu Y, Zhao X, Wu YS, Li MM, Wang XJ, Yang YG.
N6-methyl- adenosine (m6A) in RNA: an old modiﬁcation with a novel epigenetic Proteomics Bioinformatics 2013 11:8 17.  function.
Genomics  Matthew Loose, PhD, Lecturer in School of Biology at the University of Nottingham, UK.
He has been working in the ﬁeld of develop- mental gene regulatory networks (GRNs).
Ongoing research projects in his lab include deﬁning the GRNs specifying mesoderm in amphibians, blood in frogs and mice, and heart in various organisms.
He developed tools to collate and explore networks (http:// www.mygrn.org) and developed mathematical models describing these networks.
He has recently been investigating the conservation of regulatory networks in organisms with induced and pre-determined germ lines, the interplay of mesoderm speciﬁcation and germ cells, and exploring how gain and loss of genes can dramatically alter network behavior.
