Mycobiology  39(1) : 52-53  (2011)
  The  Korean  Society  of  Mycology

DOI:10.4489/MYCO.2011.39.1.052

First Report of  Botrytis cinerea as a Postharvest Pathogen  of Blueberry in Korea

Jin-Hyeuk  Kwon1

*,  Mi-Geon  Cheon1,  Okhee  Choi2  and  Jinwoo  Kim2

1Gyeongsangnam-do  Agricultural  Research  and  Extension  Services,  Jinju  660-360,  Korea
2Department  of  Applied  Biology  and  Institute  of  Agriculture  and  Life  Science,  Gyeongsang  National  University,  Jinju  660-701,  Korea

(Received  January  25,  2011.  Accepted  February  18,  2011)

Gray  mold  of  blueberry  caused  by  Botrytis  sp.  is  reported  for  the  first  time  in  Korea.  A  detailed  description  of  the  fungus
is  given,  along  with  its  rDNA  internal  transcribed  spacer  sequence.  The  fungus  was  identified  as  Botrytis  cinerea  based  on
mycological  characteristics  and  molecular  data.

KEYWORDS : Botrytis  cinerea,  Gray  mold,  Postharvest  disease

Blueberry  (Vaccinium  corymbosum),  a  flowering  plant
with  dark-purple  berries,  is  sold  fresh,  processed  as  fro-
zen fruit and juice, or as dried goods such as jellies, jams,
and  blueberry  pies.  A  gray  mold  that  was  a  morphologi-
cally distinct Botrytis sp. was observed on blueberries in a
storage  room  at  Gyeongsangnam-do  Agricultural  Research
and  Extension  Services,  Jinju,  Korea.  Infection  rates
reached  8%  in  August  and  September  of  2010.  Botrytis
diseases  appear  primarily  as  blossom  blights  or  fruit  rots,
but  they  also  cause  harvest  diseases  in  various  crops  [1].
The  pathogen  favors  cool  and  humid  conditions,  causing
considerable losses during storage [2].

Symptoms. Symptoms  of  gray  mold  were  observed  on
harvested  fruits  after  2~3  days  of  storage  in  a  refrigerated
room.  The  symptoms  usually  started  with  wrinkles,  atro-
phy,  crouch  down,  and  depression  on  the  fruit  surfaces
(Fig.  1A).  Accordingly,  the  heavily  infected  fruits  rotted.
Because  the  symptoms  appeared  quickly  in  a  refrigerated
room,  the  fruits  may  have  been  infected  while  they  were
in the field.

Mycological  characteristics. A  causal  fungal  pathogen
was  isolated  from  freshly  infected  fruits.  The  optimum
temperature for mycelia growth or sclerotia formation was
20oC.  The  sclerotia,  which  were  flat  or  irregular  in  shape
and  black  in  color,  formed  abundantly  on  potato  dextrose
agar  (Fig.  1B).  Detailed  microscopic  examinations  of  a
representative  isolate  were  performed  using  a  model
1420VP  scanning  electron  microscope  and  an  Axioplan  2
light  microscope  (Carl  zeiss,  Göttingen,  Germany).  The
conidia  were  one-celled,  ellipsoid  or  ovoid  in  shape,  col-
orless or pale brown, and 8~16 × 5~10 µm in size. Conid-
iophores  were  brown  in  color  and  16~31 µm  in  length
(Table 1, Fig. 1C).

*Corresponding  author <E-mail : kwon825@korea.krr>

Fig. 1. Symptoms  of  gray  mold  of  blueberry  (Vaccinium
corymbosum)  and  morphological  characteristics  of  the
causal  organism,  Botrytis  cinerea.  A,  Symptoms  of
gray  mold;  B,  Appearance  of  mycelial  mat  and
sclerotia  on  potato  dextrose  agar;  C,  Scanning  electron
micrography  image  of  conidia  and  conidiophores;  D,
Symptoms  induced  by  artificial  inoculation.

Pathogenicity  test. Thirty  berries  of  the  ‘Northland’
cultivar  (V.  corymbosum),  were  surface-sterilized  with  1%
NaOCl,  rinsed  in  sterile  distilled  water  three  times,  and
allowed  to  dry.  The  surface-sterilized  blueberries  were
placed  on  moist  filter  papers  in  a  plastic  box  (29 × 22 ×
15 cm).  The  conidial  suspension  (3 × 104 conidia/mL)  of
the  causal  pathogen was added  dropwise  to the surface of
the  blueberries.  The  inoculated  blueberries  were  kept  in  a
humid  chamber  with  100%  relative  humidity  at  20oC  for
24 hr  then  placed  on  a  laboratory  table  at  room  tempera-
ture  for  observation.  The  first  symptom  appeared  on  the
blueberries with mycelia and conidia after 4 days of inoc-

52

Gray  Mold  of  Blueberry  Caused  by  Botrytis  cinerea

53

Table 1. Comparison  of  morphological  characteristics  of  gray  mold  fungus  isolated  from  blueberry  (Vaccinium  corymbosum),  with

the previous descriptions of Botrytis cinerea

Characteristics

Colony
Conidia

Conidiophore
Sclerotia

Color
Shape
Size  (µm)
Color
Size  (µm)
Shape
Color

Present  isolate

Grayish  brown
Ellipsoidal  or  ovoid
8~16 × 5~10
Colorless  or  pale  brown
16~31 × 2
Flat  or  irregular
Black

B.  cinerea  [3]

Grayish  brown
Ellipsoidal  or  ovoid
6~18 × 4~11
Colorless  or  pale  brown
16~30 × 2
Flat  or  irregular
Black

ing  method  and  the  Tajima-Nei  distance  model.  In  the
phylogenetic  tree  (Fig.  2),  the  isolate  was  placed  within  a
clade comprising reference isolates of Botrytis cinerea [5].
On the basis of mycological characteristics, pathogenic-
ity  testing  in  host  plants,  and  molecular  data,  the  fungus
was  identified  as  B.  cinerea  Persoon:  Fries  [3].  To  our
knowledge,  this  is  the  first  report  of  gray  mold  on  blue-
berry  caused  by  B.  cinerea  in  Korea  [6].  The  representa-
tive culture of the fungus is stored at the Korean Agricultural
Culture  Collection  (KACC  45439),  National  Academy  of
Agricultural  Science,  Rural  Development  Administration,
Suwon, Korea.

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  carried  out  with  the  support  of  “Coopera-
tive  Research  Program  for  Agriculture  Science  &  Tech-
nology  Development  (PJ007345)”  Rural  Development
Administration, Korea.

References

1. Agrios  GN.  Plant  pathology.  5th  ed.  New  York:  Academic

Press; 2005.

2. Caruso  FL,  Ramsdell  DC.  Compendium  of  blueberry  and

cranberry diseases. St. Paul: APS Press; 1995.

3. Ellis  MB,  Waller  JM.  Sclerotinia  fuckeliana  (conidial  state:
Botrytis  cinerea).  CMI  descriptions  of  pathogenic  fungi  and
bacteria,  No.  431.  Kew:  Commonwealth  Mycological  Insti-
tute; 1974.

4. White  TJ,  Bruns  T,  Lee  S,  Taylor  JW.  Amplification  and
direct  sequencing  of  fungal  ribosomal  RNA  genes  for  phylo-
genetics.  In:  Innis  MA,  Gelfand  DH,  Sninsky  JJ,  White  TJ,
editors.  PCR  protocols:  a  guide  to  methods  and  applications.
New York: Academic Press, Inc.; 1990. p. 315-22.

5. Staats  M,  van  Baarlen  P,  van  Kan  JA.  Molecular  phylogeny
of  the  plant  pathogenic  genus  Botrytis  and  the  evolution  of
host specificity. Mol Biol Evol 2005;22:333-46.

6. Korean  Society  of  Plant  Pathology.  List  of  plant  diseases  in
Korea.  5th  ed.  Seoul:  Korean  Society  of  Plant  Pathology;
2009.

Fig. 2. Phylogenetic  tree  based  on  internal  transcribed  spacer
sequences,  showing  closest  known  relatives  of  Botrytis
cinerea,  including  the  gray  mold  fungus  infecting
blueberry.  DNA  sequences  from  the  National  Center
for  Biotechnology  Information  nucleotide  database
were  aligned  using  ClustalW,  and  a  phylogenetic  tree
was  constructed  using  the  neighbor-joining  method  and
visualized  with  TreeView.  Numbers  above  the  branches
indicate  bootstrap  values.  Bars  indicate  number  of
nucleotide  substitutions  per  site.  The  isolate  infecting
blueberry  is  indicated  in  bold  font.

ulation  and  rapidly  spread  to  nearby  fruits  (Fig.  1D).  The
causal  pathogen  was  re-isolated  from  the  lesions  to  con-
firm  Koch’s  postulates.  The  pathogenicity  test  was  con-
ducted twice.

Internal  transcribed  spacer  (ITS)  sequence  analysis.
To  confirm  identity  of  the  causal  fungus,  the  complete
ITS  rDNA  of  the  representative  fungal  pathogen  was
amplified  and  sequenced  using  primers  ITS1  (5'-TCCG-
TAGGTGAACCTGCGG-3')  and  ITS4  (5'-TCCTCCGCT-
TATTGATATGC-3')  as  described by White  et  al.  [4].  The
resulting  613-bp  sequence  was  deposited  in  GenBank
(accession  No.  HQ455788).  Phylogenetic  analysis  was
conduced using MEGA4 software, with the neighbor-join-

