Mycobiology  39(3) : 151-157  (2011)
  The  Korean  Society  of  Mycology

http://dx.doi.org/10.5941/MYCO.2011.39.3.151
pISSN  1229-8093
eISSN  2092-9323

Molecular  and  Morphological  Characterization  of  a  Taxol-Producing
Endophytic  Fungus,  Gliocladium  sp.,  from  Taxus  baccata

*

†,  G.  K.  Sushim2‡,  A.  Syed1,  B.  M.  Khan2  and  A.  Ahmad1

D.  Sreekanth1
1Biochemical  Sciences  Division,  National  Chemical  Laboratory,  Pune  411008,  India
2Plant  Tissue  Culture  Division,  National  Chemical  Laboratory,  Pune  411008,  India
†Present Address:  School of  Biotechnology  and Biomolecular  Sciences,  University  of New  South  Wales, Sydney,  NSW 2033, Australia
‡Present  Address:  Institute  of  Biochemical  Sciences  and  Technology,  Chaoyang  University  of  Technology,  Taichung  41349,  Taiwan

(Received  July  31,  2011.  Accepted  August  12,  2011)

The  endophytic  fungal  populations  of  different  tissues  of  Taxus  baccata  grown  at  high  altitudes  in  West  Bengal,  India  were
explored.  These  isolated  fungal  populations  represented  different  genera,  which  were  screened  for  taxol  production  using
immunoassay  technique.  The  culture  AAT-TS-41  that  produced  taxol  was  identified  as  Gliocladium  sp.  based  on  its  cultural,
morphological  characteristics,  internal  transcribed  spacer,  and  18S  rRNA  sequence  analysis.  Kinetics  of  taxol  production  as
a  function  of  culture  growth  were  investigated.

KEYWORDS : Endophytes,  Internal  transcribed  spacer  region,  18S  rRNA

It  has  been  previously  shown  that  endophytic  microbial
populations  can  easily  adapt  their  physiology  in  order
to  establish  themselves  in  plant  host  tissues.  These
physiological  changes  can  result  in  the  production  of
useful  metabolites,  which  could  be  exploited  for  human
use.  Taxol  is  one  such  metabolite  that  was  first  isolated
from  the  bark  of  Western  yew,  Taxus  brevifolia  [1],  and
later  from  other  geographically  diverse  Taxus  species.
This  anti-microtubule  drug  is  used  for  the  treatment  of  a
broad  range  of  human  tumors,  including  ovarian  and
metastatic breast cancers [2]. Apart from cancer treatment,
its  application  to  the  treatment  of  rheumatoid  arthritis,
malaria,  Alzheimer’s  disease,  and  autosomal  dominant
polycystic kidney disease [2] has also been reported.

Using  Taxus  sp.  for  taxol  production  is  ecologically
unsuitable,  as  it  requires  mature  trees  to  be  sacrificed.
Over  the  past  few  years,  other  renewable  sources  for  the
commercial  scale-up  of  taxol  production  have  been
investigated, such as isolation from needles (leaves) [3], in
vitro  culturing  of  Taxus  species  [4],  and  synthesis  from
readily  available  10-deacetylbaccatin  III  (10DAB  III)  [5],
but  none  could  meet  the  high  demand  for  taxol
production.  A  novel  method  for  the  production  of  taxol
by  a  cheaper  industrial  fermentation  method  was  recently
reported  based  on  the  discovery  of  endophytic  fungi
belonging  to  different  diverse  genera  that  produce  taxol.
Apart from fungi, some bacteria [6] and actinomycetes [7]

*Corresponding  author <E-mail : s.dasari@unsw.edu.au>

that  produce  taxol  have  also  been  discovered.  As  India
has  a  large  wealth  of  medicinal  plants  containing  an
abundance of Taxus baccata, a  screening programme  was
initiated  to  isolate  endophytic  microorganisms  from  T.
baccata  for  production  of  taxol.  Accordingly,  this  study
focused  on  the  screening  of  endophytic  fungi  for  taxol
production  and  the  identification  of  industrially  important
fungi based on their cultural, morphological, and molecular
characteristics.  Our  previous  studies  showed  that  this
fungus produces taxol as well as its precursor 10DAB III [8].
Based  on  its  morphological  and  molecular  characteristics,
we  identified  the  fungus  as  Gliocladium  sp.  Some  of  the
species of this genus have been identified as mycoparasites,
and many novel secondary metabolites have been discovered
from  different  species  [9, 10].  However,  this  is  the  first
report of fungus Gliocladium sp. isolated as an endophyte
of T. baccata, which produces taxol.

Materials  and  Methods

Isolation of endophytic fungi from T. baccata. Endophytic
fungi were isolated from the bark, stem, and needles of T.
baccata  obtained  from  West  Bengal,  India.  The  samples
were  cut  into  small  pieces  (approximately  0.5 × 0.5 cm),
surface-sterilized  with  0.01%  mercuric  chloride  (HgCl2)
solution  for  1 min,  and  washed  thoroughly  with  sterile
distilled  water  [11-13].  The  outer  bark  was  teased  apart

This  is  an  Open  Access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution  Non-Commercial  License  (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/)  which  permits  unrestricted  non-commercial  use,  distribution,  and  reproduction  in  any  medium,
provided  the  original  work  is  properly  cited.

151

 
152

Sreekanth  et  al.

with the help of a sterilized sharp blade in order to obtain
the  inner  bark  (stem).  Residual  water  on  the  sample
surface was removed by soaking on sterile blotting paper.
Small  pieces  of  stem  and  needles  were  placed  on  the
surface of potato dextrose agar (PDA). After 10~15 days,
fungi  were  observed  growing  from  the  stem  and  needle
fragments  on  the  plates.  Individual  hyphal  tips  of  the
various  fungi  were  then  transferred  from  the  PDA  plates,
placed  again  on  the  new  PDA  plates,  and  incubated  at
room  temperature  for  at  least  10~15  days.  Each  fungal
culture  was  checked  for  purity  and  transferred  to  agar
slants by the hyphal tip and single spore isolation methods
[13, 14].  Of  the  fungal  population,  only  slow  growing  and
unusual  fungi  were  considered  for  further  study.  Stock
cultures  were  maintained  by  subculturing  at  monthly
intervals. After  growing at  pH 7  and  25oC for 7 days, the
slants  were  maintained  at  15oC.  From  an  actively  growing
stock culture, sub-cultures were made on fresh slants. After
7 days of incubation at pH 7 and 25oC, they were used as
the starting material for the fermentation experiments.

Screening  of  endophytic  fungi  for  taxol  production.
Production  of  taxol  by  the  40  endophytic  fungi  isolated
from  different  plant  parts  of  T.  baccata  was  studied  by  a
two-stage  fermentation  procedure.  In  the  first  stage,  these
fungi  were  grown  in  submerged  culture,  whereas  in  the
second  stage,  they  were  grown  as  a  stationary  culture.
These  fungi  were  grown  in  500 mL  Erlenmeyer  flasks
containing 100 mL of modified mycological medium [15].
The  flasks  were  inoculated  with  agar  blocks  containing
mycelium  from  7-day-old  slants.  The  inoculated  flasks
were  incubated  at  25~27oC  on  a  rotary  shaker  (240 rpm)
for 5 days. These cultures were then used as seed cultures
(first  stage).  For  taxol  production,  10 mL  seed  cultures
were  transferred  to  500 mL  flasks  containing  100 mL  of
modified  S7  medium  [15].  The  flasks  were  incubated  at
25~27oC  for  21  days  as  a  stationary  culture  (second
stage). The culture was then harvested and passed through
four  layers  of  muslin  cloth  to  separate  the  mycelial  mat
from  the  culture  filtrate  3  wk  after  the  inoculations.  Both
culture  filtrate  and  mycelia  were  lyophilized  to  dryness,
followed  by  extraction  three  times  with  equal  volumes  of
chloroform:  methanol  (9 : 1)  each  time.  These  extracts
were  then  pooled  and  dried  with  anhydrous  sodium
sulphate and concentrated at 40oC in vacuo to yield crude
extract. A small amount of crude extract was dissolved in
methanol, diluted in sample diluting buffer (0.25% bovine
serum  albumin,  phosphate buffered  saline),  and  then used
for screening of taxol-positive cultures using immunoassay
technique competitive inhibition enzyme linked immunoassay
(Hawaii  biotechnology  group,  Hawaii),  according  to  the
procedure  descried  by  the  manufacturers  [16].  It  was
observed  that  most  of  the  chloroform  extracts  were  not
completely soluble in methanol.

Production  of  taxol  by  fungal  strain  AAT-TS-41  at
different  time  intervals. The  flasks  were  incubated  at
27oC  for  different  (2,  5,  10,  15,  and  21  days)  time
intervals as a stationary culture (second stage). After 2, 5,
10,  15,  and  21  days  of  incubation,  the  culture  was
harvested  and  processed.  Fermentation,  extraction,  and
quantification were carried out as described above.

Cultural  and  morphological  characters  of  the  fungus.
To  study  cultural  and  morphological  characteristics,  the
fungus  was  grown  on  PDA.  Cultural  characteristics  such
as  color  and  colony  surface  texture  were  determined  by
visual  observation.  Other  characteristics  of  the  fungus
like  mycelia,  conidiophores,  and  conidia  were  studied
microscopically  (Axiovert  25  Inverted  microscope;  Carl
Ziess,  Jena, Germany; Nikon Eclipse E200; Nikon, Tokyo,
Japan).

Nutritional  studies  and  factors  affecting  growth  and
sporulation  of  the  fungus. Fungus  was  grown  on  the
following  natural  and  semisynthetic  media:  PDA,  oat
meal  agar  (OMA),  corn  meal  agar  (CMA),  and  V-8  juice
agar prepared as described by the manufacturer (Himedia,
Mumbai,  India).  To  study  growth  of  the  fungus  on  solid
media, a mycelial disc (8 mm) cut from a sporulating 20-
day-old  culture  grown  on  PDA  was  inoculated  in  the
centre of the Petri dish (10 cm diameter) and incubated at
25~27oC in a B.O.D incubator. Observations of the growth
pattern  and  sporulation  were  recorded  when  the  culture
was 5 days old. Sporulation of the fungus on solid media
(PDA, CMA, OMA, and V-8 juice) was determined based
on  the  number  of  spores  present  per  field  under  uniform
magnification  and  categorized  in  the  following  grades:
no  sporulation,  good,  and  excellent.  Data  set  comprising
the  morphological  characteristics  based  on  the  previously
published description is  in  Table  1. Information regarding
shape, 
conidiophores,  morphological
characteristics  of  the  colony,  and  average  diameter  of  the
colony is also listed in Table 1.

temperature, 

Genomic  DNA  isolation. Genomic  DNA  of  the  fungal
culture  was  extracted  by  the  salting  out  method  [17].  For
this,  5 g  of  fungal  mycelia  was  ground  into  fine  powder
using  liquid  nitrogen  and  suspended  in  5 mL  of  SET
buffer  (75 mM  NaCl,  25 mM  EDTA  [pH  8.0],  20 mM
Tris [pH 7.5]). About 100 µL of lysozyme (final concentration
[conc.]  1 mg/mL)  was  added  to  the  above  suspension,
which  was  incubated  at  37oC  for  1 hr,  followed  by
addition  of  140 µL  of  proteinase  K  (final  conc.  0.5 mg/
mL)  and  600 µL  of  10%  SDS  and  incubation  again  for
2 hr  at  55oC  with  occasional  mixing.  Sample  was
precipitated  by  the  addition  of  2 mL  of  5 M  NaCl  (final
conc. 1.25 M), and the mixture was cooled to 37oC. Then,
5 mL  of  chloroform  was  added  and  mixed  for  about

Taxol  Producing  Endophytic  Fungi  Gliocladium  sp.

153

Table 1. Differences in morphological characteristics of fungus AAT-TS-41 growing on different media
Characters
Average diameter (mm) 
of  the  colonies  after 
5  days

V-8  juice
18 

OMA
40 

PDA
25 

Morphological  characters 

Circular,  smooth,

Circular,  smooth,

of  the  colony

Colony  color

flocculose  and  dense
White  in  front  and  pale

flocculose  and  dense
White  in  front  and  dark

Sparse,  woolly  with
definite  periphery
White  in  front  and

Conidiophore

cream  on  reverse
Erect,  branched  to

cream  on  reverse

reverse

No  conidiophores  seen

Erect,  branched  to

unbranched
verticillium  like,  with
2~5  phalides

Conidia
Conidia  shape

+++
Cylindrical,  oval,  and

+
Non

Optimum  temperature

25~27

25~27

for  growth  (oC)

curved

unbranched
verticillium  like,  with
2~5  phalides

+++
Curved,  oval,  and

cylindrical 

25~27

+++,  excellent;  ++,  good;  +,  no  sporulation.  Excellent,  more  than  100  spores;  Good,  more  than  50  spores.
PDA,  potato  dextrose  agar;  OMA,  oat  meal  agar;  CMA,  corn  meal  agar.

CMA
30 

Circular,  not  so

compact,  cottony

White  in  front  and  pale

cream  on  reverse
Erect,  branched  to

unbranched
verticillium  like,  with
2~5  phalides

++
Cylindrical,  oval,  and

curved

25~27

30 min  at  room  temperature,  followed  by  centrifugation
for 20 min at 4,500 ×g. The supernatant was then transferred
into a fresh tube, and 0.6 vol of isopropanol was added to
precipitate  the  DNA.  The  precipitated  DNA  was  pelleted
and  washed  twice  with  70%  ethanol,  air  dried,  and
dissolved  in  1~2 mL  of  TE  buffer  (10 mM  Tris,  1 mM
EDTA,  pH  8.0)  at  55oC.  The  quality  of  the  DNA  was
checked  on  0.8%  agarose  gel  stained  with  ethidium
bromide.

PCR amplification of internal transcribed spacer (ITS)
regions  and  18S  rRNA. Universal  primers  were  used
for  amplification  of  the  ITS  and  18S  rRNA  regions  from
the  fungal  strain  using  a  Robocycler  Gradient  96
(Stratagene,  Cedar  Greek,  TX,  USA).  PCR  reaction  was
set  up  in  15 µL  volume  consisting  of  40 ng  of  fungal
DNA  (0.4 µL),  1.5 µL  of  10×  buffer  (10 mM  Tris-HCl
[pH  9.0],  50 mM  KCl,  1.5 mM  MgCl2, 0.1%  [w/v]  gelatin,
0.8% Triton X-100), 4 µL of (0.2 mM) dNTPs (Sigma, St.
Louis,  MO,  USA),  1 µL  of  (1 µM)  each  primer  set  (for
ITS  [forward]  ITS1-5'TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG3'/
[reverse]  ITS2-5'GCTGCGTTCTTCATCGATGC3',  [forward]
ITS3-5'GCATCGATGAAGAACGCAGC3'/[reverse]
ITS4-5'TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC3' 
for
rRNA  [forward]  NS1-5'GTAGTCATATGCTTGTCTC3'/
[reverse] NS4-5'CTTCCGTCAATTCCTTTAAG3' [19]), and
0.5 U/µL of Taq polymerase (Bangalore Gene, Bangalore,
India).  PCR  was  carried  out  under  the  following  conditions:
for  ITS  regions,  initial  denaturation  at  95oC  for  3 min,  36
cycles:  95oC  for  30 sec,  52oC  for  30 sec,  72oC  for  30 sec;
final  extension  was  at  72oC  for  3 min;  for  18S  rRNA:
initial  denaturation  at  95oC  for  3 min,  36  cycles:  95oC  for
30 sec, 52oC for 30 sec, 72oC for 1.30 min; final extension

[18]  and 

was at 72oC for 10 min. The resulting PCR products were
analyzed on 1% agarose gel containing ethidium bromide.
PCR  fragments  were  eluted  from  gel  with  the  help  of  a
gel elution kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions
(Bangalore Gene). The purified PCR products were cloned
into  pGEMT  vector  (Promega,  Madison,  WI,  USA)  and
transformed  into  DH5α  competent  cells  [20].  Plasmid
containing  the  insert  was  isolated  using  the  alkali  lysis
method [20]. The amplified DNA fragments were visualized
on 1.2% agarose gel containing ethidium bromide.

DNA  sequencing  and  sequence  analysis. The  cloned
fragments were sequenced using Sanger’s dideoxy method
[21] using a sequencing kit (ABI Prism Big Dye Terminator
Cycle  seq,  ABS;  Applied  Biosystems,  Foster  City,  CA,
USA).  The  most  identical  sequences  of  the  strain  AAT-
TS-41 were identified from the NCBI database of Genbank
using the BLAST algorithm [22]. The nucleotide sequences
showing  high  sequence  similarity  were  manually  picked
for  further  analysis.  Multiple  sequence  alignment  was
performed  with  nucleotide  sequences  of  other  closely
related  species  obtained from the  NCBI-GenBank  database
using  the  ClustalW  algorithm  [23].  Phylogenetic  analysis
was  carried  out  using  PHYLIP  ver.  3.62  suite  programs
[24]. Since the sequences showing maximum similarity in
BLAST  search  were  selected,  DNAPARS  program  was
used  for  further  analysis.  The  bootstrap  values  for  the
parsimony tree were obtained  by analysis of 100 replicates
with  input  order  jumbled  10  times  using  the  SeqBoot
program. A consensus tree was constructed from the output
generated  using  the  CONSENSUS  program.  DNAML,  a
program  based  on  maximum-likelihood  method,  was  also
used  for  comparison.  Both  methods  were  used  to  analyze

154

Sreekanth  et  al.

all  three  sequences  (two  ITS  region  sequences  and  one
18S  rRNA  sequence)  of  the  fungus  AAT-TS-41.  The  data
generated was converted into trees using DRAWGRAM.

Results

Endophytic fungi from T. baccata. Out of 40  endophytic
fungal  cultures  screened  for  taxol  production,  one  culture
assigned  as  AAT-TS-41  (an  endophyte  isolated  from  the
stem)  was  confirmed  to  produce  taxol.  None  of  the  other
fungal  cultures  produced  considerable  concentrations  of
taxol.

Cultural  and  morphological  characters  of  the  fungus.
The  fungus  AAT-TS-41  isolated  and  grown  on  PDA
medium produced slow-growing colonies (Fig. 1A). Colonies
on PDA were white, flocculose, circular, compact, reverse
cream,  margin  smooth,  hyphae  branched  septate,  smooth,
and  hyaline  [25].  Non-stromatic  conidiophores  produced
from superficial hyphae were erect, branched to unbranched,
septate,  and  hyaline.  Phialides  solitary  or  produced  in  a
group of 2~5 were straight, smooth, verticillate, and hyaline.
Conidia  produced  singly  or  in  a  small  moist  clusters
apically  were  smooth,  oval  to  cylindrical  to  curved,
hyaline, single-celled, and variable in shape and size [26].

Based  on  cultural  and  morphological  characteristics,  the
strain was identified as Gliocladium sp.

Effects  of  various  nutrient  media  on  growth  and
sporulation. The  fungus  showed  variation  in  growth
rate  when  grown  on  various  nutrient  media.  The  results
are  presented  in  Table  1. Among  the  four  different  media
tested,  it  was  found  that  OMA  media  was  the  best  for
growth  of  the  fungus,  followed  by  CMA,  PDA,  and  V-8
juice  media.  Excellent  sporulation  was  recorded  on  PDA
and OMA media. Further, good sporulation was observed
in CMA medium and no sporulation was recorded in V-8
juice medium.

PCR  amplification  and  sequence  analysis. The  method
employed  for  genomic  DNA  isolation  resulted  in  high
quality DNA. The two different ITS regions (0.2 and 0.3 kb)
and  18S  rRNA  regions  (1.1 kb)  were  amplified  using
universal primers. BLAST analysis showed the majority of
the hits from a group of fungi belonging to Ascomycetes,
which  included  Gliocladium  sp.,  Bionectria  sp.,  Nectria
sp.,  and  Clonostachys  sp.  All  three  nucleotide  sequences
(ITS  1  &  2,  ITS  3  &  4,  and  NS1  &  NS4)  showed
similarity in the range of 95~98%. The nucleotide sequence
analysis determined that the 0.2 kb fragment was a partial

Fig. 1. Microscopic  observations  of  morphology  of  fungus  AAT-TS-41.  A,  Mycelium;  B,  Conidiophores  bearing  conidia;  C,
Arrangement of conidia on phialide tip; and D, Conidia. The inset in A showing the picture of  Gliocladium sp. growing on
potato dextrose agar, oat meal agar, corn meal agar, and V-8 juice (clockwise).

Taxol  Producing  Endophytic  Fungi  Gliocladium  sp.

155

ITS  region  at  the  5'  end  and  partial  5.8S  rRNA  gene  at
the  3'  end,  the  0.3 kb  fragment  was  a  partial  5.8S  rRNA
gene at the 5' end and partial ITS region at the 3' end, and
the  1.2 kb  fragment  was  a  18S  rRNA  gene  at  the  5'  end

and  partial  28S  gene  at  the  3'  end.  All  of  the  sequences
were  aligned  with  ClustalW,  and  the  relatedness  between
the  sequences  was  determined.  All  sequences  were
submitted  in  NCBI  gene  bank  and  are  retrievable  with
accession numbers EU528675, EU581866, and EU581865.

Phylogenetic analysis. Fig. 2A and 2B shows the results
of  the  phylogenetic  analysis  of  the  ITS  1  &  2  and  ITS  3
& 4 sequences of the ITS region. The overall grouping of
the fungi was the same for both methods (DNAPARS and
DNAML); however, the precise ordering of the fungi was
different.  Sequence  comparison  with  other  closely  related
species  confirmed  that  most  of  the  sequences  from  the
database  showed  higher  than  95~98%  sequence  identity,
but  only  Gliocladium  sp.  and  Clonostachys  sp.  were
grouped  together  with  the  ITS  region  sequence  of  AAT-
TS-41.  To  be  more  specific,  Gliocladium  sp.  showed  an
outstanding  relatedness  with  AAT-TS-41  and  shared  a
common  clade.  Further,  all  Nectria  sp.  (teleomorph)
sequences  were  grouped  together  with  Gliocladium  and
AAT-TS-41 sequences (Fig. 2B). In the case of 18S rRNA
sequence,  AAT-TS-41  was  always  grouped  with  Nectria
sp.  in  both  methods  of  analysis  (Fig.  2C),  which  was  a
teleomorph of Gliocladium sp. Even though fungi belonging
to  genera  Myrothecium,  Geosmithia,  and  Stephanonectria
showed higher than 95% sequence similarity, none of them
showed relatedness with AAT-TS-41 in phylogenetic analysis.

Production of taxol. Taxol concentrations increased with
an  increase  in  culture  incubation  time.  Low  concentration
of  taxol  was  detected  in  the  culture  after  as  early  as  2
days  of  incubation.  Approximately  118,  338,  434,  486,
and  1,076 ng/200 mL  of  taxol  were  estimated  by  ELISA
in  culture  after  2,  5,  10,  15,  and  21  days  of  incubation,

Fig. 2. Phylogenetic  relationships  of  selected  members  with
fungi AAT-TS-41. The trees were generated by parsimony
algorithm  (DNAPARS).  A,  B,  The  rooted  tree  showing
relatedness  of  the  AAT-TS-41  ITS  region  sequences
with  the  genera  Gliocladium  and  Clonostachys;  C,
Phylogenetic  tree  showing  relatedness  of  18S  rRNA
gene with genera Nectria and Bionectria.

Fig. 3. Production  of  taxol  by  the  fungal  strain  Gliocladium
sp.  at  different  time  intervals.  Data  represents  mean
values from five separate experiments ± SD.

156

Sreekanth  et  al.

respectively (Fig. 3). Taxol in mycelium and culture broth
was estimated to be 481 and 1,670 ng/200 mL, respectively.
Exact  concentrations  of  the  taxol  in  the  extracts  were  not
determined  as  the  solubility  of  the  chloroform  extracts
was very poor in methanol.

Discussion

In the present study, slow growing and unusual endophytic
fungal  cultures  were  isolated  from  different  tissues  (stem,
bark, and needles) of T. baccata. The endophyte population
explored from the Taxus sp. represents different genera of
fungi.  Forty  endophytic  fungal  strains  were  screened  for
taxol  production  using  immunoassay.  Among  the  fungal
cultures,  one  strain designated  as AAT-TS-41  was detected
as taxol-producing. Taxol production increased exponentially
with an increase in growth of the fungal culture (21 days),
indicating that taxol was produced in maximum quantities
at  later  log  phase  or  early  stationary  phase  of  fungal
growth.  However,  as  taxol  was  observed  in  culture  after
as early as 2 days of incubation, these concentrations were
much  higher  in  comparison  with  other  fungal  strains
reported to produce ng quantities of taxol after 21 days of
culture [15]. Taxol production was estimated to be high in
culture  broth  as  compared  to  fungal  mycelium,  indicating
that  the  metabolites  were  secreted  into  the  medium.  The
culture  on  solid  media  took  more  than  1  wk  to  reach
optimum  growth,  which  suggests  its  identity  as  an
endophyte  [27].  Microscopic  analyses  showed  that  the
mycelia were hyaline and septate, bearing verticillium-like
conidiophores,  a  characteristic  feature  of  Gliocladium  sp.
However,  we  did  not  observe  any  secondary  penicilliate
conidiophores.  Phialides  were  solitary  or  produced  in  a
group of 2~5, straight, smooth, and verticillium-like. Conidia
were produced singly or clustered apically and were smooth,
oval  to  cylindrical  to  curved,  hyaline,  single-celled,  and
variable  in  shape  and  size,  typical  of  Gliocladium  sp.  All
of  the  mentioned  characteristics  were  identical  to  those
described  for  the  fungus  Gliocladium  sp.  [25, 28];  hence,
fungus AAT-TS-41 could be referred to as Gliocladium sp.
As  some  of  the  morphological  characteristics  such  as
conidiophore  structure  and  shape  of  conidia  resembled  or
were  very  similar  to  another  fungus  belonging  to  genus
Verticillium sp., we found it difficult to identify the fungus
based  on  morphological  characteristics  alone.  Thus,  we
analyzed  the  ITS  and  18S  rRNA  regions  to  confirm  the
identity of the fungus.

In sequence analyses using BLAST and ClustalW, both
ITS sequences (0.2 kb and 0.3 kb sequences) and 18S rRNA
sequence  (1.1 kb)  show  highest  similarity  with  genera  -
Gliocladium,  Bionectria,  and  Clonostachys.  Phylogenetic
studies  indicated  that  the  nearest  relative  of  the  fungus
AAT-TS-41  was  either  from  genus  Gliocladium  or
Clonostachys.  Considering  morphological  characteristics,

we identified the fungus as Gliocladium sp., as the fungus
did not show any asci formation, which is very often seen
in  Bionectria,  and  also  did  not  produce  conidia  in
columns  as  reported  in  Clonostachys  [29].  18S  rRNA
phylogenetic  analysis  showed  that  the  fungus  was  closely
related  to  genus  Nectria  sp.,  a  teleomorph  (perfect  state)
of Gliocladium sp. The sequence analysis and phylogenetic
analysis  supported  the  identification.  However,  in  recent
reports,  many  species  of  genus  Gliocladium  have  been
classified  under  Clonostachys  and  Bionectria  based  on
morphological and molecular similarities [26]. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first report of the isolation of
taxol from Gliocladium sp.

Stierle et al. [15] and others have isolated taxanes from
different  endophytic  fungal  species  (Taxomyces  andreanae,
Pestalotiopsis, Pestalotia, Fusarium, Alternaria, and others)
obtained  from  Taxus  sp.,  which  are  common  to  Europe,
Asia,  and North America. The  isolation  of taxol from  the
culture of Gliocladium sp. is the first demonstration of its
occurrence  in  fungi  isolated  from  Indian  Yew  tree  T.
baccata.  The  other  interesting  aspect  of  our  study  is  the
occurrence  of  Gliocladium  sp.  as  an  endophyte,  since
some Gliocladium sp. have been isolated as mycoparasites
producing  novel  secondary  metabolites.  The  discovery  of
such  a  mycoparasitic  fungus  being  associated  as  an
endophyte  might  help  us  understand 
the  mode  of
transformation  of  genetic  material  between  the  endophyte
and  the  host,  as  many  of  these  endophytes  mimic  the
chemical  diversity  of  the  host.  In  conclusion,  we  isolated
an  endophytic  fungus  Gliocladium  sp.  producing  taxol
extra/intracellularly.

Acknowledgements

D. Sreekanth, G. K. Sushim, and A. Syed thank the Council
of  Scientific  and  Industrial  Research  (CSIR),  Government
of  India  for  a  Research  Fellowship.  Financial  support
from  the  Department  of  Biotechnology  (DBT),  New
Delhi, India is gratefully acknowledged.

References

1. Wani  MC,  Taylor  HL,  Wall  ME,  Coggon  P,  McPhail  AT.
Plant  antitumor  agents.  VI.  The  isolation  and  structure  of
taxol,  a  novel  antileukemic  and  antitumor  agent  from  Taxus
brevifolia. J Am Chem Soc 1971;93:2325-7.

2. Croom  EM  Jr.  Taxus  for  taxol  and  taxoids.  In:  Suffness  M,
editor.  Taxol:  science  and  applications.  Boca  Raton:  CRC
Press; 1995. p. 37-70.

3. Witherup  KM,  Look  SA,  Stasko  MW,  Ghiorzi  TJ,  Muschik
GM, Cragg GM. Taxus spp. needles contain amounts of taxol
comparable  to  the  bark  of  Taxus  brevifolia:  analysis  and
isolation. J Nat Prod 1990;53:1249-55.

4. Roberts  SC,  Shuler  ML.  Large-scale  plant  cell  culture.  Curr

Opin Biotechnol 1997;8:154-9.

Taxol  Producing  Endophytic  Fungi  Gliocladium  sp.

157

5. Gebetta  B,  Orsini  P,  Peterlongo  F,  Appendino  G.  Paclitaxel
analogues  from  Taxus  baccata.  Phytochemisrty  1998;47:
1325-9.

6. Page  M,  Landry  N,  Boissinot  M,  Halie  MC,  Harvey  H,
taxanes  and

Gagne  M.  Bacterial  mass  production  of 
paclitaxel. US Patent No. WO 99/ 32651; 1999.

7. Caruso  M,  Colombo  AL,  Crespi-Perellino  N,  Fedeli  L,
Malyszko  J,  Pavesi  A,  Quaroni  S,  Saracchi  M,  Ventrella  G.
Studies on a strain Kitasatospora sp. paclitaxel producer. Ann
Microbiol 2000;50:89-102.

8. Sreekanth  D,  Syed  A,  Sarkar  S,  Sarkar  D,  Santhakumari  B,
Ahmad A, Khan I. Production, purification and characterization
of  taxol  and  10DAB  III  from  a  new  endophytic  fungus
Gliocladium  sp.  isolated  from  the  Indian  yew  tree,  Taxus
baccata. J Microbiol Biotechnol 2009;19:1342-7.

9. Joshi  BK,  Gloer  JB,  Wicklow  DT.  New  verticillin  and
glisoprenin  analogues  from  Gliocladium  catenulatum,  a
mycoparasite  of  Aspergillus  flavus  sclerotia.  J  Nat  Prod
1999;62:730-3.

10. Dong  JY,  He  HP,  Shen  YM,  Zhang  KQ.  Nematicidal
epipolysulfanyldioxopiperazines  from  Gliocladium  roseum.  J
Nat Prod 2005;68:1510-3.

11. Bills  GF.  Isolation  and  analysis  of  endophytic  fungal
communities  from  woody  plants.  In:  Redlin  SC,  Carris  LM,
editors.  Endophytic  fungi  in  grasses  and  woody  plants:
systematics,  ecology,  and  evolution.  St.  Paul:  American
Phytopathological Society Press; 1996. p. 31-65.

12. Janardhanan  KK,  Ahmad  A,  Gupta  M,  Husain  A.  Grassy-
shoot,  a  new  disease  of  lemongrass  caused  by  Balansia
sclerotica (Pat.) Hohnel. J Phytopathol 1991;133:163-8.

13. Ahmad  A.  Investigations  on  the  grassy-shoot  disease  of
lemongrass  (Cymbopogon  flexuosus)  and  characterization  of
toxic  metabolites  produced  by  the  causal  agent  Balansia
sclerotic  [dissertation].  Lucknow:  University  of  Lucknow;
1991.

14. Strobel  GA,  Hess  WM,  Ford  E,  Sidhu  RS,  Yang  X.  Taxol
from  fungal  endophytes  and  the  issue  of  biodiversity.  J  Ind
Microbiol 1996;17:417-23.

15. Stierle  A,  Strobel  G,  Stierle  D.  Taxol  and  taxane  production
by  Taxomyces  andreanae,  and  endophytic  fungus  of  pacific
yew. Science 1993;260:214-6.

16. Grothaus  PG,  Bignami  GS,  O’Malley  S,  Harada  KE,  Byrnes
JB,  Waller  DF,  Raybould  TJ,  McGuire  MT,  Alvarado  B.
Taxane-specific  monoclonal  antibodies:  measurement  of
taxol,  baccatin  III,  and  “total  taxanes”  in  Taxus  brevifolia
extracts  by  enzyme  immunoassay.  J  Nat  Prod  1995;58:1003-

14.

17. Neumann  B,  Pospiech  A,  Schairer  HU.  Rapid  isolation  of
genomic  DNA  from  gram-negative  bacteria.  Trends  Genet
1992;8:332-3.

18. White TJ, Bruns T, Lee S, Taylor J. Amplification and direct
sequencing  of  fungal  ribosomal  RNA  genes  for  phylogenetics.
In:  Innis  MA,  Gelfand  DH,  Sninsky  JJ,  White  TJ,  editors.
PCR  protocols:  a  guide  to  methods  and  applications.  Orlando:
Academic Press; 1990.

19. Gardes  M,  Bruns  TD.  ITS  primers  with  enhanced  specificity
identification  of

for  basidiomycetes:  application 
mycorrhizae and rusts. Mol Ecol 1993;2:113-8.

the 

to 

20. Sambrook  J,  Fritsch  EF,  Maniatis  T.  Molecular  cloning:  a
laboratory manual. 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor: Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press; 1989.

21. Sanger  F,  Nicklen  S,  Coulson  AR.  DNA  sequencing  with
chain-terminating  inhibitors.  1977.  Biotechnology  1992;24:
104-8.

22. Altschul  SF,  Madden  TL,  Schäffer  AA,  Zhang  J,  Zhang  Z,
Miller  W,  Lipman  DJ.  Gapped  BLAST  and  PSI-BLAST:  a
new generation of  protein  database  search programs. Nucleic
Acids Res 1997;25:3389-402.

23. Thompson  JD,  Higgins  DG,  Gibson  TJ.  CLUSTAL  W:
improving  the  sensitivity  of  progressive  multiple  sequence
alignment  through  sequence  weighting,  position-specific  gap
penalties and weight matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res 1994;
22:4673-80.

24. Felsenstein  J. Confidence  limits  on phylogenies: an approach

using the bootstrap. Evolution 1985;39:783-91.

25. Stinson  M,  Ezra  D,  Hess  WM,  Sears  J,  Strobel  G.  An
endophytic  Gliocladium  sp.  of  Eucryphia  cordifolia  producing
selective  volatile  antimicrobial  compounds.  Plant  Sci  2003;
165:913-22.

26. Schroers  HJ,  Samuels  GJ,  Seifert  KA,  Gams  W.  Classification
of  the  mycoparasite  Gliocladium  roseum  in  Clonostachys  as
C.  rosea,  its  relationship  to  Bionectria  ochroleuca,  and  notes
on other Gliocladium-like fungi. Mycologia 1999;91:365-85.
27. Petrini  O.  Ecological  and  physiological  aspects  of  host-
specificity  in  endophytic  fungi.  In:  Redline  SC,  Carris  LM,
editors.  Endophytic  fungi  in  grasses  and  woody  plants:
systematics,  ecology  and  evolution.  St.  Paul:  APS  Press;
1996. p. 87-100.

28. Barnett HL, Lilly VG. A destructive mycoparasite, Gliocladium

roseum. Mycologia 1962;54:72-7.

29. Barron GL. The genera of Hyphomycetes from soil. Baltimore:

The Williams and Wilkins Co.; 1968. p. 177-8.

