Mycobiology  39(3) : 230-232  (2011)
  The  Korean  Society  of  Mycology

http://dx.doi.org/10.5941/MYCO.2011.39.3.230
pISSN  1229-8093
eISSN  2092-9323

Occurrence  of  Sclerotium  Rot  in  Allium  tuberosum  Caused  by  Sclerotium  rolfsii
in  Korea

*,  Dong-Wan  Kang1,  Won-Doo  Song1  and  Okhee  Choi2
Jin-Hyeuk  Kwon1
1Gyeongsangnam-do  Agricultural  Research  and  Extension  Services,  Jinju  660-360,  Korea
2Department  of  Applied  Biology,  Gyeongsang  National  University,  Jinju  660-701,  Korea

(Received  July  13,  2011.  Accepted  August  6,  2011)

In  this  study,  we  characterized  sporadically  occurring  sclerotium  rot  caused  by  Sclerotium  rolfsii  in  Chinese  chive  (Allium
tuberosum  Roth.)  in  farm  fields  in  Sacheon,  Korea.  The  initial  symptom  of  the  disease  was  water-soaked,  which  progressed
to  rotting,  wilting,  blighting,  and  eventually  death.  Further,  mycelial  mats  spread  over  the  lesions  near  the  soil  line,  and
sclerotia  formed  on  the  scaly  stem  and  leaves.  The  sclerotia  were  globoid,  1~3 mm,  and  white  to  brown.  The  optimum
temperature  for  growth  and  sclerotia  formation  on  potato  dextrose  agar  (PDA)  was  30oC.  The  diameter  of  the  hypae  ranged
from  4  to  8 µm.  Clamp  connection  was  observed  on  PDA  medium  after  5  days  of  incubation.  Based  on  the  mycological
characteristics,  internal  transcribed  spacer  sequence  analysis,  and  pathogenicity  test,  the  causal  agent  was  identified  as
Sclerotium  rolfsii  Saccardo.  This  is  the  first  report  of  sclerotium  rot  in  Chinese  chive  caused  by  S.  rolfsii  in  Korea.

KEYWORDS : Chinese  chive,  Sclerotium  rolfsii,  Sclerotium  rot

This  study  investigated  a  sporadically  occurring  scaly
stem  and  leaf  rot  disease  caused  by  Sclerotium  rolfsii  in
Chinese  chive  (Allium  tuberosum  Roth.)  in  farm  fields  in
Onjeong-ri, Yonghyeon-myeon, Sacheon, Korea in 2010.

In August, the scaly stems and leaves under the canopy
of  Chinese  chive  after  planting  are  exposed  to  warm
temperatures  and  high  humidity  conditions,  which  favor
disease  development  of  mulching  cultivation  in  vinyl
houses  (Fig.  1A).  We  observed  that  the  sporadically
occurring  disease  developed  mainly  on  scaly  stems  near
the  soil  line.  Infected  plants  gradually  withered,  a  white
mycelial  mat  appeared,  and  numerous  sclerotia  were
produced  on  scaly  stems  surfaces  near  the  soil  line  (Fig.
1B).  The  heavily  infected  scaly  stems  and  leaves  became
rotted, blighted, and the whole plant eventually died.

Fifty  samples  of  scaly  stems  and  leaves  of  Chinese
chive  caused  by  Sclerotium  rolfsii  were  cut,  and  after
isolation,  the  pathogenic  fungus  was  grown  on  potato
dextrose  agar  (PDA).  Detailed  microscopic  examination
of  a  representative  specimen  was  performed  by  scanning
electron  microscopy 
(LEO  1420VP;  LEO  Electron
Microscopy  Ltd.,  Cambridge,  UK)  and  light  microscopy
(Axioplan  2;  Carl  Zeiss,  Jena,  Germany).  The  optimal
growth  temperature  on  PDA  was  30oC.  Aerial  mycelia
usually formed many narrow hyphal strands 4~8 µm wide.
The  white  mycelium  formed  a  typical  clamp  connection

*Corresponding  author <E-mail : kwon825@korea.kr>

structure  after  5  days  of  growth  at  optimum  temperature
(Fig.  1C).  The  sclerotia  were  white  at  first,  after  which
they  gradually  turned  dark  brown  in  color,  and  were
1~3 mm  in  diameter.  The  maximum  number  of  sclerotia
was produced at 25~30oC. Small globoid sclerotia formed
abundantly  on  PDA  after  18  days  of  mycelial  growth
(Table 1, Fig. 1C) [1].

To 

test  pathogenicity, 

inoculum  was  prepared  as
previously  described  [2].  Briefly,  the  mycelial  mat  of  the
test  fungus  grown  on  PDA  for  7  days  was  harvested  and
mixed  thoroughly  with  sterilized  soil.  The  soil  mixture
was  used  as  an  inoculum;  200 g  of  soil  inoculum  was
placed on top of Wagner’s pots, after which Chinese chive
seedlings  were  transplanted.  The  inoculated  pots  were
kept separately in a green house and observed for disease
symptoms. After 12 days of inoculation, the same disease
symptoms  were  observed,  and  the  fungus  was  re-isolated
from the plants inoculated artificially (Fig. 1D).

To confirm the identity of the fungus, we amplified and
sequenced  an  internal  transcribed  spacer  (ITS)  rDNA
region  of the isolate using  the  primers  ITS1 and ITS4, as
described by White et al. [3]. The resulting 685 bp sequence
was  deposited  in  GenBank  (accession  No.  JF966208).
Comparison with other sequences available in the GenBank
database  revealed  that  the  ITS  sequence  shared  100%
similarity with sequences of S. rolfsii (GenBank accession

This  is  an  Open  Access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution  Non-Commercial  License  (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/)  which  permits  unrestricted  non-commercial  use,  distribution,  and  reproduction  in  any  medium,
provided  the  original  work  is  properly  cited.

230

 
Sclerotium  Rot  in  Chinese  Chive

231

Fig. 1. Symptoms  of  sclerotium  rot  in  Chinese  chive  (Allium  tuberosum  Roth.)  and  mycological  characteristics  of  the  pathogenic
fungus  Sclerotium  rolfsii.  A,  Farmers  vinyl-house  culture  of  Chinese  chive;  B,  Typical  field  symptoms  on  scaly  stems  near
the  soil  line;  C,  Scanning  electron  micrographic  image  of  clamp  connection  (arrow).  Mycelial  mat  and  sclerotia  grown  on
potato dextrose agar after 18 days of incubation (inlet); D, Symptoms after artificial inoculation.

Table 1. Comparison of mycological characteristics of the present
isolate  obtained  from  Chinese  chive  (Allium  tuberosum
Roth.) and Sclerotium rolfsii as previously described

Colony
Hyphae

Sclerotium Shape

Characteristics

Present  isolate
White
4~8

Color
Diameter  (µm)
Clamp  connection Present
Globoid
1~3
White  to  brown Brown

Diameter  (mm)
Color

S.  rolfsii [1]
White
4.5~9
Present
Spherical
1~2

No.  GU567776).  Phylogenetic  analysis  was  performed
using MEGA4 software using the neighbor-joining  method
and  the  Tajima-Nei  distance  model.  Previously  published
ITS  sequences  of  S.  rolfsii  strains  were  included  for
reference,  and  Botryotinia  fuckeliana  was  used  as  the
outgroup. In the phylogenetic tree (Fig. 2), the representative
isolate  was  placed  within  a  clade  comprising  reference
isolates of S. rolfsii.

Based  on  the  symptoms,  mycological  characteristics,
ITS sequence analysis, and pathogenicity to the host plant,

Fig. 2. Phylogenetic  tree  using  internal  transcribed  spacer  sequences  showing  closest  known  relatives  of  Sclerotium  rolfsii,
including  sclerotium  rot  fungus  infecting  Allium  tuberosum.  DNA  sequences  from  the  NCBI  nucleotide  database  were
aligned  using  ClustalW,  and  a  phylogenetic  tree  was  constructed  using  the  neighbor-joining  method  and  visualized  with
TreeView.  Numbers  above  the  branches  indicate  the  bootstrap  values.  Bars  indicate  number  of  nucleotide  substitutions  per
site. The present isolate infecting A. tuberosum is marked in bold.

232

Kwon  et  al.

this  fungus  was  identified  as  S.  rolfsii  Saccardo  [1].
Sclerotium  rot  in  Chinese  chive  caused  by  S.  rolfsii  has
not  been  previously  reported  in  Korea  [4].  Cultures  of  S.
rolfsii  were  deposited  in  the  Korean  Agricultural  Culture
Collection (KACC 45155), National Academy of Agricultural
Science,  Rural  Development  Administration,  Suwon.  To
our  knowledge,  this  is  the first report of sclerotium rot  in
Chinese chive caused by Sclerotium rolfsii in Korea.

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  carried  out  with  the  support  of  the
“Cooperative  Research  Program  for  Agriculture  Science
& Technology Development (Project No. PJ007345)” Rural
Development Administration, Korea.

References

1. Mordue JE.  Corticium rofsii. CMI descriptions of  pathogenic
fungi and bacteria. No. 410. Surrey: Commonwealth Mycological
Institute; 1974.

2. Kwon  JH.  Stem  rot  of  garlic  (Allium  sativum)  caused  by

Sclerotium rolfsii. Mycobiology 2010;38:156-8.

3. White  TJ,  Bruns  T,  Lee  S,  Taylor  JW.  Amplification  and
direct  sequencing  of  fungal  ribosomal  RNA  genes  for
phylogenetics. In: Innis MA, Gelfand DH, Sninsky JJ, White
TJ,  editors.  PCR  protocols:  a  guide 
to  methods  and
applications.  New  York:  Academic  Press,  Inc.;  1990.  p.  315-
22.

4. Korean  Society  of  Plant  Pathology.  List  of  plant  diseases  in
Korea.  5th  ed.  Seoul:  Korean  Society  of  Plant  Pathology;
2009.

