Mycobiology  39(2) : 121-124  (2011)
  The  Korean  Society  of  Mycology

DOI:10.4489/MYCO.2011.39.2.121
pISSN  1229-8093
eISSN  2092-9323

Heterologous  Expression  of  Endo-1,4-beta-xylanaseA  from  Phanerochaete  chry-
sosporium  in  Pichia  pastoris

Nguyen  Duc  Huy,  Saravanakumar  Thiyagarajan,  Yu-Lim  Son  and  Seung-Moon  Park*

Division  of  Biotechnology,  College  of  Environmental  and  Bioresource  Sciences,  Chonbuk  National  University,  Iksan  570-752,  Korea

(Received  May  2,  2011.  Accepted  May  13,  2011)

The  cDNA  of  endo-1,4-β-xylanaseA,  isolated  from  Phaenerocheate  chrysosporium  was  expressed  in  Pichia  pastoris.  Using
either  the  intrinsic  leader  peptide  of  XynA  or  the  α-factor  signal  peptide  of  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae,  xylanaseA  is  efficiently
secreted  into  the  medium  at  maximum  concentrations  of  1,946 U/L  and  2,496 U/L,  respectively.

KEYWORDS : Hemicellulose,  Phanerochaete  chsysosporium,  Pichia  pastoris,  Xylan,  Xylanase

Hemicellulose  is  a  heterogeneous  group  of  branched  and
linear  polysaccharides  that  are  bound,  via  hydrogen  bonds,
to the cellulose microfibrils in the plant cell wall, crosslink-
ing  them  into  a  robust  network.  Hemicelluloses  are  also
covalently  attached  to  lignin,  forming  a  highly  complex
structure together with cellulose. Based on the current stage
of  knowledge,  hemicelluloses  can  be  divided  into  four
general  classes  of  structurally  different  cell-wall  polysac-
charide  types:  xylans,  mannans,  mixed  linkage  β-glucans,
and  xyloglucans  [1].  The  major  component  of  hemicellu-
lose,  xylan,  is  composed  of  D-xylopyranosyl  units  linked
by  β-1,4-glycosidic  bonds.  Xylan  is  a  major  structural
polysaccharide in plant cells and is the second most abun-
dant  polysaccharide  in  nature,  accounting  for  approxi-
mately one-third of all renewable organic carbon on Earth
[2-4].  Degradation  of  xylan  requires  endo-xylanase  (Ec.
3.2.1.8),  which  hydrolyses  the  β-1,4  bond  in  the  xylan
backbone, yielding short xylooligomers. Most of the known
xylanases  belong  to  GH  families  10  and  11  (over  300
gene  sequences  are  known),  and  about  20  more  xylanase
genes  are  distributed  between  families  5,  8  and  43.  Xyla-
nases  are  naturally  secreted  by  various  micro-organisms,
including bacteria, yeasts, and filamentous fungi [5].

The white rot basidiomycete, Phanerochaete chrysospo-
rium,  can  degrade  all  complex  woody  materials  through
the release of extracellular enzymes such as lignin peroxi-
dases,  manganase  peroxidase,  glyoxal  oxidase,  cellobiose
dehydrogenase, and xylanase [6-8]. Although the lignin and
hemicellulose  hydrolyzing  capabilities  of  fungi  have  been
described  previously,  the  purification  and  characterization
of  individual  enzymes  can  be  complicated  by  the  presence

*Corresponding  author  <E-mail : smpark@chonbuk.ac.kr>

of several enzymes with similar activities [4]. Therefore, it
is  advantageous  to  clone  and  express  genes  coding  for
individual hydrolytic enzymes in a heterologous host.

The  heterologous  expression  system  of  Pichia  pastoris
provides  many  advantages  for  the  production  of  eukary-
otic recombinant proteins and is a powerful tool for indus-
trial-scale fermentation [9-12]. In this study, we report the
cloning  of  XynA,  which  encodes  an  endo-1,4-β-xyla-
naseA  (XynA)  from  P.  chrysosporium,  in  P.  pastoris.
Expression  of  the  XynA  gene  in  P.  pastoris  was  obtained
under  the  control  of  the  methanol  inducible  alcohol  oxi-
dase I (AOXI) promoter.

P.  chrysosporium  BKM-F-1767  was  obtained  from  the
Korean Collection for Type Culture and maintained in the
medium described by Tien and Kirk [13]. Escherichia coli
Top10  was  maintained  in  an  LB  agar  medium  containing
50 µg/mL  ampicillin,  IPTG  and  X-Gal  for  PCR  products
selection, and in a low-salt LB medium, containing 50 µg/
mL  Zeocin,  for  xylanase  gene  constructs  with  expression
vectors.  The  host  strain  used  for  heterologous  expression
was  Pichia  pastoris  GS115  (his4).  It  was  grown  in  YPD
medium (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 2% dextrose, and
1.5% agar).

The  vectors  pPICZA  and  pPICZαA  (Invitrogen,  Carls-
bad,  CA,  USA)  were  used  for  expression  in  P.  pastoris.
Expression  of  inserts  in  both  vectors  is  controlled  by  the
methanol  inducible  AOX1  promoter.  The  pPICZαA  pos-
sesses  the  α-secretion  factor  from  Saccharomyces  cerevi-
siae, while pPICZA does not contain a secretion signal.

P.  chrysosporium  was  cultured  under  nitrogen  limita-
tion  in  stationary  flasks  at  30oC  for  5  days  to  induce  the

This  is  an  Open  Access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution  Non-Commercial  License  (http://cre-
 
ativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/)  which  permits  unrestricted  non-commercial  use,  distribution,  and  reproduction  in  any  medium,  pro-
vided  the  original  work  is  properly  cited.

121

122

Huy  et  al.

expression of Xylanase genes. Total mRNA was extracted
using  the  Oligotex  mRNA  mini  kit  (Qiagen,  Hilden,  Ger-
many) and total cDNA was synthesized using the SMARTer
PCR  cDNA  synthesis  kit  (Clontech,  Palo  Alto,  CA,
USA).

For 

The  XynA  cDNA  of  P.  chrysosporium  BKM-F-1767
including  signal  peptide  was  amplified  using  PCR  with
the forward primer 5'-GCGAATTCATGAAGCTCTCTGC-
CTCCTTCGCG-3'  and  the  reverse  primer  5'-CGGGGC-
CCATTGCCGAAGCCAATAGCGATA-3'. 
PCR
amplification,  the  following  conditions  were  employed:
94oC 1 min, 94oC 30 sec, 51oC 30 sec, and 72oC 2 min (30
cycles).  The  purified  PCR  products  were  cloned  into  the
pGEM-T  vector,  excised  using  EcoRI  and  ApaI,  purified
from  agarose  gel,  and  inserted  into  pPICZA,  resulting  in
the  pPICZA/ss-XynA  construct.  For  cloning  into  pPIC-
ZαA,  PCR  amplification  of  the  XynA  cDNA  in  the
pGEM-T  vector  was  performed  using  the  forward  primer
5'-CGAATTCCAGTCGCCTGTTTGGGGCC-3'  and  the
reverse  primer  5'-CGCCGCGGAATTGCCGAAGCCA-
ATAG-3'.  The  forward  primer  does  not  contain  a  P.  chry-
sosporium XynA secretion signal with the amplified region
because  the  S.  cerevisiae  α-secretion  signal  is  present  in
the  pPICZαA.  PCR  conditions  employed  were  the  same
as  described  for  XynA  cDNA.  The  resulting  PCR  prod-
uct,  XynA,  was  cloned  into  the  pGEM-T  vector,  excised
using  EcoRI  and  SacII,  purified  from  agarose  gel,  and
inserted  into  pPICZαA,  resulting  in  the  pPICZαA/XynA
construct.  After  transformation  into  E.  coli  and  isolation
of  plasmid  DNA,  the  presence  of  the  inserts  was  deter-
mined  by  PCR  and  by  restriction  enzyme  digestion  fol-
lowed  by  agarose-gel  electrophoresis.  Sequence  analysis
was performed on pPICZA/ss-XynA and pPICZαA/XynA.
For  transformation  of  the  yeast  strain,  10 µg  of  plas-
mid  was  linearized  using  PmeI  and  transformed  into  P.
pastoris  by  electroporation  methods,  as  recommended  by
the  manufacture  (Bio-Rad,  Hercules,  CA,  USA).  Trans-
formed  cells  were  selected  on  YPD  agar  plates  contain-
ing  100 µg/mL  Zeocin,  at  30oC  until  a  colony  could  be
formed  (2~3  days).  The  recombinant  P.  pastoris  was  con-
firmed by PCR using AOX1 primers.

Ten  P.  pastoris  transformants  were  cultured  in  50 mL
YP  medium  containing  1%  methanol  to  determine  extra-
cellular  enzyme  activities  by  enzyme  assay.  To  measure
the  expression  of  XynA,  a  single  colony  was  grown  in
5 mL YPD medium overnight at 30oC and 200 rpm. After
overnight  incubation,  5 mL  cultures  were  transferred  into
100 mL  of  fresh  YPD  medium  in  a  shaking  incubator  at
30oC  and  150 rpm  for  2  days.  The  cell  pellets  were  har-
vested  by  centrifugation  at  2,000 rpm  for  5 min  and  the
cell  pellet  was  resuspended  in  10 mL  YP  medium  (1%
yeast  extract,  2%  peptone).  The  suspensions  were  slowly
added to 90 mL of fresh YP medium until the optical den-
sity  (OD)  reached  1.  Fresh  YP  medium  was  added  to

make  a  final  volume  of  100 mL.  For  the  induction  of
xylanase, 1 mL  of 100% methanol was added every 24 hr
to a final concentration of 1% for 7 days at 25oC. One mL
of  cultivation  fluid  was  collected  every  24 hr,  centrifuged
for  5 min  at  15,000 rpm,  and  measured  for  enzyme  activ-
ity.  The  clone  that  released  xylanase  at  the  highest  level
was selected and stored at −80oC.

To purify XynA, on the second day of cultivation, cell-
free supernatants were collected by centrifugation at 3,000
rpm  for  5 min  and  filtered  through  0.45 µm  filters.  One
hundred  mL  of  filtered  supernatant  was  mixed  with  10 mL
10×  binding  buffer  (20 mM  sodium  phosphate,  0.5 M
NaCl,  and  20 mM  imidazole;  pH  7.4).  The  mixture  was
applied  to  the  Ni2+  his-tag  column  (Histrap;  GE  Health-
care,  München,  Germany)  using  the  ∆KTA  FPLC  purifi-
cation system. Protein was eluted with elution buffer (20 mM
sodium  phosphate,  0.5 M  NaCl  and  500 mM  imidazole;
pH  7.4)  and  collected  in  a  15 mL  conical  tube.  All  frac-
tions  containing  purified  enzyme  were  dialyzed  in  distilled
water  to  remove  salt  and  imidazole.  Protein  concentration
was  measured  by  the  Bradford  method  using  a  Thermo
Scientific  protein  assay  kit    (Rockford,  IL,  USA)  with
serum  albumin  as  the  standard  protein.  SDS-PAGE  was
performed as described in Sambrook and Russell [14].

Xylanase  activity  was  assayed  by  measuring  the  pro-
duction  of  reducing-sugar  ends  from  birchwood  xylan
(Sigma,  St.  Louis,  MO,  USA)  with  3,5-dinitrosalicylic  acid
(DNSA),  as  described  by  Decelle  et  al.  [4],  with  minor
modifications.  Culture  supernatant  (100 µL)  or  purified
xylanase (1 µg) were mixed with double distilled water to
make  a  200 µL  volume.  The  mixture  was  incubated  with
200 µL  of  1%  (w/v)  birchwood  xylan  in  a  sodium  citrate
buffer (100 mM, pH 4.5) at 70oC for 10 min. Then, 200 µL
of  DNSA  reagent  was  added  and  the  mixture  was  boiled
for  10 min.  The  amount  of  released  reducing  sugar  was
determined  at  540 nm,  as  described  in  Sengupta  et  al.
[15]. A standard curve was built using D-xylose as a sub-
strate  and  the  absorbance  was  converted  into  moles  of
reducing  sugars  released.  One  unit  of  xylanase  activity
was  defined  as  the  release  of  1 µmol/min  of  xylose.  The
optimum  temperature  of  xylanase  activity  was  measured
by  performing  the  activity  assay,  as  described  above,  at  a
range  of  temperatures  (30  to  80oC).  Sodium  citrate  and
sodium  phosphate  buffers  were  used  to  generate  a  pH
range  (3.0  to  8.0)  to  determine  the  optimum  pH  at  the
optimal temperature.

The  full-length  cDNA  fragment  that  encodes  XynA  in
P.  pastoris  was  99%  identical  to  the  nucleotide  sequence
of  the  cDNA  encoding  for  XynA  from  P.  chrysosporium
strain  ME446  (GeneBank  accession  No.  AF301903.1).
However,  the  predicted  amino  acid  sequence  was  100%
identical.  Thus,  the  selected  cDNA  was  expressed  in  P.
pastoris.  To  study  the  expression  of  XynA  in  P.  pastoris,
two  distinct  expression  vectors  were  used.  The  construct

Expression  of  XynA  in  Pichia  pastoris

123

pPICZA/ss-XynA  is  composed  of  the  inducible  promoter
AOX1,  the  native  intrinsic  signal  peptide  of  XynA,  the
open  reading  frame  for  mature  XynA,  and  a  termination
transcription  signal.  The  second  construct  vector  pPIC-
ZαA/XynA  differs  from  the  first  in  that  it  contains  the  S.
cerevisiae  α-factor  secretion  signal  upstream  of  the
sequence  of  XynA  cDNA.  In  addition,  to  facilitate  purifi-
cation  of  the  recombinant  XynA,  both  recombinant  XynA
genes  were  fused  to  the  his-tag  site  on  the  vectors.  For
each  construct,  approximately  50~100  transformants  were
obtained  after  selection  of  recombinants  on  a  zeocin  con-
taining plate. For each construct, six colonies were checked
by  PCR  using  AOX  primers.  They  exhibited  unique  bands
of  the  correct  size  on  agarose  gel  and  produced  enzyme
activity  in  the  culture  medium  one  day  after  inoculation.
Enzyme  assays  showed  that  all  positive  colonies  secreted
extracellular XynA into the culture medium.

P. pastoris recombinants were induced to express XynA
at OD 1 for 7 days. Every day, 1 mL methanol was added
for  induction  and  an  enzyme  assay  was  performed  using
1 mL  of  the  culture  medium  (Fig.  1).  The  results  indicated
that  both  native  and  α-factor  secretion  signal  peptides
were  efficient  in  mediating  xylanase  secretion.  Enzyme
activity  secreted  using  α-factor  peptides  is  higher  than
when  using  intrinsic  native signal peptide.  Enzyme  activi-
ties reached 1,536 U/L and 1,089 U/L one day after induc-
tion,  for  α-factor  and  native  signal  peptide,  respectively.
The  maximal  enzyme  activities  occurred  two  days  after
induction  for  both  secretion  signal  peptides  (2,496 U/L
and  1,946 U/L,  respectively).  These  results  show  that  the

Fig. 1. Time  course  changes  of  XynA  expression  using  the
intrinsic  secretion  signal  (pPICZA/ss-XnA)  and  the  α-
factor  secretion  signal  (pPICZαA/XynA)  in  Pichia
pastoris.  Data  shown  are  a  representative  profile  based
on  two  separate  experiments,  each  with  three  samples
for  each  data  point.  The  closed  triangles  represent  XynA
secreted  by  the  α-factor  secretion  signal  (pPICZαA/
XynA)  and 
the  closed  diamonds  represent  XynA
secreted  by  the  intrinsic  secretion  signal  (pPICZA/ss-
XynA).

Fig. 2. SDS-PAGE  analysis  of  XynA  purified  from  Pichia
pastoris.  Lane  1,  molecular  weight  markers;  lane  2,
pPICZαA/XynA;  lane  3,  pPICZA/ss-XynA.

enzyme  activity  in  this  study  is  four  times  higher  than
previously  reported  XynA  expression  in  Aspergillus  niger
[4].

To purify the enzyme product, culture media were directly
applied  on  his-tag  column  Histrap  (GE  Healthcare)  and
eluted,  as  per  manufacturor’s  recommendations  (Fig.  2).
However,  the  molecular  mass  of  purified  XynA  on  poly-
acrylamide  gel  was  approximately  50 kDa,  which  was
larger  than  the  predicted  molecular  mass  of  43 kDa  for
pPICZA  and  pPICZαA.  The  discrepancies  between  the
predicted  and  recombinant  enzymes  seem  to  be  due  to
post-translational modifications, such as glycosylation [16-
18].  To confirm  that  the purified  proteins were  XynA,  we
performed matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass
spectrometry. The purified XynAs were subjected to SDS-
PAGE  and  digested  by  trypsin.  Peptide  mapping  of  the
fragments  performed  by  mass  spectrometry  confirmed  the
identity of the purified proteins (data not shown).

The  optimum  temperature  of  recombinant  XynA  was
determined  by  assay  within  a  temperature  range  of  30  to
80oC (Fig. 3A). The results showed that recombinant XynA
had  maximum  activity  at  70oC,  which  is  similar  to  XynA
from  P.  chrysosporium  expressed  in  A.  niger  [4].  Enzy-
matic  assays  suggested  an  optimal  activity  of  XynA  at
approximately pH 5.0 (Fig. 3B). Enzyme activity decreased
rapidly  at  a  pH  of  below  4.0  or  above  6.0.  The  optimum
pH  is  comparable  with  XynA  from  P.  chrysosporium  [4],
although the result was slightly different (5.0 compared to
4.5).  The  differences  in  protein  folding  form  may  be  an
explanation for this.

Although P. chrysosporium hydrolyzes lignin and polysac-
charide,  the  purification  and  characterization  of  individual
enzymes  can  be  complicated  because  of  the  presence  of
several  enzymes  with  similar  activities.  As  a  result,  it  is

124

Huy  et  al.

ter  for  University-Wide  Research  Facility  and  Research
Institute  of  Bioindustry  at  Chonbuk  National  University
for kindly providing the facilities for this research.

References

1. Ebringerová  A,  Hromádková  Z,  Heinze  T.  Hemicellulose.

Adv Polym Sci 2005;186:1-67.

2. Collins T, Gerday C, Feller G. Xylanases, xylanase families and
extremophilic xylanases. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2005;29:3-23.
3. Shallom  D,  Shoham  Y.  Microbial  hemicellulases.  Curr  Opin

Microbiol 2003;6:219-28.

4. Decelle  B,  Tsang  A,  Storms  RK.  Cloning  functional  expres-
sion  and  characterization  of  three  Phanerochaete  chrysospo-
rium endo-1,4-beta-xylanases. Curr Genet 2004;46:166-75.

5. He  J,  Yu  B,  Zhang  K,  Ding  X,  Chen  D.  Expression  of  endo-
1,4-beta-xylanase  from  Trichoderma  reesei  in  Pichia  pas-
toris  and  functional  characterization  of the produced  enzyme.
BMC Biotechnol 2009;9:56.

6. Gold  MH,  Alic  M.  Molecular  biology  of  the  lignin-degrad-
ing  basidiomycete  Phanerochaete  chrysosporium.  Microbiol
Rev 1993;57:605-22.

7. Covert  SF, Bolduc  J,  Cullen  D.  Genomic  organization  of  a
cellulase  gene  family  in  Phanerochaete  chrysosporium.  Curr
Genet 1992;22:407-13.

8. Martinez  D,  Larrondo  LF,  Putnam  N,  Gelpke  MD, Huang K,
Chapman  J,  Helfenbein  KG,  Ramaiya  P,  Detter  JC,  Larimer
F,  et  al.  Genome  sequence  of  the  lignocellulose  degrading
fungus  Phanerochaete  chrysosporium  strain  RP78.  Nat  Bio-
technol 2004;22:695-700.

9. Macauley-Patrick  S,  Fazenda  ML,  McNeil  B,  Harvey  LM.
Heterologous  protein  production  using  the  Pichia  pastoris
expression system. Yeast 2005;22:249-70.

10. Daly  R,  Hearn  MT.  Expression  of  heterologous  proteins  in
Pichia  pastoris:  a  useful  experimental  tool  in  protein  engi-
neering and production. J Mol Recognit 2005;18:119-38.

11. Li  P,  Anumanthan  A,  Gao  XG,  Ilangovan  K,  Suzara  VV,
Düzgüne   N,  Renugopalakrishnan  V.  Expression  of  recombi-
nant  proteins  in  Pichia  pastoris.  Appl  Biochem  Biotechnol
2007;142:105-24.

çs

12. Tolner  B,  Smith  L,  Begent  RH,  Chester  KA.  Production  of
recombinant  protein  in  Pichia  pastoris  by  fermentation.  Nat
Protoc 2006;1:1006-21.

13. Tien  M,  Kirk  TK.  Lignin  peroxidase  of  Phanerochaete  chry-

sosporium. Methods Enzymol 1988;161:238-49.

14. Sambrook  J,  Russell  DW.  Molecular  cloning:  a  laboratory
manual, Vol. 1. 3rd ed. New York: Cold Spring Harbor; 2003.
15. Sengupta S, Jana ML, Sengupta D, Naskar AK. A note on the
estimation  of  microbial  glycosidase  activities  by  dinitrosali-
cylic acid reagent. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 2000;53: 732-5.
16. Chung  HJ,  Park  SM,  Kim  HR, Yang  MS,  Kim  DH.  Cloning
the  gene  encoding  acetyl  xylan  esterase  from  Aspergillus  fic-
uum  and  its  expression  in  Pichia  pastoris.  Enzyme  Microb
Technol 2002;31:384-91.

17. Kwon  MA,  Kim  HS,  Yang  TH,  Song  BK,  Song  JK.  High-
level expression and characterization of Fusarium solani cuti-
nase in Pichia pastoris. Protein Expr Purif 2009;68:104-9.

18. Gu  L,  Lajoie  C,  Kelly  C.  Expression  of  a  Phanerochaete
chrysosporium  manganese  peroxidase  gene  in  the  yeast
Pichia pastoris. Biotechnol Prog 2003;19:1403-9.

Fig. 3. Effect  of  temperature  (A)  and  pH  (B)  on  enzyme
activity.  The  closed  squares  represent  XynA  secreted
by  the  intrinsic  secretion  signal  (pPICZA/ss-XynA)  and
the  open  circles  represent  XynA  secreted  by  the  α-
factor  secretion  signal  (pPICZαA/XynA).

often  advantageous  to  clone  and  express  genes  of  individual
hydrolytic  enzymes  in  a  heterologous  host.  The  present
study  has  reported  the  cloning  of  the  gene  that  encodes
XynA from P. chrysosporium and its expression in P. pas-
toris,  which  can  utilize  methanol  as  its  sole  carbon  and
energy  source.  Heterologous  expression  of  XynA  in  P.
pastoris  makes  four  times  more  XynA  than  was  previ-
ously  reported  in  A.  niger  [4].  It  is  possible  to  over-pro-
duce  XynA  without  any  contamination  by  other  xylolytic
enzymes. The enzyme produced in this study offers a can-
didate  for  use  in  biobleaching  or  enzymatic  pretreatment
of biomass prior to utilization.

Acknowledgements

This  research  was  supported  by  Basic  Science  Research
Program  through  the  National  Research  Foundation  of
Korea  (NRF)  funded  by  the  Ministry  of  Education,  Sci-
ence and Technology (2010-0015666). We thank the Cen-

