Mycobiology  39(2) : 79-84  (2011)
  The  Korean  Society  of  Mycology

DOI:10.4489/MYCO.2011.39.2.079
pISSN  1229-8093
eISSN  2092-9323

The  Distribution  of  Cytoplasm  and  Nuclei  within  the  Extra-radical  Mycelia  in
Glomus  intraradices,  a  Species  of  Arbuscular  Mycorrhizal  Fungi

Jaikoo  Lee1,2

*

1Gyeonggi  Science  High  School  for  The  Gifted,  Suwon  440-800,  Korea
2Korea  National  University  of  Education,  Cheongwon  363-892,  Korea

(Received  January  20,  2011.  Accepted  April  4,  2011)

Nuclear  distribution  within  the  extra-radical  fungal  structures  and  during  spore  production  in  the  arbuscular  mycorrhizae
fungus  Glomus  intraradices  was  examined  using  an  in  vitro  monoxenic  culture  system.  A  di-compartmental  monoxenic  culture
system  was  modified  using  a  nitrocellulose  membrane  and  a  coverglass  slip  for  detailed  observations.  Nuclear  distribution
was  observed  using  the  fluorescent  DNA  binding  probes  SYBR  Green  I  and  DAPI.  Both  septate  and  non-septate  mycelial
regions  were  observed,  but  cytoplasmic  contents  were  only  found  within  non-septate  mycelia.  Nuclear  fluorescent  staining
revealed  that  the  non-septate  hyphal  region  contained  nuclei  only  with  cytoplasm,  and  that  nuclear  distribution  was  limited
by  septa.  Swollen  hyphal  bodies  were  often  associated  with  septate  and  empty-looking  hyphae.  Cytoplasmic  contents  filled
the  swollen  hyphal  body  from  the  non-septate  hyphal  region  following  removal  of  the  septa.  As  a  consequence,  the  swollen
body  developed  into  a  new  spore.  These  observations  provide  understanding  about  the  distribution  of  AM  fungal  nuclei
within  extra-radical  mycelia  and  during  spore  formation.  The  results  suggest  a  mechanism  by  which  the  development  of
a  cytoplasm-containing  mycelium  is  controlled  by  the  formation  or  removal  of  septa  to  efficiently  maintain  and  proliferate
essential  contents.  This  mechanism  may  provide  a  survival  strategy  to  the  fungus.

KEYWORDS : Arbuscular  mycorrhizae  fungus  spore,  Cytoplasm,  Glomus,  Nuclei,  Septum

The  arbuscular  mycorrhizae  (AM)  association  is  the  most
widespread  plant-fungal  symbiosis.  The  ecological  and
economic  importance  of  this  symbiosis  has  led  to  a  great
interest  in  various  aspects  of  AM  fungal  biology.  AM
fungi  have  existed  morphologically  unaltered  for  more
than  400  million  yr  [1].  Their  mycelia  are  usually  asep-
tate  and  coenocytic;  many  nuclei  coexist  within  the  same
cytoplasm [2, 3]. After root colonisation, AM fungus (AMF)
develop extra-radical mycelial networks in the soil matrix.
The widespread nature of the extra-radical mycelia of AM
fungi within the soil substrate plays a role in nutrient uptake
and  translocation  [4].  In  addition,  their  structural  develop-
ment  is  related  to  spore  production  [4, 5].  Intra-cellular
organelles  such  as  nuclei  and  mitochondria  can  move  and
translocate  within  the  coenocytic  mycelium  and,  eventu-
ally,  they  may  be  allocated  into  new  spores,  resulting  in
hundreds of nuclei  in an  individual  spore  [6].  Whether  all
nuclei  in  a  new  spore  are  congregated  from  the  coeno-
cytic  mycelium  or  only  a  few  nuclei  (or  single  nucleus)
migrate  and  undergo  nuclear  division  within  the  new  spore
is  still  unknown.  Moreover,  whether  the  nuclei  within  a
single  spore  are  genetically  different  or  identical  has  not
been  clearly  described.  Although  morphological  observa-

*Corresponding  author  <E-mail : jh0221hy@empal.com>

tions  alone  are  limited  for  answering  these  questions,  a
detailed  description  of  the  process  of  spore  formation  and
hyphal  development  regarding  nuclear  distribution  can  pro-
vide  important  insight  into  these  questions.  Despite  this
importance, surprisingly little has been studied in this field
to  date,  primarily  because  of  a  lack  of  an  appropriate
experimental system. Small sized fungal nuclei, thick hyphal
(or  spore)  wall  structures  and  auto-fluorescence  from  the
fungal tissues [7-9] also hamper long-term observations of
nuclear behaviour.

Direct observations of the distribution of nuclei using in
vitro  culture  is  inefficient,  because  most  hyphal  regions
are opaque in previous studies [5, 10]. Only a few regions
in  which  the  plasma  membrane  might  be  particularly  per-
meable  reveal  nuclei  and  fluorescing  debris  that  could  be
deforming  nuclei.  Bago  et  al.  [10]  observed  the  forma-
tion  of  septa  limiting  the  damaged  site  and  a  deformed
DNA  mass,  shortly  after  damaging  a  region  of  hyphae
using  high  laser  power.  Therefore,  septum  formation  was
considered  a  healing  mechanism  against  ageing  or  lytic
events  in  this  fungus  [10].  During  development  of  the
branched  absorbing  structures  (BAS),  Bago  et  al.  [5]  also
observed  that  septa  formed  progressively  from  the  hyphal

This  is  an  Open  Access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution  Non-Commercial  License  (http://cre-
ativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/)  which  permits  unrestricted  non-commercial  use,  distribution,  and  reproduction  in  any  medium,  pro-
vided  the  original  work  is  properly  cited.

79

 
80

Lee

apices  to  the  BAS  trunk  after  full  development  of  the
BAS  [5].  Based  on  these  observations,  some  authors  con-
cluded  that  a  progressive  process  of  cytoplasm  retraction
occurred  after  the  full  development  of  the  BAS,  eventu-
ally  forming  the  empty-looking,  septate  BASs.  Because
this  process  looked  similar  to  the  degeneration  process  of
arbuscules  within  root  cortical  cells,  it  was  assumed  to  be
BAS  degeneration  [5].  In  contrast  to  these  BASs,  some
BASs  that  were  associated  with  spores  or  a  group  of
spores  were  retained  longer  without  forming  septa  and
developed  into subtending hyphae [5]. However, the pres-
ence  of  cytoplasm  and  nuclear  distribution  in  these  BASs
was not clearly shown in their data.

In  this  study,  nuclear  distribution  and  morphological
details  of  a  spore  cluster  in  Glomus  intraradices  were
investigated.  Together  with  fluorescent  DNA  binding  probes
and  an  in  vitro  monoxenic  culture,  this  study  aims  to
observe:  1)  the  distribution  of  AM  fungal  nuclei  within
the extra-radical mycelium and 2) the distribution of cyto-
plasm and nuclei during spore formation. To achieve these
aims, an in vitro monoxenic culture system [11] was mod-
ified  to  facilitate  observation  of  the  fungal  architecture
and  nuclear  distribution  within  mycelia  using  a  coverslip
and a nitrocellulose membrane.

Materials  and  Methods

In  vitro  monoxenic  culture. A  minimal  medium  (M)
described  by  Bécard  and  Fortin  [11]  was  used  to  maintain
the  in  vitro  cultures.  The  composition  of  the  medium  in
mg/L of distilled water was: MgSO4·7H2O, 731; KNO3, 80;
KCl, 65; KH2PO4, 4.8; Ca(NO3)2·4H2O, 288; Na-FeEDTA,
8;  KI,  0.75;  MnCl2·4H2O,  6;  ZnSO4·7H2O,  2.65;  H3BO3,
1.5;  CuSO4·5H2O,  0.13;  Na2MoO4·2H2O,  0.0024;  glycine,
3; thiamine, 0.1; pyridoxine, 0.1; nicotinic acid, 0.5; myoi-
nositol, 50 and sucrose, 10,000. The pH of the medium was
adjusted  to  5.5  before  sterilisation  at  121oC  for  15 min.
Phytogel  (Sigma-Aldrich  Inc.,  St.  Louis,  MO,  USA)  was
used  for  the  gelling  material  at  a  concentration  of  0.4%.
In  vitro  Ri-T  DNA  plates  transformed  with  carrot  roots
and  colonised  with  Glomus  intraradices  FACE#494  were
gifted  by  Hannes  Gamper.  The  transformed  roots  have
been routinely propagated on M medium by transferring a
fragment  of  young  healthy  roots  into  new  medium  each
time.  New  non-AMF  roots  were  inoculated  with  a  block
of gelling material containing colonised roots, hyphae and
spores every 5 mon.

Modification  of  the  in  vitro  root-organ  culture  system.
To  observe  the  extra-radical  mycelia  of  the  fungus  effi-
ciently,  modifications  were  made  from  the  standard  di-
compartment  in  vitro  system  [12].  At  first,  an  autoclaved
22 × 50 mm coverslip (0.13~0.17 mm thick) was  added  to
the top of the solid media of a standard di-compartment in

Fig. 1. Modified  di-compartmental 

in  vitro  organ  culture
system.  1,  side  without  sucrose  for  fungi  only;  2,  side
with  sucrose  for  plants  and  fungi;  3,  nitrocellulose
membrane  (0.45 µm);  4,  coverslip;  5,  slant;  6,  cutting
out  the  edges  of  solid  media  on  the  plant  and  fungal
side.  Either  a  coverslip  or  nitrocellulose  membrane,  or
both  were  used  for  the  modifications  (see  text).

vitro system that had been prepared in advance. To induce
the  fungal  hyphae  to  grow  on  top  of  the  coverslip,  they
were closely set to the middle partition in the fungal com-
partment and then a slant was made to facilitate the extra-
radical  mycelia  of  the  fungus  to  grow  over  the  middle
partition easily (5 in Fig. 1). Gel medium at both edges of
the  roots  and  the  fungal  side  was  cut  out  to  prevent  host
roots  from  growing  over  the  middle  partition  of  the  fun-
gal  compartment  (6  in  Fig.  1).  Second,  although  the  first
modification made it possible to observe the details of the
extra-radical  mycelial  architecture  and  spores,  fungal  growth
was  not  favourable  on  the  glass  surface.  To  obtain  more
fungal material, a nitrocellulose membrane (hydrophilic, pore
size 0.45 µm; Millipore Inc., Billerica, MA, USA) was cut
to  fit  the  fungal  side  of  the  di-compartment  Petri  dish.
This  membrane  was  sterilised  by  autoclaving  and  substi-
tuted for the coverslip described above.

Observations  of  extra-radical  mycelia  and  spores.
Observations  were  conducted  twice  per  month  using  1~8
mon old cultures. The standard in vitro monoxenic culture, in
which  G.  intraradices  had  been  growing,  was  directly  set
on  a  Nikon  EFD-3  microscope  (Nikon  Inc.,  Tokyo,
Japan).  To  adjust  the  specimen  to  the  gap  between  the
objective  lens  (×4  or  ×10)  and  the  microscope  stage,  the
fungal  side  of  the  di-compartment  culture  was  made  with
a  minimum  volume  of  M  medium,  and  the  fungal  struc-
tures  were  observed  with  the  lid  opened.  For  the  modi-
fied  in  vitro  culture  with  a  coverslip,  when  fungal  hyphae
and  spores  were  found  on  the  coverslip  of  the  first  modi-
fied  in  vitro  culture,  the  extra-radical  hyphae  and  spores
were  fixed  with  Helly’s  fluid  solution  (K2Cr2O7  2.5 g,
HgCl2  5.0 g,  Na2SO4  1.0 g  dissolved  in  100 mL  distilled

Distribution  of  Cytoplasm  and  Nuclei  in  an  AM  Fungus

81

water).  The  fungus  was  fixed  by  adding  a  few  drops  of
Helly’s fluid solution directly onto the coverslip where the
fungal  hyphae  and  spores  were  growing.  Samples  were
washed  for  24 hr  by  filling  the  fungal  side  of  the  di-com-
partment Petri dish with distilled water. Water was replaced
every 8 hr.  The  fixed  samples were stained with hematox-
ylin  following  the  procedure  of  Robinow  [13].  The  stained
fungal extra-radical mycelia and spores were collected with
the  coverslip  from  the  Petri  dish.  Detailed  hyphal  net-
works and spores were observed under a Nikon EFD-3.

Observation  of  nuclear  distribution  within  extra-radical
mycelia. The modified  in  vitro AMF culture with the nitro-
cellulose  membrane  was  used  to  observe  the  nuclei.  The
nuclei  were  fluorescently  stained  using  either  SYBR  Green
I  (Molecular  Probes,  Inc.,  Eugene,  OR,  USA)  or  4',6-dia-
midino-2-phenylindole  (DAPI,  Molecular  Probes,  Inc.),
independently.  The  membrane  on  which  the  fungus  had
been  growing  was  removed  from  the  culture.  For  the
SYBR  Green  I  stain,  the  membrane  was  soaked  in  0.25
Tris-Borate-EDTA  (TBE)  buffer  (pH  8.3)  for  30 min  to
stabilize  the  pH  and  was  transferred  to  a  new  Petri  dish.
Fungal  materials  were  stained  by  adding  5 µg/mL  SYBR
Green I. Five µg/mL DAPI solution was added to the fun-
gal mycelia growing on the membrane. After a room tem-
perature  incubation  in  the  dark  for  30 min,  the  stained
fungal  materials  were  observed  under  an  epi-fluorescence
microscope,  Nikon  EFD-3.  A  UV-2A  filter  (excitation
wavelength:  330~380 nm)  and  a  B-2A  filter  (excitation
wavelength:  450~490 nm)  were  used  for  the  DAPI  and
SYBR Green I staining, respectively.

Results

Development of the extra-radical mycelia and spores. The
developmental  stages  of  the  extra-radical  mycelia  of  G.
intraradices  followed  the  same  process  as  the  observa-
tions from Bago  et  al. [4, 10]. Runner hyphae rapidly col-
onised new regions of the medium in straight lines. While
the  runner  hyphae  were  developing,  they  dichotomously
branched  into  sub-ordered  runner  hyphae,  and  some  sub-
sequently  divided  shortly.  Hyphal  thickness  decreased  as
branch order increased. After colonising a new area of the
medium, the runner hyphae stopped expanding and differ-
entiated  into  highly  branching  structures.  The  hyphal
branches  were  far  more  dichotomously  divided into much
finer  mycelium,  forming  a  BAS.  Some  G.  intraradices
spores developed from the runner hyphae, but most of the
spores  formed  after  extensive  development  of  the  runner
hyphae and BAS.

A  conventional  nuclear  stain  with  hematoxylin  did  not
reveal  the  fungal  nuclei  but  hyphae  and  spores  that  con-
tained  cytoplasm  and  those  that  did  not  were  clearly  dis-
tinguished  by  their  transparency  (Fig.  3).  Cytoplasm  was
only  observed  in  non-septate  hyphal  areas,  and  the  areas

Fig. 2. Observation  of  spore  differentiation  using  the  monoxenic
culture.  Newly  developing  spores  (ns)  and  swollen  hyphal
bodies  (sb)  were  distinguished  by  their  transparency,  as
the  cytoplasm  was  dark  and  cloudy  in  appearance.  Spores
containing  cytoplasm  were  always  connected  to  non-
septate  hyphae,  whereas  empty-looking  spores  were
connected  to  septate  hyphae.  A~C,  Images  of  runner
hyphae  and  the  swollen  hyphal  body  developed  from
the  hyphae.  The  hyphae  connected  to  the  empty-looking
swollen  hyphal  bodies  were  septate.  One  of  the  two
swollen mycelia was filled with cytoplasm and became  a
new  spore,  whereas  the  other  remained  as  a  swollen
body in the image of (C). At the end of spore formation,
mature  spores  (ms)  were  produced  in  the  image  of
(D).  Septa  are  represented  with  ‘*.’  ‘sh’,  ‘ch,’  and  ‘fh’
which  represent  septate  hyphae,  cytoplasmic  hyphae
(non-septate),  and  finely  branching  hyphae,  respectively
(scale  bars = 100 µm).

of septate hyphae always looked empty. Spores with cyto-
plasm  were  dark  and  cloudy,  whereas  the  non-cytoplas-
mic  spores  appeared  empty  (Fig.  2).  The  empty-looking
spores  were  connected  to  the  septate  hyphae,  whereas
cytoplasmic  spores  were  always  connected  to  one  of  the
non-septate,  cytoplasmic  mycelium  (Figs.  2  and  3).  Some
of the old-looking septate hyphae appeared to shrink (Fig.
3). Septa seemed to block the cytoplasm, which may have
been  expanding  into  the  new  mycelium  (Fig.  3).  Finely
branched  structures  were  observed  in  a  spore  cluster,  and
most had septa at intervals of 20~30 µm (Fig. 3). A swol-
len  hyphal  body,  which  might  become  a  new  spore,  was
found  at  the  apical  position  of  the  newly  branched  hyphae.
These  hyphae  had  septa  only  on  the  side  of  a  swollen
body (Fig. 3).

Nuclear  fluorescence staining using SYBR Green  I  and
DAPI.  SYBR Green I stained  G.  intraradices nuclei with
a  bright  green  fluorescence  from  the  very  young  spore
stage,  in  relatively  thin  hyphae,  or  when  matured  spores
were  crushed  (Figs.  4  and  5).  However,  the  nuclei  from
mature  intact  spores  and  thick  hyphae  did  not  stain  well.
Cytoplasm  was  also  coloured  with  irregular  dim  green,

82

Lee

Fig. 3. Observations  of  the  extra-radical  hyphae  and  spore
formation  with  hematoxylin  stain.  A,  D,  Developing
spores;  B,  C,  E,  F,  Different  stages  of  the  extra-radical
hyphae.  Spores  (ms)  were  associated  with  finely  branch-
ing  hyphae  (fh).  Cytoplasmic  area  was  distinguished
from  the  non-cytoplasmic  area  by  transparency.  A  new
swollen  hyphal  apex  (ns)  formed  at  a  new  branch.  B,
Cytoplasmic  contents  seemed  to  migrate  from  the
runner  hyphae  (rh)  into  the  septate  hyphae  by  removing
the  septa;  C,  E,  Some  of  lateral  hyphal  branches
remained  septate;  C,  F,  Shrunk-looking  structures  (ss)
were  found  with  the  septate  hyphae.  White  arrows
indicate  the  positions  where  cytoplasm  was  limited  by
the  septum.  Background  blots  appeared  due  to  the
Helly’s  fluid  fixation  process  (scale  bars = 50 µm).

which  allowed  us  to  recognise  the  cytoplasm.  An  exami-
nation  of  staining  continuity  showed  that  SYBR  Green  I
stained  brightly  for  about  5 hr  but  gradually  faded  after
7 hr  30 min  under  the  experimental  conditions  (less  than
3 min  exposure  every  1  hr).  Positions  of  nuclei  did  not
change much during the 7 hr, indicating that SYBR Green
I may not  be  suitable  for  long-term observations  of fungi.
Spore  outer  layers  (L1  and  L2  in  the  description  in
INVAM)  and  thick  hyphae  had  stronger  auto-fluorescence
than that of the inner layer (L3) at 488 nm excitation (Fig.
4B).

The  G.  intraradices  nuclei  within  mature  spores  and
some  of  the  thick  runner  hyphae  rarely  fluoresced  with
DAPI.  However,  DAPI  stained  the  fungal  nuclei  within

Fig. 4. Observations  of  the  extra-radical  hyphae  and  nuclear
distribution  using  DAPI  (B,  C)  and  SYBR  Green  I  (A,
B,  E,  G).  Nuclei  fluoresced  with  blue  spots  in  DAPI
staining  and  bright  green  spots  in  SYBR  Green  I
staining.  A,  Nuclei  were  observed  within  a  new  spore
(ns)  and  within  the  hyphae  connecting  to  the  spore;  B,
As  mature  spores  (ms)  were  crushed,  many  nuclei
were  detected  within  the  spores  as  well  as  the  hyphae
but  auto-fluorescence  was  strong  in  the  spore  coats
and  thick  hyphal  walls.  ‘i’  and  ‘o’  indicate  inner  layer
and  outer  layer  of  spore  wall,  respectively;  C,  Very
early  stage  of  spore  development;  only  a  few  nuclei
were  observed  within  the  spore  (in  a  small  window  at
top  right  of  the  image),  and  squashed  nuclei  were
found  in  a  row  along  the  fine  hyphae;  D,  Juvenile
stage  of  a  developing  spore  that  contains  tens  of
nuclei.  A  nucleus  was  found  at  the  neck  of  the  spore,
indicating  nuclei  movement  into  (or  out)  the  spore;
E~H,  Runner  hyphae;  E,  G,  Dark  field  images  for  the
fluorescence  and  (F)  and  (H)  are  bright  field  images
corresponding  to  (E)  and  (G),  respectively.  G,  H,
Magnified  images  of  the  white  boxed  area  (m)  in  (H),
showing  the  border  between  cytoplasmic  and  non-
cytoplasmic  hyphal  regions.  Cytoplasm  and  nuclei
limited  by  septa.  Border  between  septate  and  non-
septate  mycelia  are  indicated  by  a  white  arrow  in
bright-field  images  and  by  a  black  arrow  in  dark-field
images.  Branching  hyphae  with  a  septa  did  not  contain
cytoplasmic  contents  or  nuclei  (scale  bars = 20 µm).

Distribution  of  Cytoplasm  and  Nuclei  in  an  AM  Fungus

83

thin hyphae, some of the thick runner hyphae, very early
stage  spores  and  juvenile  spores,  which  were  smaller  in
size  and  had  fewer  nuclei  than  that  of  mature  spores.
Thus,  DAPI  performed  slightly  better  than  SYBR  Green
I.  Although  the  auto-fluorescence  was  stronger,  it  was
difficult  to  determine  whether  cytoplasm  was  present  or
absent  within  hyphae  compared  to  the  SYBR  Green  I
stain.

A  very  young  spore  that  had  only  several  nuclei  was
connected to thin hyphae whose diameter was narrower than
that of the nuclei (1.25~1.5 µm, hyphal diameter). The fun-
gal  nuclei  within  the  narrow  hyphae  appeared  squashed
(Fig.  4C).  A  nucleus  was  found  in  the  neck  of  a  juvenile
spore  in  which  the  nucleus  might  have  been  passing
through into a new spore (Fig. 4D).

The  G.  intraradices  nuclei  within  hyphae  or  from  burst
spores were round, oval or irregular in shape. Their diam-
eters  were  3.23 ± 0.79 µm  and  2.88 ± 0.40 µm  in  hyphae
and  spores,  respectively.  Runner  hyphae  and  branching
hyphae  colonised  the  membrane  surface  and  most  had
septa  (Fig.  4E~4H).  An  examination  of  the  border
between  septate  and  non-septate  mycelia  confirmed  that
non-septate areas only contained cytoplasm, and that fluo-
rescent nuclei always appeared with cytoplasm only in the
non-septate  regions  (Fig.  4E~4H).  Consistent  with  these
observations, cytoplasm was blocked by septa. These non-
septate  hyphae,  containing  cytoplasm  and  nuclei,  were
linked  to  the  cytoplasmic  hyphae  or  thin  hyphae  that sup-
ported  spores  (Fig.  4A~4D).  Nuclei  were  distributed  at
regular intervals in some regions, particularly thin hyphae,

Fig. 5. Nuclei  within  a  Glomus  intraradices  mycelium.  A,
Magnified  image  of  the  centre  of  (E)  in  Fig.  4.  n1,
nuclei  of  usual  size;  n2,  nuclei  about  twice  the  normal
size;  n3,  stretched  form  of  nuclei;  B,  Nuclei  existing
densely  in  a  row  within  a  thin  mycelium;  C,  Nuclei
existing  in  pairs  within  runner  hypha;  D,  Nuclei
distributed  loosely  but  in  regular  intervals  within  a
thin  hypha  (scale  bars = 10 µm).

but  were  rather  irregularly  distributed  within  thick  myce-
lia  in  most  cases  (Fig.  5).  The  density  of  nuclei  also  dif-
fered  among  different  hyphal  regions  (Fig.  5B  and  5D).
Paired  nuclei  were  observed  frequently,  and  some  of  the
nuclei  were  about  twice  as  large  as  normal  nuclei  or
stretched  forms  and  seemed  to  be  dividing  (Fig.  5A  and
5C),  suggesting  segregation  of  nuclei  within  extra-radical
hyphae.

Discussion

Improvement  in  the  in  vitro  AMF  monoxenic  system
to  study  extra-radical  hyphal  networks  and  nuclear
behaviour. Although the current in vitro monoxenic sys-
tem  is  a  useful  tool  for  studies  of  the  extra-radical  myce-
lia  of  AM  fungi  [10, 14, 15],  modifications  to  the  culture
system  were  necessary  to  examine  more  detailed  fungal
architecture  and  nuclear  behaviour.  The  fungal  nuclei  were
much more efficiently stained using the nitrocellulose mem-
brane  than  intact  gelling  materials.  This  was  because  the
fluorescent  reagents  were  in  direct  contact  with  the  fun-
gal  tissues.  Use  of  a  membrane  is  a  suitable  approach  for
studying extra-radical mycelial networks [16-18] and observ-
ing nuclei during anastomosis [16, 19]. Recently, the occur-
rence  of  anastomoses  between  genetically  distinct  isolates
was  reported  [20].  It  would  be  interesting  to  trace  the
nuclear movement after exchanging nuclei through hyphal
fusion  between  the  different  isolates  using  the  membrane-
added in vitro system. Additionally, long-term staining tech-
niques  to  detect  AM  fungal  nuclei  need  to  be  developed.
Nuclear  fluorescent  stains  such  as  SYBR  Green  I  and
DAPI  are  ineffective  for  long-term  observations  and  they
may  affect  fungal  viability,  as  these  fluorescent  reagents
bind  DNA  directly.  Establishing  stable  transformants  and
finding  suitable  material  that  can  provide  better  observa-
tions of the extra-radical mycelial structure as  well as flu-
orescent  nuclei  will  provide  an  opportunity  to  understand
the  extra-radical  hyphal  networks  and  nuclear  behaviour
in more detail.

Control  of  cytoplasm  and  nuclear  distribution  by
septa. A high proportion of the extra-radical hyphae and
fine  hyphal  structures  such  as  BAS  were  septate  and
appeared empty. Septa in BAS may have formed from the
hyphal  apex  to  the  BAS  trunk  after  the  BAS  developed
fully,  as  shown  in  Bago  et  al.  [5]  but  the  retraction  of
cytoplasm  and  septal  formation  was  not  clear  in  their
study.  In  contrast,  septa  and  cytoplasm  blocked  by  septa
were  clearly  observed  in  this  study.  There  was  an  obvi-
ous distinction between the cytoplasmic and non-cytoplas-
mic hyphal regions. Cytoplasm and nuclei were only found
within  non-septate  areas  of  BAS,  whereas  septate  areas
always appeared empty. This septate area in BAS has been
explained  as  a  continuous  process  of  cytoplasm  retraction

84

Lee

by  Bago  et  al.  [5]  but  this  suggests  a  very  sophisticated
mechanism  such  as  completely  pulling  back  all  the  cyto-
plasmic  content  followed  by  the  formation  of  a  septum.
Otherwise, some traces  of cytoplasm such as nuclei, chro-
matin debris or vacuoles would remain in the septate hyphal
area,  as  shown  within  the  old-looking  runner  hyphae,  but
none  of  these  were  not  found  within  border  regions.  Fur-
thermore,  the  swollen  hyphal  body,  which  may  become  a
new  spore,  was  always  associated  with  non-cytoplasmic
hyphae  when  spores  began  to  form.  It  seems  that  cyto-
plasm  and  nuclei  progressively  migrate  into  the  new  form-
ing  spore  following  removal  of  the  septa.  Therefore,  the
previous  suggestion  that  the  septate  and  empty-looking
hyphae were attributed to the process of cytoplasm retrac-
tion  due  to  ageing  and  lytic  events  [5, 10]  needs  to  be
reconsidered.  Because  the  distribution  of  the  cytoplasm
and  nuclei  appeared  to  be  restrained  by  septa,  formation
or  removal  of  septa  may  control  the  expansion  or  migra-
tion  of  cytoplasmic  contents  into  new  hyphal  areas.  The
presence  of  septa  may  prevent  the  diffusion  of  damage-
induced  toxic  materials  into  neighbouring  hyphal  areas.  It
may also prevent loss of intracellular organelles when hyphae
are damaged [21, 22]. If distribution and migration of fun-
gal  cytoplasmic  contents  can  be  controlled  by  removing
or  forming  septa,  this  would  provide  a  safe  manner  of
movement  for cytoplasm  and  nuclei under  harsh  soil  con-
ditions.

Acknowledgement

I  thank  Peter  Young  for  discussing  this  topic  and  Hannes
Gamper  who  showed  me  fluorescently  stained  nuclei  for
the  first  time  and  provided  me  with  the  SYBR  Green  I
fungal strain and the staining information.

References

1. Remy W, Taylor TN, Hass H, Kerp H. Four hundred-million-
year-old  vesicular  arbuscular  mycorrhizae.  Proc  Natl  Acad
Sci U S A 1994;91:11841-3.

2. Balestrini  R,  Bianciotto  V,  Bonfante-Fasolo  P.  Nuclear  archi-
tecture  and  DNA  location  in  two  VAM  fungi.  Mycorrhiza
1992;1:105-12.

3. Bianciotto  V,  Bonfante  P.  Quantification  of  the  nuclear  DNA
content  of  two  arbuscular  mycorrhizal  fungi.  Mycol  Res
1992;96:1071-6.

4. Bago  B,  Azcón-Aguilar  C,  Piché  Y.  Architecture  and  devel-
opmental  dynamics  of  the  external  mycelium  of  the  arbuscu-
lar  mycorrhizal  fungus  Glomus  intraradices  grown  under
monoxenic conditions. Mycologia 1998;90:52-62.

5. Bago  B,  Azcón-Aguilar  C,  Goulet  A,  Piché  Y.  Branched
absorbing  structures  (BAS):  a  feature  of  the  extraradical
mycelium  of  symbiotic  arbuscular  mycorrhizal  fungi.  New
Phytol 1998;139:375-88.

6. Bécard G, Pfeffer PE. Status of nuclear division in arbuscular
mycorrhizal  fungi  during  in  vitro  development.  Protoplasma

1993;174:62-8.

7. Vierheilig H, Knoblauch M, Juergensen K, van Bel AJ, Grun-
dler  FM,  Piché  Y.  Imaging  arbuscular  mycorrhizal  structures
in  living  roots  of  Nicotiana  tabacum  by  light,  epi-fluores-
cence,  and  confocal  laser  scanning  microscopy.  Can  J  Bot
2001;79:231-7.

8. Dreyer  B,  Morte  A,  Pérez-Gilabert  M,  Honrubia  M.  Autoflu-
orescence  detection  of  arbuscular  mycorrhizal  fungal  struc-
tures  in  palm  roots:  an  underestimated  experimental  method.
Mycol Res 2006;110:887-97.

9. Helber  N,  Requena  N.  Expression  of  the  fluorescence  mark-
ers  DsRed  and  GFP  fused  to  a  nuclear  localization  signal  in
the  arbuscular  mycorrhizal  fungus  Glomus  intraradices.  New
Phytol 2008;177:537-48.

10. Bago  B,  Zipfel  W,  Williams  RM,  Piché  Y.  Nuclei  of  symbi-
otic  arbuscular  mycorrhizal  fungi  as  revealed  by  in  vivo  two-
photon microscopy. Protoplasma 1999;209:77-89.

11. Bécard  G,  Fortin  JA.  Early  events  of  vesicular-arbuscular
mycorrhiza  formation  on  Ri  T-DNA  transformed  roots.  New
Phytol 1988;108:211-8.

12. St-Arnaud  M,  Hamel  C,  Vimard  B,  Caron  M,  Fortin  JA.
Enhanced  hyphal  growth  and  spore  production  of  the  arbus-
cular  mycorrhizal  fungus  Glomus  intraradices  in  an  in  vitro
system  in  the  absence  of  host  roots.  Mycol  Res  1996;100:
328-32.

13. Robinow  CF.  Observations  on  cell  growth,  mitosis,  and  divi-
sion  in  the  fungus  Basidiobolus  ranarum.  J  Cell  Biol  1963;
17:123-52.

14. Bago  B,  Vierheilig  H,  Piché  Y,  Azcón-Aguilar  C.  Nitrate
depletion  and  pH  changes  induced  by  the  extraradical  myce-
lium  of  the  arbuscular  mycorrhizal  fungus  Glomus  intraradices
grown in monoxenic culture. New Phytol 1996;133:273-80.

15. Villegas  J,  Williams  RD,  Nantais  L,  Archambault  J,  Fortin
JA.  Effects  of  N  source  on  pH  and  nutrient  exchange  of
extramatrical  mycelium  in  a  mycorrhizal  Ri  T-DNA  trans-
formed root system. Mycorrhiza 1996;6:247-51.

16. Giovannetti  M,  Fortuna  P,  Citernesi  AS,  Morini  S,  Nuti  MP.
The occurrence of anastomosis formation and nuclear exchange
in  intact  arbuscular  mycorrhizal  networks.  New  Phytol  2001;
151:717-24.

17. Giovannetti M, Sbrana C, Strani P, Agnolucci M, Rinaudo V,
Avio  L.  Genetic  diversity  of  isolates  of  Glomus  mosseae
from  different  geographic  areas  detected  by  vegetative  com-
patibility  testing  and  biochemical  and  molecular  analysis.
Appl Environ Microbiol 2003;69:616-24.

18. Avio  L,  Pellegrino  E,  Bonari  E,  Giovannetti  M.  Functional
diversity of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal isolates in relation to
extraradical mecelial networks. New Phytol 2006;172:347-57.
19. Giovannetti  M,  Azzolini  D,  Citernesi  AS.  Anastomosis  for-
mation  and  nuclear  and  protoplasmic  exchange  in  arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi. Appl Environ Microbiol 1999;65:5571-5.

20. Croll  D,  Giovannetti  M,  Koch  AM,  Sbrana  C,  Ehinger  M,
Lammers  PJ,  Sanders  IR.  Nonself  vegetative  fusion  and
genetic  exchange  in  the  arbuscular  mycorrhizal  fungus  Glo-
mus intraradices. New Phytol 2009;181:924-37.

21. Trinci AP, Collinge AJ. Occlusion of the septal pores of dam-
aged  hyphae  of  Neurospora  crassa  by  hexagonal  crystals.
Protoplasma 1974;80:57-67.

22. Aylmore  RC,  Wakley  GE,  Todd  NK.  Septal  sealing  in  the
basidiomycete Coriolus versicolor. J Gen Microbiol 1984;130:
2975-82.

