Mycobiology  39(1) : 57-58  (2011)
  The  Korean  Society  of  Mycology

DOI:10.4489/MYCO.2011.39.1.057

First Report of Stem Rot on Asiatic Dayflower (Commelina communis L.) Caused
by  Sclerotium  rolfsii  in  Korea

Okhee  Choi1,  Jin-Hyeuk  Kwon2,  Yongsik  Min1  and  Jinwoo  Kim1,3

*

1Department  of  Applied  Biology,  Gyeongsang  National  University,  Jinju  660-701,  Korea
2Gyeongsangnam-do  Agricultural  Research  and  Extension  Services,  Jinju  660-360,  Korea
3Institute  of  Agriculture  and  Life  Science,  Gyeongsang  National  University,  Jinju  660-701,  Korea

(Received  December  13,  2010.  Accepted  January  11,  2011)

Stem  rot  was  found  for  the  first  time  on  the  Asiatic  dayflower  plant  (Commelina  communis  L.)  in  Korea.  A  detailed  descrip-
tion  of  this  Korean  specimen  is  given,  along  with  its  rDNA  internal  transcribed  spacer  sequence.  The  fungus  was  identified
as  Sclerotium  rolfsii  Saccardo  based  on  mycological  characteristics  and  molecular  data.

KEYWORDS : Commelina  communis  L.,  Sclerotium  rolfsii,  Stem  rot

The  Asiatic  dayflower  plant  (Commelina  communis  L.),
native  throughout  East  Asia  and  northern  parts  of  South-
east  Asia,  is  an  herbaceous  annual  plant  in  the  dayflower
family [1]. The plant is also cultivated for its dye in Japan
and  northern  China  [2].  Healthy  plants  with  blue-colored
flowers are shown in Fig. 1A.

Symptoms. A  stem  rot  disease  has  been  observed  spo-
radically on Asiatic dayflower at moist, shady forest edges
and  roadsides  in  Geoje,  Korea  in  2010  (Fig.  1B).  From
late  spring  to  summer,  stems  under  the  canopy  are
exposed  to  warm  and  highly  humid  conditions,  which  are
favorable  for  the  development  of  sclerotial  stem  rot.  The
disease  developed  mainly  on  the  stems  near  the  soil  line.
The disease started with small water-soaked lesions on the
stem,  which  expanded  and  rotted.  Numerous  sclerotia
were often produced on the surfaces of stems near the soil
line.  The  heavily  infected  stems  became  rotted  and
blighted, and the plant eventually died (Fig. 1B).

Mycological characteristics. The freshly isolated patho-
genic  fungus  grown  on  potato  dextrose  agar  (PDA)  was
examined  microscopically.  Detailed  microscopic  examina-
tions of a representative specimen were performed using a
light  microscope  (Axioplan;  Carl  Zeiss,  Jena,  Germany).
Small  globoid  sclerotia  formed  abundantly  on  the  PDA
after  10  days  of  mycelial  growth  (Fig.  1C).  The  sclerotia,
which were relatively uniform in size (1~3 mm), were white
at  first  and  became  dark  brown  gradually.  The  white
mycelium had a typical clamp connection (Fig. 1D).

Inoculums were prepared with myce-
Pathogenicity tests.
lial  mats  and  mixed  with  autoclaved  soil  for  pathogenic-

*Corresponding  author <E-mail : jinwoo@gnu.ac.kr>

ity  testing.  Then,  healthy  C.  communis  plants  were  planted
in pots with soil inoculums containing mycelial mats. The
first  symptoms  appeared  at  7  days  after  inoculation,  and
typical  symptoms  developed  into  water-soaking  lesions.
Then,  white  mycelia  and  sclerotia  were  observed  on  the
rotted  areas  of  stems  (Fig.  1E).  The  causal  pathogen  was
re-isolated from the lesions to confirm Koch's postulate.

Internal  transcribed  spacer  (ITS)  sequence  analysis.
The  complete  ITS  rDNA  region  of  the  representative  iso-
late  was  amplified  and  sequenced  using  the  ITS1  (5'-
TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG-3')  and  ITS4  (5'-TCCTC-
CGCTTATTGATATGC-3') primers as  described  by  White
et al. [3]. The resulting 684-bp sequence was deposited in
GenBank  (accession  No.  HQ420816).  A  phylogenetic
analysis  was  performed  using  MEGA4  software  (MEGA,
Tempe,  AZ,  USA),  with  the  neighbor-joining  method  and
the  Tajima-Nei  distance  model.  Previously  published  ITS
sequences  of  Sclerotium  rolfsii  strains  were  included  for
reference  [4].  In  the  phylogenetic  tree  (Fig.  2),  the  repre-
sentative isolate was placed within a clade comprising ref-
erence isolates of S. rolfsii.

Based  on  symptoms,  mycological  characteristics,  molec-
ular  data,  and  pathogenicity  to  the  host  plant,  this  fungus
was  identified  as  S.  rolfsii  Saccardo  [5].  A  representative
culture  of  S.  rolfsii  has  been  deposited  with  the  Korean
Agricultural  Culture  Collection  (KACC  45483),  National
Academy  of  Agricultural  Science,  Rural  Development
Administration,  Suwon,  Korea.  To  our  knowledge,  this  is
the first report of the presence of S. rolfsii on Asiatic day-
flower  in Korea [6]. This  disease  is  highly  dependent  upon
weather  conditions.  Environmental  conditions  during  the
summer  in  Korea  are  similar  to  subtropical  conditions,
which  are  favorable  for  development  of  this  disease.  The
recent  occurrence  of  this  disease  suggests  the  possibility

57

58

Choi  et  al.

Fig. 1. Symptoms  of  stem  rot  on  Commelina  communis  L.  and  mycological  characteristics  of  the  pathogenic  fungus,  Sclerotium
rolfsii.  A,  Healthy  plants;  B,  Typical  field  symptoms  on  stems  and  near  the  soil  line;  C,  Mycelial  mat  and  sclerotia  grown
on  potato  dextrose  agar  after  15  days;  D,  Clamp  connection  (scale  bar = 10 µm);  E,  Symptoms  after  artificial  inoculation.

tive  Research  Program  for  Agriculture  Science  &  Tech-
nology  Development  (PJ007345)”  Rural  Development
Administration, Korea.

References

1. Hong  D,  DeFillipps  RA.  Commelina  communis.  In:  Wu  ZY,
Raven PH, Hong DY, editors. Flora of China. Beijing and St.
Louis:  Missouri  Botanical  Garden  Press  and  Science  Press;
2000. p. 36.

2. Pennell  FW.  What  is  Commelina  communis?  Proc  Acad  Nat

Sci Phila 1938;90:31-9.

3. White  TJ,  Bruns  T,  Lee  S,  Taylor  JW.  Amplification  and
direct  sequencing  of  fungal  ribosomal  RNA  genes  for  phylo-
genetics.  In:  Innis  MA,  Gelfand  DH,  Sninsky  JJ,  White  TJ,
editors.  PCR  protocols:  a  guide  to  methods  and  applications.
New York: Academic Press, Inc.; 1990. p. 315-22. 

4. Harlton  CE,  Levesque  CA,  Punja  ZK.  Genetic  diversity  in
Sclerotiun  (Athelia)  rolfsii  and  related  species.  Phytopathol-
ogy 1995;85:1269-81.

5. Mordue  JE.  Corticium  rofsii.  CMI  descriptions  of  pathogenic
fungi  and  bacteria.  No.  410.  Surrey:  Commonwealth  Myco-
logical Institute; 1974.

6. Korean  Society  of  Plant  Pathology.  List  of  plant  diseases  in
Korea.  5th  ed.  Seoul:  Korean  Society  of  Plant  Pathology;
2009.

Fig. 2. Phylogenetic  tree  using  internal  transcribed  spacer
sequences  showing  closest  known  relatives  of  Sclerotium
rolfsii  including  stem  rot  fungus  infecting  Commelina
communis  L.  DNA  sequences  from  the  NCBI  nucleotide
database  were  aligned  using  ClustalW,  and  a  phylogenetic
tree  was  constructed  using  the  neighbor-joining  method
and  visualized  with  TreeView.  Numbers  above  the
branches  indicate  the  bootstrap  values.  Bars  indicate
number  of  nucleotide  substitutions  per  site.  The  present
isolate  infecting  C.  communis  is  marked  in  bold.

that S. rolfsii is spreading widely.

Acknowledgements

This  work  was  conducted  with  the  support  of  “Coopera-

