Mycobiology  39(2) : 129-132  (2011)
  The  Korean  Society  of  Mycology

DOI:10.4489/MYCO.2011.39.2.129
pISSN  1229-8093
eISSN  2092-9323

Optimal  Media  Conditions  for  the  Detection  of  Extracellular  Cellulase  Activity
in  Ganoderma  neo-japonicum

Woo-Sik  Jo1

*,  Ha-Na  Park1,  Doo-Hyun  Cho1,  Young-Bok  Yoo2  and  Seung-Chun  Park3

1Department  of  Agricultural  Environment,  Gyeongbuk  Agricultural  Technology  Administration,  Daegu  702-320,  Korea
2Mushroom Research Division Department of Herbal Crop Research National Institute of Horicultural & Herbal Science, Rural Devel-
opment  Administration,  Suwon  404-707,  Korea
3College  of  Veterinary  Medicine,  Kyungpook  National  University,  Daegu  702-701,  Korea

(Received  December  16,  2010.  Accepted  May  18,  2011)

To  determine  the  optimal  media  conditions  for  the  detection  of  the  extracellular  cellulase  activity  in  Ganoderma  neo-japoni-
cum,  we  varied  three  media  conditions:  dye  reagent,  pH,  and  temperature.  We  evaluated  the  use  of  four  dyes,  Congo  red,
phenol  red,  remazol  brilliant  blue,  and  trypan  blue.  To  observe  the  effect  of  pH  on  the  chromogenic  reaction,  we  tested
media  ranging  from  4.5  to  8.0.  To  research  the  effect  of  temperature  on  the  clear  zone  and  the  fungus  growing  zone,  we
tested  temperatures  ranging  from  15  to  35oC.  On  the  whole,  the  best  protocol  called  for  Ganoderma  neo-japonicum  transfer
onto  media  containing  Congo  red  with  a  pH  of  7.0,  followed  by  incubation  at  25oC  for  5  days.  Our  results  will  be  useful
to  researchers  who  study  extracellular  enzyme  activity  in  Ganoderma  neo-japonicum.

KEYWORDS : Cellulase,  Chromogenic  media,  Congo  red,  Ganoderma  neo-japonicum

Many  studies  about  fungi  in  Korea  have  been  done  with
regard  to  their  classification,  nutritional  components,  and
effective components. In particular, due to the rapid devel-
opment of fungal enzymology during the past three decades,
amylolytic,  cellolytic,  proteolytic,  and  pectolytic  enzymes
have  been  adopted  for  use  in  many  fields,  including  indus-
try, medicine, pharmacy, and agriculture. As a result, devel-
opment  of  methods  to  purify  high-quality  enzymes  from
fungi  is  a  rapidly  progressing  area  of  study  [1].  Hong  et
al. [2] have isolated a cellulase from Pleurotus sajor-caju,
and  Hashimoto  [3]  have  extracted  carboxy  methylcellu-
lase  from  Pholiota  nameko,  an  edible  mushroom.  Gano-
derma neo-japonicum is found throughout Japan and so is
called  Japanese  fungi.  This  fungus  is  famous  as  a  tradi-
tional  and  folk  medicine  and  is  used  to  cure  various  dis-
eases  and  cancers  alone  or  in  combination  with  other
herbal  medicines  [4].  G.  neo-japonicum  is  a  high-class,
wood-decaying  fungus.  Once  G.  lucidum  mycelia  enter
woody  tissue,  the  fungus  grows  continuously  using  com-
ponents  extracted  the  cells  of  the  wood.  Wood-decaying
fungi can degrade cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin, the
main  components  of  the  wood  cell  wall,  by  secreting
enzymes  such  as  cellulase,  hemicellulase,  and  ligninase
[5, 6].  In  this  regard,  we  expected  that  G.  neo-japonicum
has cellulolytic activity and tested it.

*Corresponding  author  <E-mail : jws67@korea.kr>

A plate assay is a frequently used as a screening method
for  detection  of  microorganisms  that  secrete  extracellular
enzymes.  From  a  number  of  possible  plate  assays  for
polysaccharide  activity,  we  selected  a  method  based  on  a
dye  coupled  to  a  polysaccharide.  When  the  dye-polymer
complex  is  hydrolysed,  the  dye  or  polysaccharide-dye
molecules diffuse from the colony zone, producing pale or
colourless  haloes.  This  method  is  cost-efficient,  simple,
and convenient [7, 8].

For  this  assay,  we  wanted  to  determine  the  optimal
media conditions for the detection of extracellular enzyme
activity  of  G.  neo-japonicum.  We  chose  cellulose  as  the
carbon substrate as it is the most plentiful substrate on the
planet  and  has  been  commonly  used  for  the  screening  of
cellulase  producing  fungi.  The  aims  of  this  study  were:
1)  to  determinate  the  best  dye  to  detect  the  extracellular
cellulase  activity  of  Ganoderma  neo-japonicum,  and  2)  to
screen for and select the most suitable pH and temperature.
Two  Ganoderma  genera  were  obtained  from  the  Korean
Agricultural  Culture  Collection  (KACC,  Suwon,  Korea),
and  others  were  prepared  by  the  authors’  laboratory.  Pre-
culturing  of  all  the  cultures  was  done  on  potato  dextrose
agar (Difco, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) at 25oC for 5 days.
To  correctly  identify  extracellular  cellulase  activity,  Tri-
choderma was used as a positive control and Saccharomy-

This  is  an  Open  Access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution  Non-Commercial  License  (http://cre-
ativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/)  which  permits  unrestricted  non-commercial  use,  distribution,  and  reproduction  in  any  medium,  pro-
vided  the  original  work  is  properly  cited.

129

 
130

Jo  et  al.

Table 1. Comparison of clear zone formation by Ganoderma neo-japonicum on media with different dyes

Species

Congo  red

Phenol  red

Remazol  brilliant  blue

Trypan  blue

CM Avi

Cel

CM Avi

Cel

CM

Avi

Cel

CM Avi

Cel

Ganoderma  neo-japonicum
Ganoderma  lucidum  (GBGL-01)
Trichoderma  (positive  control)
Saccharomyces  (negative  control)

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+

+
+
-
-

+
+
-
-

+
+
-
-

+
+
-
-

+
+
-
-

+
+
-
-

-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-

-
-
-
-

+,  clear  zone  detection;  −,  no  clear  zone  detection.
CM,  carboxymethyl  cellulose;  Avi,  Avicel;  Cel,  D-cellobiose.

Fig. 1. Examples  of  clear  zones  detected  in  chromogenic  media  containing  D-cellobiose  and  different  dyes  (A,  Congo  red;  B,
phenol  red;  C,  remazol  brilliant  blue;  D,  trypan  blue).  Top  row:  before  incubation.  Middle  row:  after  incubation  of
Trichoderma.  Bottom  row:  after  incubation  of  Ganoderma  neo-japonicum.  Arrows  indicate  clear  zones.

ces was used as a negative control. To detect extracellular
cellulase  activity,  the  precultures  were  transferred  onto
chromogenic  media.  The  chromogenic  media  consisted  of
0.1% yeast nitrogen base (Difco) as a nitrogen source and
1.5%  agar  powder.  In  addition,  the  media  contained  0.5%
Congo  red,  phenol  red,  remazol  brilliant  blue,  or  trypan
blue  (Sigma,  St.  Louis,  MO,  USA)  as  the  chromogenic
dye  linked  to  one  of  three  polysaccharides:  CM-cellulose
(Sigma)  to  measure  CM-cellulase  activity,  Avicel  (Fluka,
Ireland) for avicelase, and D-cellobiose (Sigma) for β-glu-
cosidase.  After  incubation  for  5  days  at  25oC,  estimation
of  cellulase  activity was  conducted  by  observing  the  clear
zone  formed  around  each  fungal  colony,  which  results
from  the  reaction  between  the  enzymes  secreted  by  the
colony  and  the  chromogenic  substrates.  The  clear  zone  of
each sample  was observed with  the  naked eye  and  photo-
graphed on a white light box. To evaluate the effect of pH

on  the  chromogenic  reaction,  the  cultures  were  trans-
ferred  to  Congo  red-containing  media  of  different  pHs
ranging from 4.5 to 8.0, and incubated at 25oC for 5 days.
To  evaluate  the  effect  of  temperature,  the  cultures  were
transferred to Congo red media maintained at pH 7.0, and
incubated for 5 days at different temperatures ranging from
15 to 35oC. These assays were each repeated three times.

The  results  of  the  chromogenic  reaction  for  the  four  dif-
ferent  dyes  are  given  in  Table  1.  The  clear  zone  appeared
in the chromogenic media for Congo red,  phenol red, and
remazol  brilliant  blue,  but  no  clear  zone  appeared  in  the
media  with  trypan  blue.  Fig.  1  shows  representative  exam-
ples  of  the  clear  zones  observed  due  to  β-glucosidase
activity.  In  the  cases  of  Trichoderma  and  Saccaromyces
(the  positive  and  negative  controls,  respectively),  clear
zones  were  only  detected  in  the  Congo  red  media.  Media
containing  any  of  the  three  carbon  substrates,  CM-cellu-

Extracellular  Cellulase  Activity  in  Ganoderma  neo-japonicum

131

lose,  avicel,  or  D-cellobiose,  showed  clear  zones.  The
clear  zone  of  Trichoderma  was  the  largest,  but  no  signifi-
cant  clear  zone  was  detected  for  Saccharomyces.  G.  neo-
japonicum,  on  the  other  hand,  formed  a  clear  zone  on
both  Congo  red-containing  media  and  remazol  brilliant
blue-containing  media.  G.  neo-japonicum  and  G.  lucidum
(GBGL-01)  formed  clear  zones  in  media  containing  CM-
cellulose,  avicel,  or  D-cellobiose.  Also,  in  some  cases,  a
clear  zone  was  observed  on  the  phenol  red-containing
media,  but  no  clear  zone  was  observed  on  trypan  blue-
containing media. Among the four dyes, the clear zone was
much  more  obvious  in  the  Congo  red-containing  media

than in the other three dye-containing media. For this rea-
son, we used Congo red for subsequent analyses.

Congo  red  is  a  pH  indicator  that  changes  from  blue  to
red at pH 3.0~5.2. Fungi first degrade cellulose into cello-
biose,  and  then  break  down  cellobiose  to  form  glucose,
and finally metabolize glucose to organic acids. The organic
acids  secreted  by  the  fungi  lower  the  media  pH,  resulting
in  the  Congo  red  media  changing  color  from  red-orange
to light gray, with light purple or light blue. Therefore, we
made  media  with  pHs  ranging  from  4.5  to  8.0.  The  pH
difference  affected  the  color  of  the  media  and  the  forma-
tion  of  the  clear  zone  (Fig.  2).  Clear  zones  were  not

Fig. 2. Examples  of  chromogenic  reactions  on  media  containing  Congo  red  and  D-cellobiose  over  a  range  of  pH.  Top  row:  before
incubation.  Middle  row:  after  incubation  of  Trichoderma.  Bottom  row:  after  incubation  of  Ganoderma  neo-japonicum.
Arrows  indicate  clear  zones.

Fig. 3. Examples  of  chromogenic  reactions  on  media  containing  Congo  red  at  pH  7.0  over  a  range  of  temperatures.  D-cellobiose
was  used  as  the  carbon  substrate.  Top  row:  after  incubation  of  Trichoderma.  Bottom  row:  after  incubation  of  Ganoderma
neo-japonicum.  Arrows  indicate  clear  zones.

132

Jo  et  al.

clearly observed in media of pH 4.5 or 5.0 because of the
dark  color  of  the  media.  The  clear  zone  at  pH  6.0  had  an
uncertain boundary line, and the clear zone at pH 8.0 was
smaller  than  the  one  observed  at  pH  7.0.  As  a  result,  we
selected pH 7.0 for the detection of the extracellular cellu-
lase  activity  in  G.  neo-japonicum.  For  the  carbon  sub-
strates,  media  containing  avicel  and  D-cellobiose  showed
clear  zones  with  a  distinct  color  change  and  boundary
line.  Media  with  CM-cellulose  showed  a  clear  zone  with
an  uncertain  boundary  line  but  a  clear  change  of  color.  In
addition,  we  tested  in  different  temperatures  ranging  from
15 to 35oC, to determine how temperature affects the clear
and  fungus  growing  zones.  Among  the  5  tested  tempera-
tures, 25oC was the most suitable temperature for all three
carbon substrates (Fig. 3).

Our  work  identifies  the  optimal  media  conditions,  dye
reagent,  pH,  and  temperature  for  assays  detecting  the
extracellular cellulase activity of G. neo-japonicum. Congo
red  has  been  used  successfully  in  the  detection  of  cellu-
loytic  enzymes  in  Ophiostoma  and  Leptographium  spe-
cies  [9].  Yoon  et al. [10] also  showed  that Congo  red can
be  used  in  the  detection  of  extracellular  cellulase  in  vari-
ous  fungi.  We  confirmed  that  Congo  red  was  the  most
suitable  dye  for the  detection  of  the  extracellular cellulase
activity  in  G.  neo-japonicum.  The  clear  zone  at  pH  7.0
was much more clear than at other pHs and 25oC was the
best  temperature.  Therefore,  the  best  method  calls  for  G.
neo-japonicum  transfer  onto  media  containing  Congo  red
at  pH  7.0,  followed  by  a  5  day  incubation  at  25oC.  We
expect  that  our  results  will  be  useful  to  researchers  who
study extracellular enzyme activity in G. neo-japonicum.

Acknowledgements

This  study  was  supported  by  “National  Joint  Agricultural

Research  Project  of  RDA  (Project  No.  20100301-302-
093-001-06-00),” Republic of Korea.

References

1. Park WH, Kim TH, Ro IH. Studies on enzymes of the higher
fungi  of  korea  (II):  identification  of  cellulolytic  enzyme  in
Lenzites betulina. Kor J Mycol 1986;14:225-9.

2. Hong  JS,  Uhm  TB,  Jung  GT,  Lee  KB.  Studies  on  the
enzymes  produced  by  Pleurotus  sajor-caju  (I).  Kor  J  Mycol
1984;12:59-64.

3. Hashimoto  K.  Biochemical  studies  on  the  mushroom.  Toyo

Shokuhin Kenkyusho Kenkyu Hokukusho 1972;10:163.

4. Lin  JM,  Lin  CC,  Chen  MF,  Ujiie  T,  Takada  A.  Radical  scav-
enger  and  antihepatotoxic  activity  of  Ganoderma  formosanum,
Ganoderma  lucidum  and  neo-japonicum.  J  Ethnopharmacol
1995;47:33-41.

5. Abrahanm  L,  Hoffman  B,  Gao  Y,  Breuil  C.  Action  of
Ophiostoma  piceae  proteinase  and  lipase  on  wood  nutrients.
Can J Microbiol 1998;44:698-701.

6. Shin  DS,  Lee HH,  Lim  KP,  Cho  NS,  Cho  BM.  Chemistry  of

forest product. Seoul: Haeng Mun Sa; 1991. p. 121-2.

7. Castro  GR,  Ferrero  MA,  Méndez  BS,  Sineriz  F.  Screening
and  selection  of  bacteria  with  high  amylolytic  activity.  Acta
Biotechnol 1993;13:197-201.

8. Hejgaard  J,  Gibbons  GC.  Screening  for  alpha-amylase  in
cereals.  Improved  gel-diffusion  assay  a  dye-labelelled  starch
substrate. Carlsberg Res Commun 1979;44:21-5.

9. Hyun MW, Yoon JH, Park WH, Kim SH. Detection of cellu-
lolytic  activity  in  Ophiostoma  and  Leptographium  species  by
chromogenic reaction. Mycobiology 2006;34:108-10.

10. Yoon JH, Park JE, Suh DY, Hong SB, Ko SJ, Kim SH. Com-
parison  of  dyes  for  easy  detection  of  extracellular  cellulases
in fungi. Mycobiology 2007;35:21-4.

