Mycobiology  39(1) : 26-32  (2011)
  The  Korean  Society  of  Mycology

DOI:10.4489/MYCO.2011.39.1.026

Inhibition Effects of Silver Nanoparticles against Powdery Mildews on Cucumber
and  Pumpkin

Kabir  Lamsal1,  Sang-Woo  Kim1,  Jin  Hee  Jung1,  Yun  Seok  Kim1,  Kyoung  Su  Kim2  and  Youn  Su  Lee1

*

1Division  of  Bio-Resources  Technology,  Kangwon  National  University,  Chuncheon  200-701,  Korea
2Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, Center for Fungal Genetic Resources and Center for Fungal Pathogenesis, Seoul National
University,  Seoul  151-724,  Korea

(Received  October  21,  2010.  Accepted  February  16,  2011)

Powdery  mildew  is  one  of  the  most  devastating  diseases  in  cucurbits.  Crop  yield  can  decline  as  the  disease  severity  increases.
In  this  study,  we  evaluated  the  effect  of  silver  nanoparticles  against  powdery  mildew  under  different  cultivation  conditions
in  vitro  and  in  vivo.  Silver  nanoparticles  (WA-CV-WA13B)  at  various  concentrations  were  applied  before  and  after  disease
outbreak  in  plants  to  determine  antifungal  activities.  In  the  field  tests,  the  application  of  100 ppm  silver  nanoparticles  showed
the  highest  inhibition  rate  for  both  before  and  after  the  outbreak  of  disease  on  cucumbers  and  pumpkins.  Also,  the  appli-
cation  of  100 ppm  silver  nanoparticles  showed  maximum  inhibition  for  the  growth  of  fungal  hyphae  and  conidial  germination
in  in  vivo  tests.  Scanning  electron  microscope  results  indicated  that  the  silver  nanoparticles  caused  detrimental  effects  on
both  mycelial  growth  and  conidial  germination.

KEYWORDS : Agricultural  chemical,  Inhibition  effect,  Powdery  mildew,  Silver  nanoparticles

Powdery  mildew  is  one  of  the  most  destructive foliar dis-
eases of cucurbits. On cucurbits, the disease can be caused
by  two  fungal  species,  Golovinomyces  cichoracearum  or
Sphaerotheca  fusca,  which  are  obligate  biotrophic  ecto-
parasites that induce identical symptoms but can be distin-
guished easily under light microscopy [1].

A wide variety of vegetable crops are affected by pow-
dery  mildews,  including  artichoke,  beans,  beets,  carrot,
cucumber, eggplant, lettuce, melons, peas, peppers, pump-
kins,  radicchio,  radishes,  squash,  tomatoes,  and  turnips.
The  powdery  mildews  are  a  group  of  pathogens  that  can
cause  disease  over  a  wide  range  of  environmental  condi-
tions.  However,  several  environmental  factors  may  directly
affect  the  development  of  this  disease  in  cucurbits  includ-
ing  temperature,  relative  humidity  and  light.  Temperature
and  humidity  must be examined together because  it  is  the
water vapor pressure deficit that has  the greatest effect on
host-parasite  interactions  [2].  For  example,  temperatures
between  75~85oF  and  elevated  levels  of  relative  humidity
(80~95%)  in  the  absence  of  rainfall  promote  the  develop-
ment of this disease.

Severe infection by powdery mildew before the flowering
stage  can  reduce  the  yield  of  cucumber  fruit  by  20~40%.
Leaf  infestation  by  this  pathogen  interferes  with  photo-
synthesis  and  respiration,  leading  to  reduced  fruit  set,
inadequate ripening, and poor flavor development [3]. The
disease  causes  a  whitish,  talcum-like  powdery  growth  on
leaf  surfaces,  petioles  and  stems.  Infected  leaves  usually

*Corresponding  author <E-mail : younslee@kangwon.ac.kr>

wither  and  die,  and  the  plants  senesce  prematurely  [4].
The  disease  is  a  major  production  problem  in  many  areas
of  the  world,  and  the  reduction  of  fruit  quality  and  crop
yield is the most striking aspects of disease loss.

Genetic resistance is used extensively as a control mea-
sure  in  cucumber  and  pumpkins,  and  it  is  being  incorpo-
rated  into  other  cucurbit  crops.  Yield  potential  should  be
considered  when  selecting  varieties  because  some  resis-
tant  varieties  produce  less  fruit  than  susceptible  varieties
that  have  not  been  treated  with  fungicides.  Resistant  vari-
eties  of  pumpkin  and  winter  squash  are  under  development.
Successive  cucurbit  plantings  should  be  physically  separated
because older plants can serve as a source of conidia.

Silver ions are very reactive. They inhibit microbial res-
piration  and  metabolism  and  they  cause  physical  damage
[5, 6].  Moreover,  silver  ions  may  intercalate  into  bacterial
DNA  once  they  enter  the  cell  which  prevents  further  pro-
liferation of the pathogen [7]. Silver has been used to treat
medical  ailments  for  over  100  years  due  to  its  natural
antibacterial  and  antifungal  properties.  It  is  also  used  in
many  applications  as  a  pure  free  metal  or  as  a  compound
because  it  possesses  antimicrobial  activity  against  patho-
gens but is nontoxic to humans.

Recently,  nanotechnology  has  amplified  the  effective-
ness  of  silver  particles  as  antimicrobial  agents.  The  nano-
silver particles typically measure 25 nm. Reducing the parti-
cle  size  of  materials  is  an  efficient  and  reliable  tool  for
improving  their  biocompatibility.  In  fact,  nanotechnology
helps  in  overcoming  the  limitations  of  size  and  can
change the outlook of the world regarding science [8]. Sil-

26

Inhibition  of  Powdery  Mildews  Using  Silver  Nanoparticles

27

ver nanoparticles have extremely large relative surface areas
which increases their contact with bacteria or fungi, vastly
improving  its  bactericidal  and  fungicidal  effectiveness.  The
larger  surface  area-to-volume  ratio  of  silver  nanoparticles
increases  their  contact  with  microbes  and  their  ability  to
permeate  cells.  When  in  contact  with  bacteria  and  fungus,
they will adversely affect cellular metabolism and inhibit cell
growth.  Silver  suppresses  respiration,  basal  metabolism  of
electron transfer systems, and transport of substrates in the
microbial  cell  membrane.  The  nano-silver  inhibits  multi-
plication  and  growth  of  those  bacteria  and  fungi  which
cause  infection,  odour,  itchiness  and  sores.  Nanoparticle
development  has  restored  interest  in  the  antimicrobial  effects
of metals, which declined following the widespread appli-
cation  of  modern  synthetic  antibiotics.  However,  studies
on  the  antimicrobial  activity  of  silver  nano  particles  have
been performed mostly against the animal pathogens [9].

Here,  we  report  that  silver  nanoparticles  can  be  used
effectively in the control of powdery mildews and the pre-
vention  of  deleterious  infections.  Our  results  support  the
hypothesis  that  silver  nanoparticles  can  be  prepared  in  a
simple  and  cost-effective  manner  and  are  suitable  for  for-
mulating new types of fungicidal materials.

Materials  and  Methods

Nano  silver  solution  and  fungicide. Silver  nanoparticle
used  in  this  study  (WA-CV-WA13B,  CV)  was  obtained
from  Bio-Plus  Co.  Ltd  (Pohang,  Korea)  at  1,000 ppm  ini-
tial  concentration  (Table  1).  Different  working  concentra-
tions  of  silver  nano  particles  (10 ppm,  30 ppm,  50 ppm,
and 100 ppm) were prepared by diluting the original stock
solution.  All  solutions  were  stored  at  4oC  until  use.  Two
different  fungicides  i.e.  NSS-F  (Dongbangagro,  Co.,  Seoul,
Korea)  and  Fenari  (Dongbu  HiTek,  Seoul,  Korea)  were
used as positive controls.

was calculated by counting the numbers of infected leaves
out  of  150  leaves  among  the  treated  plants.  Also,  in order
to determine the efficacy of silver nanoparticles, experiment
was carried out in a pumpkin field in Sembat, Chuncheon,
Kangwon-do  with  the  same  procedures  used  for  cucum-
ber.  Fungicides  NSS-F  and  Fenari  were  used  as  positive
controls  and  water  was  used  as  a  negative  control  as
described  above.  Each  experiment  was  repeated  three
times  and  disease  index  was  calculated  by  counting  the
numbers  of  infected  leaves  out  of  150  leaves  among  the
treated plants.

In vitro assay and scanning electron microscope (SEM)
Infected  leaves  of  approximately  5 cm × 5 cm
analysis.
were  collected  aseptically  and  brought  into  the  laboratory
for  in  vitro  inhibition  analysis  of  powdery  mildew  using
SEM.  The  diseased  portion  was  cut  out  from  the  leaf  and
kept in a petri dish (90 × 15 mm). Five mL of four differ-
ent  concentrations  (i.e.,  10 ppm,  30 ppm,  50 ppm  and
100 ppm) of silver nanoparticles CV was applied over the
surface  of  leaves  using  a  sprayer.  Water  was  used  as  a
control.  Treated  leaves  were  incubated  for  four  days  at
room  temperature.  The  treated  leaves  were  then  observed
by  SEM  provided  by  SEM  (LV-SEMS-3500N  Hitachi,
Korea Basic Science Institute-Chuncheon).

Data  analysis. The  results  were  obtained  one  week  after
the  last  treatment  for  after-the-disease-outbreak  treatment,
and  the  results  were  obtained  four  weeks  after  the  last
treatment  for  before-the-disease-outbreak  treatment.  Disease
incidence  (%)  was  determined  by  calculating  the  number
of  infected  leaves  out  of  150  leaves  among  the  treated
plants.  A  plant  with  disease  symptoms  was  con-  sidered
infected.

Results

In  order  to  determine  the  efficacy  of  silver
Field  assay.
nanoparticals  against  powdery  mildew  in  the  field,  an  ex-
periment was carried out in Gothan, Chuncheon, Kangwon-
do after cucumbers were infected with the disease naturally.
Silver  nanoparticle  CV was  used at  four  different  concen-
trations  (10 ppm,  30 ppm,  50 ppm  and  100 ppm).  The
aerial spray method was used to apply silver nanoparticles
around  the  shoot  portion  of  the  whole  plants  3~4  weeks
before  the  outbreak  of  the  disease  and  after  disease
occurrence.  Fungicides  NSS-F  (Dongbangagro,  Co.)  and
Fenari (Dongbu HiTek) were used as positive controls and
distilled water was used as negative control. Disease index

Effect  of  silver  nanoparticles  against  powdery  mildew
in  cucumbers. The  results  for  disease  incidence  (%)  in
cucumber  treated  with  silver  nanoparticles  before  and
after  the  outbreak  of  disease  symptoms  were  shown  in
Fig. 1. The average disease incidence observed in the con-
trol plants was 82.0%. All plants treated with silver nano-
particle  CV  showed  disease  suppression  compared  to  the
control.  The  disease  incidence  was  significantly  lower  in
plants treated with high concentrations of silver nanoparticle.
Inhibition  increased  with  increasing  concentration  of  silver
nanoparticles.  The  chemical  fungicide  “Fenari”  showed
the lowest disease incidence (3%). Other commercial fun-

Table 1. Characteristics of silver nanoparticles used in this study

Type

Physical  form

Average  particles  size  (nm)

Silver  contents  (µg/mL)

Solvent

WA-CV-WA13B  (CV)

Dark  brown  colloid

7~25

40,000~50,000

Distilled  water

28

Lamsal  et  al.

Fig. 1. Effect  of  silver  nanoparticles  WA-CV-WA13B  against
powdery  mildew  in  cucumber.  Results  were  obtained
one  wk  after  the  last  treatment  for  after-the-disease-
outbreak  treatment  and  the  other  results  were  obtained
four  wk  after  the  last  treatment  for  before-the-disease-
outbreak 
fungicides  NSS-F
(Dongbangagro,  Co.,  Seoul,  Korea)  and  Fenari  (Dongbu
HiTek,  Seoul,  Korea)  were  used  as  positive  controls.
Distilled  water  was  used  as  a  negative  control.  Data
were  obtained  from  triplicate  assays  and  presented  as
mean ± SD.

treatment.  Commercial 

Fig. 2. Effect  of  silver  nanoparticles  WA-CV-WA13B  against
powdery  mildew  in  pumpkin.  Results  were  obtained
one  wk  after  the  last  treatment  for  after-the-disease-
outbreak  treatment  and  the  other  results  were  obtained
four  wk  after  the  last  treatment  for  before-the-disease-
outbreak 
fungicides  NSS-F
(Dongbangagro,  Co.,  Seoul,  Korea)  and  Fenari  (Dongbu
HiTek,  Seoul,  Korea)  were  used  as  positive  controls.
Distilled  water  was  used  as  a  negative  control.  Data
were  obtained  from  triplicate  assays  and  presented  as
mean ± SD.

treatment.  Commercial 

gicide  NSS-F  treated  plants  showed  25.5%  disease  inci-
dence. The comparative analysis of disease incidence, when
plants  were  treated  with  different  concentrations  of  silver
nanoparticle  before  and  after  disease  outbreak  on  plants,
was  also  assessed.  The  disease  incidence  was  higher  in
the  plants  treated  after  disease  outbreak  on  plants.  The
disease  incidence  was  observed  as  57.8,  48.8,  40.2  and
20%  in  10,  30,  50  and  100 ppm  concentrations  of  silver
nanoparticles  treated  after  disease  outbreak  on  plants.  In
similar way, the disease incidence was observed as 45, 40,
27  and  18%  in  10,  30,  50  and  100 ppm  concentrations  of
silver  nanoparticles  treated  before  the  disease  outbreaks
on  plants,  respectively.  Therefore,  results  showed  the
application  of  silver  nanoparticle  was  more  effective  when
applied  before  any  disease  symptoms  occurred  on  plants.
Also,  100 ppm  concentration  of  silver  nanoparticles  was
more  effective  than  that  of  commercial  fungicide  NSS-F
in both before and after the disease outbreak conditions.

Effect  of  silver  nanoparticles  against  powdery  mildew
in  pumpkin. The  disease  incidence  of  silver  nanoparti-
cles  CV  was  analyzed  against  powdery  mildew  in  pump-
kins (Fig. 2). The average disease incidence was maximum,
i.e. 85% in control plants. Positive control “Fenari” showed
the  lowest  disease  incidence  (4%)  against  the  powdery
mildew, and another commercial fungicide NSS-F showed

34.4%  disease  incidence,  which  is  higher  compared  to
that  of  100 ppm  silver  nanoparticles  application  in  both
before  and  after  disease  outbreak  conditions.  The  efficacy
of  50 ppm  silver  nanoparticles  was  also  higher  than  that
of  NSS-F  when  the  treatment  was  done  before  disease
outbreak  on  plants.  However,  the  disease  incidence  was
similar  with  that  of  NSS-F  in  30 ppm  silver  nanoparticles
treatment.  The  disease  incidence  was  observed  the  high-
est in case of silver nanoparticles treatment done after dis-
ease  outbreak  in  plants.  The  disease  incidence  was
significantly  low  when  treatment  was  done  before  disease
appears  on  plants.  Suppression  of  disease  was  observed
significantly high in all four concentrations of silver nano-
particles  when  it  was  applied  before  disease  outbreak  in
plants. The disease incidence was observed as 60, 60, 65 and
25%  in  10,  30,  50  and  100 ppm  concentrations  of  silver
nanoparticles treatment after the disease outbreak on plants.
The inhibition of powdery mildew was observed signif-
icantly  high  in  case  of  treatment  done  before  disease  out-
breaks  on  pumpkin.  The  disease  incidence  was  observed
in 10 ppm, 30 ppm, 50 ppm and 100 ppm silver nanoparti-
cles  were  53.4,  34.4,  25  and  20%  respectively,  treated
before  disease  outbreak  on  plants.  Commercial  fungicide
NSS-F  showed  lower  disease  suppression  rate  compared
to  100 ppm  treatment  on  pumpkins  on  both  before  and
after  the  disease  outbreak  conditions.  The  result  showed

Inhibition  of  Powdery  Mildews  Using  Silver  Nanoparticles

29

that  the  inhibition  of  powdery  mildew  on  both  plants
depends  on  the  concentration  of  silver  nanoparticles  and
treatment  timing.  Successful  reduction  of  powdery  mil-
dew  on  pumpkin  can  be  achieved  when  silver  nanoparti-
cles  are  applied  in  dose  dependent  manner  as  well  as

before disease outbreak on host plants.

SEM  analysis  of  silver  nanoparticles  against  hypha
and spore germination. Powdery mildew infected leaves
were  used  to  analyze  via  SEM  the  inhibition  of  the  dis-

Fig. 3. Spores  and  mycelia  of  powdery  mildews  treated  with  distilled  water  (control)  and  observed  with  scanning  electron

microscope  over  four  days  with  two-day  interval.

Fig. 4. Spores  and  mycelia  of  powdery  mildews  treated  with  10 ppm  silver  nanoparticles  WA-CV-WA13B  and  observed  with

scanning  electron  microscope  over  four  days  with  two-day  interval.

30

Lamsal  et  al.

ease  by  silver  nanoparticles.  Control  leaves  treated  with
distilled  water  had  slightly wrinkled  spores and  mycelia  2
days  after  treatment  but  they  regained  their  original  shape
by  4  days  after  treatment  (Fig.  3).  When  powdery  mildew
was  treated  with  10 ppm  silver  nanoparticles,  there  were

wrinkled  and  sunken  spores  and  mycelia  (Fig.  4).  The
condition  became  more  severe  over  time.  Similar  condi-
tions  were  observed  in  spores  and  mycelia  treated  with
30 ppm  and  50 ppm  silver  nanoparticles  (Figs.  5  and  6).
When  powdery  mildew  was  treated  with  100 ppm  silver

Fig. 5. Spores  and  mycelia  of  powdery  mildews  treated  with  30 ppm  silver  nanoparticles  WA-CV-WA13B  and  observed  with

scanning  electron  microscope  over  four  days  with  two-day  interval.

Fig. 6. Spores  and  mycelia  of  powdery  mildews  treated  with  50 ppm  silver  nanoparticles  WA-CV-WA13B  and  observed  with

scanning  electron  microscope  over  four  days  with  two-day  interval.

Inhibition  of  Powdery  Mildews  Using  Silver  Nanoparticles

31

Fig. 7. Spores  and  mycelia  of  powdery  mildews  treated  with  100 ppm  silver  nanoparticles  WA-CV-WA13B  and  observed  with

scanning  electron  microscope  over  four  days  with  two-day  interval.

nanoparticles,  cellular  deformities  occurred  from  day  two
after  treatment  and  the  condition  became  more  severe
over  time  (Fig.  7).  In  most  cases,  the  death  and  lysis  of
spores and mycelia were observed.

Discussion

Little  is  known  about  the  effects  of  silver  on  the  phyto-
pathogenic  fungi,  because  most  studies  have  focused  on
bacterial  and  viral  pathogens  of  animals.  In  this  study,  we
evaluated  the  inhibition  effects  of  silver  nanoparticles
against  powdery  mildew  in  cucumbers  and  pumpkins  in
the  field.  Our  results  clearly  demonstrated  that  the  silver
nanoparticles  inhibit  the  fungus  which  causes  powdery
mildew.  Previous  studies  suggested  that  nanometer-sized
silvers  possess  different  properties,  which  might  come
from  morphological,  structural  and  physiological  changes
[10]. Silver nano particles are highly reactive because they
generate  Ag+  ions,  while  metallic  silver  is  relatively  unre-
active  [11].  Nanoparticles  penetrate  into  microbial  cells,
which  imply  lower  concentrations  of  nano-sized  silvers  are
sufficient  for  microbial  control.  This  would  be  efficient,
especially  for  some  organisms  that  are  less  sensitive  to
antibiotics due to poor penetration of some antibiotics into
cells  [12].  A  previous  study  observed  that  silver  nanoparti-
cles disrupt transport systems, including ion efflux [11]. The
dysfunction of  ion  efflux  can  cause rapid  accumulation  of
silver  ions,  which  interupts  cellular  processes  such  as
metabolism and respiration by reacting with molecules. Also,

silver  ions  produce  reactive  oxygen  species  via  their  reac-
tion  with  oxygen,  which  are  detrimental  to  cells,  causing
damage to proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids [13, 14].

In the present experiment, silver nanoparticles of 50 ppm
and 100 ppm had significant inhibition effects against pow-
dery mildew, in both field tests. As we observed, the treat-
ment  below  100 ppm  solution  had  shown  low  inhibition
rate when it was applied after disease outbreak. But when
silver  nanoparticle  was  applied  3~4  weeks  before  disease
outbreaks,  even  50 ppm  concentration  of  silver  nanoparti-
cles  can  inhibit  powdery  mildew  effectively.  This  sug-
gests  that  disease  suppression  can  be  achieved  with  a  low
concentration  of  silver  nanoparticles  when  it  is  applied
before  disease  outbreak  in  the  field.  Therefore,  this  study
demonstrated  that  silver  nanoparticles  can  control  pow-
dery mildew in field conditions.

Acknowledgements

This  research  was  supported  by  grants  from  the  Ministry
of  Food,  Agriculture,  Forestry  and  Fisheries,  and  in  part,
the  Agriculture  and  Life  Sciences  Research  Institute
(ALSRI) of Kangwon National University. We would like
to  thank  Bio-Plus  Co.  Ltd.  (Pohang,  Korea)  for  providing
silver nanoparticle used in this study.

References

1. Braun  U,  Cook  RT,  Inman  AJ,  Shin  HD.  The  taxonomy  of

32

Lamsal  et  al.

the  powdery  mildew  fungi.  In:  Bélanger  RR,  Bushnell  WR,
Dik  AJ,  Carver  TL,  editors.  The  powdery  mildews.  A  com-
prehensive treatise. St. Paul: APS Press; 2002. p. 13-55.

2. Jarvis  W,  Gubler  WG,  Grove  GG.  Epidemiology  of  powdery
mildews  in  agricultural  ecosystems.  In:  Belanger  RR,  Bush-
nell WR, Dik AJ,  Carver TL, editors. The powdery mildews.
a comprenhensive treatise. St. Paul: APS Press; 2002. p. 169-
99.

Escherichia coli  and Staphylococcus  aureus.  J  Biomed  Mater
Res 2000;52:662-8.

8. Mirkin  CA,  Taton  TA.  Semiconductors  meet  biology.  Nature

2000;405:626-7.

9. Richards  RM.  Antimicrobial  action  of  silver  nitrate.  Micro-

bios 1981;31:83-91.

10. Nel A, Xia T, Mädler L, Li N. Toxic potential of materials at

the nanolevel. Science 2003;311:622-7.

3. McGrath MT. Successful management  of  powdery  mildew in
pumpkin  with  disease  threshold-based  fungicide  programs.
Plant Dis 1996;80:910-6.

11. Morones JR, Elechiguerra JL, Camacho A, Holt K, Kouri JB,
Ramirez  JT,  Yacaman  MJ.  The  bactericidal  effect  of  silver
nanoparticles. Nanobiotechnology 2005;16:2346-53.

4. Zitter  TA,  Hopkins  DL,  Thomas  CE.  Compendium  of  cucur-

bit diseases. St Paul: APS Press; 1996.

5. Bragg,  PD, Rannie  DJ.  The effect  of  silver  ions  on  the  respi-
ratory  chain  of  Escherichia  coli.  Can  J  Microbiol  1974;20:
883-9.

6. Thurman  RB,  Gerba  CP,  Bitton  G.  The  molecular  mecha-
nisms  of  copper  and  silver  ion  disinfection  of  bacteria  and
viruses. Crit Rev Environ Sci Technol 1989;18:295-315.

7. Feng  QL,  Wu  J,  Chen  GQ,  Cui  FZ,  Kim  TN,  Kim  JO.  A
mechanistic  study  of  the  antibacterial  effect  of  silver  ions  on

12. Samuel  U,  Guggenbichler  JP.  Prevention  of  catheter  related
infections:  the  potential  of  a  new  nano-silver  impregnated
catheter. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2004;23(Suppl 1):S75-8.

13. Hwang  ET,  Lee  JH,  Chae  YJ,  Kim  YS,  Kim  BC,  Sang  BI,
Gu MB. Analysis of the toxic mode of action of silver  nano-
particles  using  stress-specific  bioluminescent  bacteria.  Small
2008;4:746-50.

14. Storz  G,  Imlay  JA.  Oxidative  stress.  Curr  Opin  Microbiol

1999;2:188-94.

