Mycobiology  39(2) : 140-142  (2011)
  The  Korean  Society  of  Mycology

DOI:10.4489/MYCO.2011.39.2.140
pISSN  1229-8093
eISSN  2092-9323

First  Report  of  Rhizopus  oryzae  as  a  Postharvest  Pathogen  of  Apple  in  Korea

Jin-Hyeuk  Kwon1

*,  Jinwoo  Kim2  and  Won-Il  Kim3

1Gyeongsangnam-do  Agricultural  Research  and  Extension  Services,  Jinju  660-360,  Korea
2Institute  of  Agriculture  and  Life  Science,  Gyeongsang  National  University,  Jinju  660-701,  Korea
3National  Academy  of  Agricultural  Science,  Rural  Development  Administration,  Suwon  441-707,  Korea

(Received  January  24,  2011.  Accepted  May  13,  2011)

Soft  rot  in  apple  caused  by  Rhizopus  oryzae  was  found  for  the  first  time  in  Korea.  A  detailed  description  of  the  specimen
is  given  along  with  its  internal  transcribed  spacer  rDNA  sequence.  The  fungus  was  identified  as  Rhizopus  oryzae  based  on
the  mycological  characteristics,  molecular  data,  and  pathogenicity  testing. 

KEYWORDS : Postharvest  disease,  Rhizopus  oryzae,  Soft  rot

Postharvest diseases including soft rot occur on the succu-
lent  tissues  of  vegetables,  fruits,  and  ornamental  plants
worldwide.  Postharvest  losses  as  a  result  of  fungal  infec-
tion  occur  if  products  are  stored  at  the  incorrect  tempera-
ture,  stored  for  an  extended  period  of  time  at  cold
temperatures,  or  as  a  result  of  mechanical  failure  during
storage  or  transport  [1].  In  March  2010,  a  disease  sus-
pected to be Rhizopus soft rot was observed on apple fruit
at commercial markets in Jinju, Korea.

Symptoms. The  first  symptom  of  soft  rot  on  apple  fruit
was  a water-soaked  appearance  to the affected  tissue.  The
diseased  parts  later  disintegrated  into  a  mushy  mass  of
disorganized  cells  that  sloughed  off.  Rapid  softening  and
disintegration  of  the  diseased  tissue  followed.  White
mycelia  formed  on  infection  sites  of  apples  and  gradually
covered  the  fruit  with  tufted  whisker-like  gray  sporangio-
phores  and  sporangia  (Fig.  1A).  Longitudinal  sections  of
the  infected  apple  fruit  appeared  softened  and  severely
rotted (Fig. 1B).

Mycological  characteristics. The  causal  fungus  was
isolated  from  the  diseased  fruit  sampled  from  commercial
markets.  Sporangiospores,  sporangia,  and  sporangiophores
were observed under a light microscope (Table 1) [2]. The
fungal  colonies  that  grew  on  potato  dextrose  agar  were
initially  white  and  cottony,  then  became  heavily  speckled
with  sporangia,  and  finally  became  brownish-grey  to
blackish-grey and spread rapidly with stolons fired at vari-
ous points to the substrate by rhizoids (Fig. 2A). The opti-
mum  temperature  for  mycelial  growth  was  30oC,  with

*Corresponding  author  <E-mail : kwon825@korea.kr>

good  growth  still  apparent  at  37oC.  Sporangiospores  were
unequal,  numerous,  irregular,  sub-globose  or  oval,  angular
with  striations,  and  4~8 µm  (Fig.  2B).  Sporangiophores
were  usually  straight,  mostly  8~20 µm,  smooth-walled,
simple or branched, non-septate, long, and arose from sto-
lons  opposite  rhizoids  usually  in  groups  of  3~5  or  more.
Sporangia  were  globose,  white  at  first,  and  then  turned
black  with  many  spores,  mostly  40~200 µm  (Fig.  2C).
Columella  were  globose  to  sub-globose,  pale  brown,  and
mostly  85~110 µm  (Fig.  2D).  Rhizoids  and  stolons  were
dark brown (Fig. 2E).

Pathogenicity  testing. Twelve  apple  fruits  were  artifi-
cially  inoculated  with  a  representative  fungus  using  the
wound  infection  method.  A  conidial  suspension  (0.1 mL;
3 × 104 conidia/mL)  of  the  causal  fungus  was  placed  on
the surface of apple fruit. The inoculated fruit was kept in
a  moist  chamber  with  100%  relative  humidity  at  30oC.
After a 3 day incubation, the same fungal symptoms were
reproduced: soft rot was observed on inoculated fruits that
was  identical  to  symptoms  observed  at  the  commercial
markets  (Fig.  1C  and  1D).  The  causal  pathogen  was  re-
isolated from the lesions to prove Koch’s postulates.

Internal  transcribed  spacer  (ITS)  sequence  analysis.
To  confirm  the  identity  of  the  causal  fungus,  the  ITS
rDNA  of  the  isolate  was  amplified  and  sequenced  using
ITS1  (5'-TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG-3')  and 
ITS4
primers (5'-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3'), as described
by  White  et  al.  [3].  The  resulting  626-bp  sequence  was
deposited in GenBank (accession No. HQ897687). A phy-

This  is  an  Open  Access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  of  the  Creative  Commons  Attribution  Non-Commercial  License  (http://cre-
ativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/)  which  permits  unrestricted  non-commercial  use,  distribution,  and  reproduction  in  any  medium,  pro-
vided  the  original  work  is  properly  cited.

140

 
Soft  Rot  of  Apple  Caused  by  Rhizopus  oryzae

141

logenetic  analysis  was  performed  using  MEGA4  with  the
neighbor-joining method and the Tajima-Nei distance model.

Fig. 1. Symptoms  of  soft  rot  on  apple  (Malus  pumila  var.
dulcissima  Koidz.)  caused  by  Rhizopus  oryzae.  A,  Soft
rot  symptoms  on  apple  fruit  sampled  from  commercial
markets;  B,  Longitudinal  section  of  apple.  Symptoms
were  induced  naturally;  C,  Symptoms  induced  by
artificial  inoculation;  D,  Longitudinal  section  of  apple.
Symptoms  were  induced  artificially.

Fig. 3. Phylogenetic  tree  using  internal  transcribed  spacer  (ITS)
sequences  showing  closest  known  relatives  of  Rhizopus
oryzae,  including  soft  rot  fungus  infecting  Malus  pumila
var.  dulcissima  Koidz.  DNA  sequences  from  the  NCBI
nucleotide  database  were  aligned  using  ClustalW,  and
a  phylogenetic  tree  was  constructed  using  the  neighbor-
joining  method  and  visualized  with  TreeView.  Numbers
above the branches indicate bootstrap values. Bars indicate
number  of  nucleotide  substitutions  per  site.  The  present
isolate  infecting  M.  pumila  is  marked  in  bold.

Table 1. Comparison  of  morphological  characteristics  of  soft  rot  fungus  isolated  from  apple  (Malus  pumila  var.  dulcissima  Koidz.)

with previous descriptions of Rhizopus oryzae

Characteristics

Colony
Sporangium

Sporangiospore

Sporangiophore
Columellum

Color
Shape
Size
Shape
Size
Size
Shape
Size

Isolate  in  present  study

R.  oryzae  [2]

Brownish-grey  to  blackish-grey
Globose
40~200 µm  in  diameter
Sub-globose  or  oval
4~8 µm  in  length
8~20 µm  in  diameter
Globose  to  sub-globose
85~110 µm  in  diameter

Brownish-grey  to  blackish-grey
Globose
30~210 µm  in  diameter
Sub-globose,  limoniform
4~10 µm  in  length
7~20 µm  in  diameter
Globose  to  sub-globose
90~120 µm  in  diameter

Fig. 2. Morphological  characteristics  of  Rhizopus  oryzae  isolated  from  soft  rot  lesions  on  apple  (Malus  pumila  var.  dulcissima
Koidz.).  A,  Colony  on  potato  dextrose  agar  after  a  7  day  incubation;  B,  Sporangium  and  sporangiophore;  C,  Columella;  D,
Sporangiospores;  E,  Rhizoids.

142

Kwon  et  al.

Previously  published  ITS  sequences  from  R.  oryzae  strains
were  included  for  reference,  and  Mucor  miehei  (Gen-
Bank accession No. AF198253) was used as an out-group
[4].  In  the  phylogenetic  tree,  the  present  isolate  was
placed within a clade comprising R. oryzae references iso-
lates (Fig. 3).

Soft  rot  of  apple  caused  by  R.  stolonifer  has  been
reported  previously  [5],  but  soft  rot  caused  by  R.  oryzae
has  not  been  recorded  in  Korea  [6].  The  representative
culture  of  the  causal  fungus  was  deposited  in  the  Korean
Agricultural  Culture  Collection  (KACC  45815),  National
Academy  of  Agricultural  Science,  Suwon,  Korea.  Based
on  the  mycological  characters,  molecular  data,  and  patho-
genicity  testing  of  the  host  plant,  the  fungus  was  identi-
fied  as  Rhizopus  oryzae Went  &  Prisen  Geerligs  [2].  This
is the first report of R. oryzae on apple in Korea.

Acknowledgements

This work was conducted with the support of the Cooper-
ative  Research  Program  for  Agriculture  Science  &  Tech-
nology  Development  (PJ007345),  Rural  Development
Administration, Korea.

References

1. Agrios  GN.  Plant  pathology.  5th  ed.  New  York:  Academic

Press; 2005.

2. Lunn  JA.  Rhizopus  oryzae.  CMI  descriptions  of  pathogenic
fungi and bacteria. No. 525. Kew: Commonwealth Mycologi-
cal Institute; 1977.

3. White  TJ,  Bruns  T,  Lee  S,  Taylor  JW.  Amplification  and
direct  sequencing  of  fungal  ribosomal  RNA  genes  for  phylo-
genetics.  In:  Innis  MA,  Gelfand  DH,  Sninsky  JJ,  White  TJ,
editors.  PCR  protocols:  a  guide  to  methods  and  applications.
New York: Academic Press; 1990. p. 315-22.

4. Abe  A,  Oda  Y,  Asano  K,  Sone  T.  The  molecular  phylogeny
of  the  genus  Rhizopus  based  on  rDNA  sequences.  Biosci
Biotechnol Biochem 2006;70:2387-93.

5. Kwon  JH,  Jee  HJ.  Occurrence  of  rhizopus  soft  rot  on  apple
fruit  caused  by  Rhizopus  stolonifer  in  Korea.  Res  Plant  Dis
2008;14:57-60.

6. Korean  Society  of  Plant  Pathology.  List  of  plant  diseases  in
Korea.  5th  ed.  Seoul:  Korean  Society  of  Plant  Pathology;
2009.

