 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, 4, 47-52 

47 

Open Access 

Black  Box  Chimera  Check  (B2C2):  a Windows-Based  Software  for  Batch 
Depletion of Chimeras from Bacterial 16S rRNA Gene Datasets 

Viktoria Gontcharova1,2, Eunseog Youn4, Randall D. Wolcott1,2,3, Emily B. Hollister5,  
Terry J. Gentry5 and Scot E. Dowd1,2,* 

1Research and Testing Laboratory of the South Plains, Lubbock, TX, USA 79407 

2Medical Biofilm Research Institute, Lubbock, TX, USA 79407 

3Southwest Regional Wound Care Clinic, Lubbock, TX, USA 79410 

4Computer Science Department, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, USA 79409-3104 

5Department of Soil and Crop Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA 77843-2474 

Abstract:  The  existing  chimera  detection  programs  are  not  specifically  designed  for  "next  generation"  sequence  
data. Technologies like Roche 454 FLX and Titanium have been adapted over the past years especially with the introduc-
tion  of  bacterial  tag-encoded  FLX/Titanium  amplicon  pyrosequencing  methodologies  to  produce  over  one  million  250-
600  bp 16S  rRNA  gene  reads  that  need  to  be  depleted  of  chimeras  prior  to  downstream  analysis.  Meeting  the  needs  of  
basic scientists who are venturing into high-throughput microbial diversity studies such as those based upon pyrosequenc-
ing  and  specifically  providing  a  solution  for  Windows  users,  the  B2C2  software  is  designed  to  be  able  to  accept  files  
containing  large  multi-FASTA  formatted  sequences  and  screen  for  possible  chimeras  in  a  high  throughput  fashion.  The 
graphical user interface (GUI) is also  able to batch process multiple files.  When compared to popular chimera  screening 
software  the  B2C2  performed  as  well  or  better  while  dramatically  decreasing  the  amount  of  time  required  generating  
and  screening  results.  Even  average  computer  users  are  able  to  interact  with  the  Windows  .Net  GUI-based  application  
and  define  the  stringency  to  which  the  analysis  should  be  done.  B2C2  may  be  downloaded  from  http://www. 
researchandtesting.com/B2C2. 

Keywords: Chimera, chimera detection, high throughput, pyrosequencing, Windows, next generation.  

INTRODUCTION 

 
PCR  techniques,  although  commonly  used  and  arguably 
the  most  powerful  and  accurate  means  of  characterizing  
bacterial  diversity  also  generate  chimeric  sequences  [1].  A 
chimera  is  formed  during  PCR  amplification  if  sequence 
synthesis which first starts at one template, is interrupted for 
any  reason,  and  continues  synthesis  along  another  template. 
The  focus  of  chimera  detection  is  now  on  development  of 
high  throughput  methods  which  still  maintain  a  degree  of 
efficiency  and  accuracy  while  allowing  for  flexible  user  
input.  Next  generation  pyrosequencing  technologies,  like  
the  Roche  454,  generate  over  1  million  high  quality  reads  
per  run,  between  250-600  basepairs  (bp)  on  average  using 
PCR principles.  This  can complicate chimera detection even 
further by amplifying the errors occurring in the process.  

Pyrosequencing  is  a  rapid  sequencing  process  following 
 
the  synthesis  principle  that  has  been  made  feasible  by  ap-
proaches  like  454  Sequencing,  a  system  for  massively-
parallel pyrosequencing [2]. Amplicon based 454 sequencing 
techniques  promise  the  potential  for  previously  unrealized  
 

*Address  correspondence  to  this  author  at  the  Research  and  Testing  
Laboratory of the South Plains, Lubbock, TX, USA 79407; Tel: 806-771-1134; 
Fax: 806-771-1168; E-mail:sdowd@pathogenresearch.org  

resolution  into  highly  diverse  environments.  Bacterial  tag-
encoded  FLX  Amplicon  Pyrosequencing  (bTEFAP)  is  a 
newly  described  method  for  evaluating  microbial  diversity 
within  complex  environments  [3-5],  based  upon  the  16S 
rRNA  gene  or  any  other  gene.  One  of  the  necessary  im-
provements  in  the  analysis  of  data  generated  by  this  power-
ful  technique  and  other  approaches  to  analysis  of  pyrose-
quencing  results  [6,  7]  is  the  ability  to  detect  and  eliminate 
chimeras. 

  Chimeras  pose  serious  problems  in  community  analysis 
by  artificially  increasing  diversity.  The  current  and  most 
powerful  chimera  detection  algorithms  require  computation 
of multiple sequence alignment and distance matrices, which 
is  computationally  and  time  intensive  [8-11].  In  addition, 
many of  the existing  algorithms are optimal for detection of 
chimeras  in  full  length  sequences  (1300+  bp)  [8,  9]. We  in-
troduce a standalone Windows. Net based application which 
can be used for high throughput, high volume screening and 
batch  processing  of  16S  rRNA  gene  amplicon  libraries.  By 
utilizing  a  GUI  format  in  the  Windows  environment,  we 
provide an application which can be utilized by a wide vari-
ety  of  microbial  ecologists  who  may  not  have  expertise  in 
programming  or  the  Linux/Unix  based  environments,  which 
are more common to bioinformaticians. 

 
 

1874-2858/10 

2010 Bentham Open 

48    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4 

MATERIALS AND METHODOLOGY 

  With  a  demand  for  a  method  to  screen  for  chimeras  we 
built  a  GUI-based  high  throughput  implementation.  The 
software is designed for a non-bioinformatician scientist and 
could be used for variable stringencies of chimera  checking. 
The  software  is  built  within  the.  NET  Windows  platform 
which  allows  scientists to batch process sequence files from 
a wide range of projects, including short read data. 

Characteristics of the B2C2 Software 

  Multiple files within a folder may be selected for analysis 
during  the  same  process.  The  method  extracts  100  bp  long 
contiguous  start  and  end  regions  of  each  FASTA  format  in-
put  sequence.  These  regions  are  then  aligned  against  a  cus-
tom  BLAST  database  containing  7,199  high  quality  se-
quences  consisting  of  a  representative,  verified  set  of  bacte-
ria  with  full  taxonomic  information  (at  all  7  major  levels). 
Each species of bacteria was only included once to minimize 
search  space. When  sequences  are  aligned  against  this  data-
base,  taxonomic  information of each of the regions  is evalu-
ated and the percentage of matching taxonomic levels is cal-
culated  from  species  back  to  the  kingdom  level.  The  higher 
the  taxonomic  identity  between  both  regions,  the  less  likely 
is  the  sequence  to  be  chimeric.  In  other  words,  if  the  start 
and  end  regions  align  to  the  same  species,  the  identity  is 
100%,  or  7  out  of  7  possible  levels.  This  evaluation  consid-
ers  all  levels  of  taxonomy  since  sequences  belonging  to  the 
same species belong  to the same genus, family, order,  class, 
phylum and kingdom.  Similarly,  if  the start and end regions 
align  to  sequences  from  the  same  genus,  but  differing  spe-
cies,  there  are  6  of  7  matching  levels-  including  kingdom, 
phylum, class, order, family and genus. 

  The  stringency  of  the  analysis  is  user  defined,  thus  the 
accuracy  is  able  to  be  customized  for  the  strictness  desired 
and  the  task  at  hand.  The  database  against  which  the  input 
sequences  are  aligned  has  been  designed  to  contain  all  the 
necessary  information  for  this  type  of  analysis  based  on  the 
seven  major  taxonomic  levels:  kingdom,  phylum,  class,  or-
der,  family,  genus,  and  species.  Each  sequence  in  the  data-
base  contains  this  information  and  during  the  analysis,  the 
number  of  matching  taxa  are  assessed.  For  each  region  of 
each sequence, top 8 best results from a BLAST, specifically 
blastn,  alignment  are  considered.  The  best  match  from  the 
start and end regions are used in the calculation of the result. 

B2C2 Output 

  The  output  is  organized  into  four  FASTA  files  based  on 
user defined parameters (for definite, possible, non-chimeric 
and unclassified sequences). The sequence names in the files 
are  followed  by  a  number  of  matching  phylogenetic  levels 
between  the  start  and  end  regions  of  the  sequence  in  ques-
tion,  neither  the  potential  parents  nor  the  break-points  of  a 
potential  chimera  are  reported.  These  files  are  designated 
with  the  file  name  followed  by  "DefiniteChimera",  "Possi-
bleChimera"  and  "NotChimera".  In  addition,  a  fourth  file 
designated  with  "NotClassified"  is  created  to  contain  se-
quences for which  a problem occurred, such as no hits were 
found  for  one  or  both  end  regions.  Because  as  noted  for  all 
other  chimera  detection  algorithms,  there  is  no  guaranteed 
way  to  computationally  determine  if  the  sequences  are  
chimeric, the files are provided for the user to determine the 

Gontcharova et al. 

next appropriate step. However, the application also contains 
the  option  for  the  user  to  remove  chimeric  and  possibly  
chimeric  sequences  from  the  submitted  files  to  generate  a 
"Final"  FASTA  file.  This  file  can  be  used  for  downstream 
analysis applications.  

Testing B2C2 

  To  ensure  that  this  application  performed  as  well  or  bet-
ter  than  current  chimera  check  implementations  we  did  a 
comparative study. A test set of 300 chimeric sequences was 
generated  from  randomly  selected  bacterial  sequences.  Se-
quences  of  600  bp  were  formed  from  two  parental  strands 
snipped  in  the  200  to  400  range  and  re-concatenated  to  a 
different  sequence  in  the  200-600  range.  This  process  was 
applied  to  simulate  100  chimeric  sequences  with  parents 
varying at the genus or species level (close relationship), 100 
chimeric  sequences  varying  on  order  or  family  levels,  and 
100 distantly related chimeric sequences varying  at  the phy-
lum or class levels. The 600 bp sequences emulated the short 
reads resulting from "next generation" technologies. A fourth 
file,  consisting  of  verified,  non-chimeric,  parent  sequences 
was  also  compiled  to  test  the  ability  of  B2C2  to  correctly 
classify  non-chimeras.  These  "parents"  are  existing  se-
quences in commonly used databases such as NCBI or RDP, 
not  only  present  to  demonstrate  the  ability  of  the  engines  to 
correctly  identify  non-chimeras,  but  also  demonstrate  how 
the  engines  work  on  potentially  randomly  extracted  se-
quences that are often referenced and used in research. 

  Testing was performed not only on B2C2, but also on the 
Greengenes  server,  using  the  "Chimera  check  with  Bellero-
phon  (version  3)"  [8,  9]  and  Chimera_Check  from  RDPII 
[11]  for  performance  comparison.  Other  chimera  checking 
packages  are  available,  such  as  the  Pintail  and  Mallard  pro-
grams  from  the  Cardiff  School  of  Biosciences  [12].  These 
applications  were  not  selected  as  comparison  tools  for  the 
performance  of  B2C2  due  to  preliminary  pre-processing 
steps.  These  steps  are  not  easily  amenable  for  next-
generation  scale  data.  Sequences  have  to  be  pre-aligned  by 
ClustalW,  which  not  only  adds  a  step  in  the  processing,  but 
increases  processing  time.  The  authors  of  these  programs 
also  suggest  not  including  more  than  1000  reliable  (non-
chimeric)  sequences  in  the  analysis  due  to  speed  concerns, 
encouraging  the  files  to  not  exceed  500  sequences  and  ex-
cluding  distantly  related  sequences.  Furthermore,  the  user 
must  supply  the  engine  with  not  only  the  query  sequences, 
but the  subjects against which to  align as well. This is a po-
tentially time consuming, intricate step that not every user is 
willing or able to perform. Because next generation products 
may  result  in  over  a  million  reads,  the  suggested  pre-
screening processes  and establishing an  essential reliable set 
would greatly  increase the processing time of the data.  Mal-
lard,  Pintail  and  other  existing  chimera  checking  tools,  al-
though  reliable  and  highly  functional,  are  not  the  optimal 
tools  for  rapid  and  efficient  screening  of  high  volume 
datasets such as those resulting from 454 FLX and Titanium 
technologies (Roche Applied Science). 

RESULTS  

  The application performed well on a test set of 300 short 
FASTA  formatted  sequences,  similar  to  a  set  resulting  from 
next-generation processing. The default parameters for B2C2 
were  used.  These  parameters  were  established  to  allow  for 

Black Box Chimera Check (B2C2) 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4    49 

flexibility  in  the  decision  making  process  of  the  algorithm. 
Performance  results  are  shown  in  Table  1a  and  summarized 
in  1b.  Non-chimeric,  essentially  randomly  chosen  existing 
sequences  from  commonly  used  databases  such  as  NCBI 
were  also  tested  (last  column  in  the  table  under  heading 
“Non  Chimeras”).  Results  demonstrate  the  ability  of  B2C2 
to  properly  identify  non-chimeric  sequences.  Data  is  orga-
nized  in  a  table  formatted  to  contain  the  prediction  in  the 
first column and the subset of test cases in the first row. The 
results  indicate  that  from  the  distant  chimeras,  B2C2  accu-
rately categorized 98% of the sequence as chimeric. Another 
1% of  the  sequences were organized into the "Possibly  Chi-
meric" category, generally intended for further consideration 
by  the  user.  The  last  chimeric  sequence  was  wrongfully 
characterized  as  chimeric.  Although  the  performance  of 
B2C2, like most other chimera detection algorithms, appears 
to become more ambiguous with the  increased homology of 
the two ends of the simulated chimeric sequences, the engine 
still  performed  well,  according  to  Tables  1a  and  1b.  From 
Table  1b,  it  is  easily  interpreted  that  not  only  are  chimeras 
accurately  declared,  but  non  chimeras  are  also  detected  as 
well, indicating a low rate of false positives. 

  The same 300 chimeric  sequences  and 100 non-chimeric 
sequences  were  submitted  online  to  the  Chimera_Check 
from RDPII engine. The results returned consisted of images 
needing  to  be  manually,  subjectively,  individually  and  visu-
ally analyzed.  Based on slopes  and the designated "breaking 
point" in the sequences, the queries were organized into three 
categories  of  "Chimeras",  "Maybe  Chimeras",  and  "Not 
Chimeras".  If  the  image  consisted  of  a  result  where  a  clear 
positive  slope  continued  until  the  breaking  point,  followed 
by  a  negative  slope,  the  sequence  was  tallied  into  the  "Chi-
meras"  category.  If  the  positive  slope  was  followed  by  a 
slope of 0 and then a negative slope, the sequence was orga-
nized  into  the  "Maybe  Chimeras"  section.  Sequences  were 
organized  into  non-chimeras  if  the  engine  returned  the 

statement  of  "There  was  no  way  of  breaking  your  sequence 
in  two  chimeric  halves,  so  their  combined  match  with  the 
database was better  than that of the full  length sequence" or 
if the slope was very small or the break appeared to be close 
to the start or end of the sequence. 

  Chimera_Check  from  RDPII  performed  well  on  the  test 
set  and  the  results  can  be  viewed  in  Tables  2a  and  2b.  The 
results  indicate  RDPII  to  be  an  excellent  chimera  detection 
tool  for  distant,  medium  and  close  chimeras.  Although  ac-
cording  to  the  resulting  statistics,  RDPII  outperformed 
B2C2, it must be emphasized that inspection of the output is 
subjective and  B2C2 did not  asses the data with  the strictest 
parameters  possible  (chimeras  from  sequences  differing  at 
the species level were deemed non-chimeric). These parame-
ters may be adjusted by the user for desired stringency. Fur-
thermore,  RDPII  performed  worse  than  B2C2  on  the  accu-
racy of non-chimeric sequence detection. This tool identified 
only  54%  of  the  sequence  correctly,  while  B2C2  correctly 
identified 89%. 

  The  next  comparison  tool,  Greengenes'  "Chimera  check 
with  Bellerophon  (version  3)"  was  not  able  to  properly 
evaluate  the  test  set;  the  sequences  came  back  with  a  "not 
tested"  categorization.  Greengenes'  algorithm  is  specialized 
to evaluate full length bacterial sequences, thus not appropri-
ate for analysis of next generation data, which contains short 
reads averaging 400 bp.  

  The platform was further tested with a new set of 300 full 
length  sequences.  The  full  length  sequences  were  generated 
from known bacterial parents to simulate full length chimeric 
strands.  Full  length  parents  were  used  as  non-chimeric  se-
quences. Default parameters were used for  the  analysis. The 
results  were  scored  again  into  the  same  categories:  "Chime-
ras", "Maybe Chimeras" and "Not Chimeras". The additional 
"Problems"  category  was  also  used  during  this  analysis  for 
sequences  not  returning  a  result.  From  Greengenes'  results, 

Table 1a.  Results  of  test  set  Implementation  on  B2C2.  The  Software  Classified  Chimeras  from  Three  sets,  Distant  Chimeras,  
Medium Chimeras, and Close Chimeras, into Four Resultant files: “NotChimera”, “PossibleChimera”, “DefiniteChimera”, 
and a “NotClassified” File 

Category 

Problems 

Not Chimeras 

Maybe Chimeras 

Chimeras 

Totals 

Distant Chimeras 

Medium Chimeras 

Close Chimeras 

Not Chimeras 

0 

1 

1 

98 

100 

0 

11 

11 

78 

100 

0 

35 

4 

61 

100 

0 

89 

3 

8 

100 

 
Table 1b.  Summary  of  Results  of  Test  Set  Implementation  on  B2C2.  The  Software  Classified  Chimeric  and  Non-Chimeric  

Sequences. Three Possible Classification Categories Resulted: Chimera, Possible Chimera and Non-Chimera 

 

 

Chimeras 

Predicted 

Possible Chimeras 

Non-Chimeras 

Chimeras 

Non-Chimeras 

Actual 

237 

16 

47 

8 

3 

89 

50    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4 

Gontcharova et al. 

"putative  chimera"  sequences  were  scored  as  "Chimeras", 
"Appears  to  be  clean"  and  sequences  matching  the  Core  Set 
were  scored  as  "Not  Chimera",  "A  sub-threshold  chimera" 
were  counted  as  "Maybe  Chimeras",  and  "not  tested"  se-
quences were put  into the "Problems" category. Greengenes' 
performance  noticeably  increased  by  lengthening  the  short 
reads  to  their  full  length  and  the  results  are  provided  in  

Tables  3a  and  3b.  Greengenes  appears  to  take  the  more  
conservative  approach  in  chimeric  detection,  a  very  small 
margin  of  chimeric  sequences  was  actually  declared  to  be 
chimeric.  However,  62%  of  non  chimeric  sequences  were 
deemed  as  such.  This  percentage  is  still  not  as  good  at  the 
performance  seen  with  B2C2,  but  it  is  improved  from  the 
54% seen with the RDPII chimera checker. 

Table 2a.  Results  of  Test  Set  Implementation  on  Chimera_Check  for  RDPII.  The  Software  Classified  Chimeras  from  Three  Sets, 
Distant Chimeras,  Medium Chimeras, and Close  Chimeras,  into Four Resultant Files: Not Chimeras,  Maybe Chimeras, 
Definite Chimeras, and a Problem File 

Category 

Problems 

Not Chimeras 

Maybe Chimeras 

Chimeras 

Totals 

 

Distant Chimeras 

Medium Chimeras 

Close Chimeras 

Not Chimeras 

0 

0 

0 

100 

100 

0 

2 

2 

96 

100 

0 

5 

20 

75 

100 

0 

54 

20 

26 

100 

Table 2b.  Summary  of  Results  of  Test  Set  Implementation  on  Chimera_Check  for  RDPII.  The  Software  Classified  Chimeric  and 
Non-Chimeric  Sequences.  Three  Possible  Classification  Categories  Resulted:  Chimera,  Possible  Chimera  and  Non-
Chimera 

 

 

Chimeras 

Predicted 

Possible Chimeras 

Non-Chimeras 

 

Actual 

Chimeras 

Non-Chimeras 

271 

22 

7 

26 

20 

54 

Table 3a.  Results  of  Second  Test  Set  (Composed  of  Longer  Sequences)  Implementation  on  the  Greengenes  Server.  The  Software 
Classified  Chimeras  from  Three  Sets,  Distant  Chimeras,  Medium  Chimeras,  and  Close  Chimeras,  into  Four  Resultant 
Files: Not Chimeras, Maybe Chimeras, Definite Chimeras, and a Problem File 

Category 

Problems 

Not Chimeras 

Maybe Chimeras 

Chimeras 

Totals 

 

Distant Chimeras 

Medium Chimeras 

Close Chimeras 

Not Chimeras 

12 

69 

14 

5 

100 

10 

67 

14 

9 

100 

5 

82 

7 

6 

100 

0 

62 

22 

16 

100 

Table 3b.  Summary of Results of Second Test Set (Composed of Longer Sequences) Implementation on the Greengenes Server. The 
Software Classified Chimeric and Non-Chimeric Sequences. Three Possible Classification Categories Resulted: Chimera, 
Possible Chimera and Non-Chimera 

 

 

Predicted 

 

 

Chimeras 

Possible Chimeras 

Non-Chimeras 

Actual 

Chimeras 

Non-Chimeras 

20 

35 

218 

16 

22 

62 

Black Box Chimera Check (B2C2) 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4    51 

  The  same  long  sequences  were  also  analyzed  with  the 
B2C2  software.  Our  goal  for  the  software  was  to  develop  a 
fast, reliable and easy to use process for our short read, high 
volume  output.  We  were  not  able  to  find  a  suitable  auto-
mated method in the past, thus  the only solution was  to  cre-
ate  our  own.  However,  the  software  is  not  limited  to  next 
generation  output,  and  B2C2  can  be  used  on  all  FASTA 
formatted bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequences. The software 
performed  well  with  the  new  full  length  test  set  (averaging 
1300  bp)  and  the  default  parameters.  The  results  are  pro-
vided  in  Tables  4a  and  4b.  The  results  demonstrate  signifi-
cantly better performance when compared with Greenegenes. 
Close  chimeras  showed  to  be  the  greatest  of  difficulty,  al-
though  still  produced  good  results  with  71%  of  the  se-
quences  being  declared  chimeric  or  possibly  chimeric  com-
pared  to  13%  as  shown  by  Greenegenes.  A  greater  percent-
age  of  non  chimeric  sequences  was  also  correctly  identified 
by B2C2 than Greengenes, 88% as opposed to 62%. 

DISCUSSION 

  All  tests  of  B2C2  were  performed  using  default  condi-
tions to simulate an easy and comfortable situation for a sci-
entist  assessing  data.  Identity  of  less  than  60%  in  the  start 
and  end  regions  of  the  query  sequences  were  organized  into 
the  "DefiniteChimera"  file,  identities  greater  than  60%  and 
less  than  85%  were  distributed  into  the  "PossibleChimera" 
file and those sequences with an identity of greater than 85% 
were  put  into  the  "NotChimera"  file.  These  percentages  al-
low  for  reliable  results  without  removing  all  room  for  error. 
The  upper  bound  of  85%  allows  for  sequences  where  the 
ends  don't  differ  or  only  differ  at  the  species  level  to  be 
deemed non-chimeric. 

  Chimera detection is not  an exact science, thus we felt  it 
was  not  appropriate  to  default  a  parameter  to  the  highest 

strictness  possible.  Due  to  this  criteria,  chimeric  sequences 
where the start and end regions are from the same genus will 
be deemed non chimeric. However, as previously mentioned, 
the user  is able to  adjust setting according to his/her specifi-
cations and raising the upper bound to guarantee the start and 
end regions aligning to the same species. 

  We feel it is important mentioning that it was difficult to 
establish  a  precise  scoring  mechanism  for  RDPII,  due  to  a 
needed visual  judgement call on the user's part, thus making 
a non uniform evaluation based on the resulting graphs. Dur-
ing  this  analysis,  we  gave  RDPII  a  favorable  judgement 
when  results  were  unclear.  Furthermore,  because  manual 
inspection of each of the submitted sequences has  to be per-
formed, the software is not an appropriate tool for analysis of 
high throughput data containing millions of individual reads, 
particularly  because  the  user  will  then  need  to  return  to  the 
original  data  to  find  and  remove  the  chimeric  sequences.  It 
would take a considerable amount of time to not only submit 
sequences and wait for the results, but to individually assess 
the  results  and  decide  the  fate  of  each  sequence  from  a 
graph. 

  The  previously  existing  software  was  able  to  assess  the 
datasets  tailored  to  the  engines,  however,  both  Greengenes' 
and  RDPII's  algorithms  have  the  drawback  of  slow  turn-
around times (even on the small test sets of 400 sequences) – 
taking up to several hours per run. Greengenes' limitation on 
the number of input sequences per analysis run and the man-
ual  analysis  necessary  for  Chimera_Check  from  RDPII  re-
sults  make  the  engines  inconvenient  for  high  volume  bacte-
rial  sequences  analysis.  Also,  the  overall  performance  of 
B2C2 is competitive with both engines used for comparison. 
Both  Chimera_Check  and  Greengenes  did  not  perform  as 
well as B2C2 in classifying non-chimeric sequences, and the 

Table 4a.  Results  of  Test  Set  Implementation  on B2C2 Using Full Length Bacterial Sequences. The Software Classified Chimeras 
from  Three  Sets,  Distant  Chimeras,  Medium  Chimeras,  and  Close  Chimeras,  into  Four  Resultant  Files:  NotChimera,  
Possible Chimera, DefiniteChimera, and a NotClassified File 

Category 

Problems 

Not Chimeras 

Maybe Chimeras 

Chimeras 

Totals 

 

Distant Chimeras 

Medium Chimeras 

Close Chimeras 

Not Chimeras 

0 

0 

1 

99 

100 

0 

9 

17 

74 

100 

0 

29 

7 

64 

100 

0 

88 

7 

5 

100 

Table 4b.  Summary of Results of Test Set Implementation on B2C2 Using Full Length Bacterial Sequences. The Software Classified 
Chimeric  and  Non-Chimeric  Sequences.  Three  Possible  Classification  Categories  Resulted:  Chimera,  Possible  Chimera 
and Non-Chimera 

 

 

 

 

Predicted 

Possible Chimeras 

Chimeras 

Non-Chimeras 

Actual 

Chimeras 

Non-Chimeras 

237 

25 

38 

5 

7 

88 

52    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4 

Gontcharova et al. 

accuracy  on  chimeric  sequences  is  close  with  RDPII  and 
noticeably better than Greengenes. 

  B2C2 has  the ability to perform well in a speedy fashion 
implementing  a  methodology  that  has  not  been  made  publi-
cally  available.  The process follows a logical  and simplified 
method  to  attain  results  comparable  to  those  from  the  exist-
ing  popular  methods.  The  advantage  of  the  new  application 
is not only in performance, but also processing time, ease of 
use and less limitations on file and sequence size. 

CONCLUSIONS  

B2C2 is the next step in addressing the need for a useful and 
efficient tool applicable for chimera detection in next genera-
tion  16S  rRNA-based  output  such  as  that  generated  by  the 
bTEFAP  method. The software currently  available for tradi-
tional chimera checking, although precise, accurate, and very 
useful  for  appropriate  data,  are  not  an  efficient  solution  for 
"next generation" output. B2C2 is a standalone, user-friendly 
application,  which  can  be  downloaded  from  http://www. 
researchandtesting.com/B2C2  and  run  by  anyone  for  bacte-
rial  16S  rRNA  gene  sequence  data.  Currently,  this  software 
is  used  in  our  lab  to  deplete  chimeras  from  pyrosequencing 
results  as  a  part  of  a  processing  pipeline  [13-16].  B2C2  can 
be  incorporated  into  a  pipeline  as  a  preprocessing  step  from 
which  chimera  depleted  files  may  be  further  analyzed  in  an 
appropriate fashion. As with all chimera detection algorithms 
the precision of the results tends to decline as the parents of 
chimeric  sequences  get  phylogenetically  more  closely  re-
lated. To increase the stringency, even to 100%, the user can 
adjust  the  settings  and  determine  the  optimal  set  of  parame-
ters for their specific data and need. This type of platform  is 
very  useful,  in  accuracy,  flexibility  and  simplicity,  for  labs 
and  individuals  conducting  research  on  16S  rRNA  gene  se-
quences and dealing with large numbers of reads. B2C2 is an 
efficient,  self-explanatory  application  capable  of  handling 
chimera evaluation on an unprecedented scale. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  

Funding:  This  work  was  supported  by  internal  development 
funds  of  Medical  Biofilm  Research  Institute  and  the  Re-
search and Testing Laboratory of the South Plains. 

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL  

Supplementary  material  is  available  on  the  publishers 

 
Web site along with the published article. 

REFERENCES  

[1]  

[2]  

[3]  

[4]  

[5]  

[6]  

[7]  

[8]  

[9]  

(bTEFAP) 

Shuldiner AR, Nirula A, Roth J. Hybrid DNA artifact from PCR of 
closely related target sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 1989; 17: 4409. 
Rothberg  JM,  Leamon  JH.  The  development  and  impact  of  454 
sequencing. Nat Biotechnol 2008; 26: 1117-24. 
Dowd SE, Wolcott RD, Sun Y, McKeehan T, Smith E, Rhoads D. 
Polymicrobial  nature  of  chronic  diabetic  foot  ulcer  biofilm 
infections  determined  using  bacterial  tag  encoded  FLX  amplicon 
pyrosequencing (bTEFAP). PLoS One 2008; 3: e3326. 
Dowd SE,  Sun Y, Wolcott RD, Domingo A, Carroll JA.  Bacterial 
tag-encoded  FLX  amplicon  pyrosequencing 
for 
microbiome  studies:  bacterial  diversity  in  the  ileum  of  newly 
weaned  Salmonella-infected  pigs.  Foodborne  Pathog  Dis  2008;  5 
:459-72. 
Dowd  SE,  Callaway  TR,  Wolcott  RD,  et  al.  Evaluation  of  the 
bacterial  diversity  in  the  feces  of cattle  using  16S  rDNA  bacterial 
tag-encoded  FLX  amplicon  pyrosequencing  (bTEFAP).  BMC 
Microbiol 2008; 8: 125. 
Dethlefsen  L,  Huse  S,  Sogin  ML,  Relman  DA.  The  pervasive 
effects of an antibiotic on the human gut microbiota, as revealed by 
deep 16S rRNA sequencing. PLoS Biol 2008; 6: e280. 
Sogin  ML,  Morrison  HG,  Huber  JA,  et  al.  Microbial  diversity  in 
the  deep  sea  and  the  underexplored  "rare  biosphere".  Proc  Natl 
Acad Sci USA 2006;103:12115-20. 
DeSantis  TZ,  Hugenholtz  P,  Larsen  N,  et  al.  Greengenes,  a 
chimera-checked  16S  rRNA  gene  database  and  workbench 
compatible  with  ARB.  Appl  Environ  Microbiol  2006;  72:  5069- 
72. 
DeSantis TZ, Jr., Hugenholtz P, Keller K, et al. NAST: a multiple 
sequence  alignment  server  for  comparative  analysis  of  16S  rRNA 
genes. Nucleic Acids Res 2006; 34: W394-W9. 

[10]   Huber  T,  Faulkner  G,  Hugenholtz  P.  Bellerophon:  a  program  to 
in  multiple  sequence  alignments. 

detect  chimeric  sequences 
Bioinformatics 2004; 20: 2317-9. 
Cole JR, Chai B, Marsh TL, et al. The Ribosomal Database Project 
(RDP-II): previewing a new autoaligner that allows regular updates 
and  the  new  prokaryotic  taxonomy.  Nucleic  Acids  Res  2003;  31: 
442-3. 

[11]  

[12]   Ashelford KE, Chuzhanova NA, Fry JC, Jones AJ, Weightman AJ. 
At  least  1  in  20  16S  rRNA  sequence  records  currently  held  in 
public  repositories  is  estimated  to  contain  substantial  anomalies. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 2005; 71: 7724-36. 

[13]   Wolcott  RD,  Gontcharova  V,  Sun  Y,  Zischakau  A,  Dowd  SE. 
Bacterial diversity in surgical site infections: not just aerobic cocci 
any more. J Wound Care 2009; 18: 317-23. 

[15]  

tag-encoded  FLX  and 

[14]   Wolcott RD, Gontcharova V, Sun Y, Dowd SE.  Evaluation of the 
bacterial  diversity  among  and  within  individual  venous  leg  ulcers 
using  bacterial 
titanium  amplicon 
pyrosequencing  and  metagenomic  approaches.  BMC  Microbiol 
2009; 9: 226. 
Pitta DW, Pinchak WE, Dowd SE, et al. Rumen bacterial diversity 
dynamics  associated  with  changing  from  bermudagrass  hay  to 
grazed winter wheat diets. Microb Ecol 2010; 59(3): 511-22.. 
Suchodolski JS, Dowd SE, Westermarck E, et al. The effect of the 
macrolide  antibiotic  tylosin  on  microbial  diversity  in  the  canine 
small intestine as demonstrated by massive parallel 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing. BMC Microbiol 2009; 9: 210. 

[16]  

 
 
Received: June 18, 2010 
 

 Gontcharova et al.; Licensee Bentham Open. 

 

Revised: June 25, 2010 

Accepted: June 30, 2010 

This is an open access article licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ 
by-nc/3.0/) which permits unrestricted, non-commercial use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the work is properly cited.  

 

 

