26 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, 4, 26-29 

 

Open Access 

Possible  Role  of  Plant  Allelochemical  in  Clearance  of  Bacteria  from  the 
Gut of Spruce Budworm, Choristoneura fumiferana 

Anthony S.D. Pang* 

Great Lakes Forestry Centre, CFS, NRCan, 1219 Queen Street East, Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, Canada P6A 2E5, Canada 

Abstract:  Field  results,  using  Bacillus  thuringiensis  delta-endotoxin  in  controlling  spruce  budworms,  Choristoneura  
fumiferana, are far less satisfactory than those from the laboratories 

The  role  of  septicemia  has  also  been  shown  to  be  important  in  mortality.  However  its  relationship  with  insect  diet  has  
not  been  studied.  Insect  gut  juice  from  spruce  budworm  fed  on  balsam  foliage  inhibited  bacterial  growth.  Such  activity 
has not been observed in the gut juice from insects fed on artificial diet. Moreover, when bacteria were given to the insects 
orally,  and  the  insects  then  fed  on  balsam  foliage  overnight,  little  or  no  bacterial  colonies  could  be  detected  in  their  
gut juices in the tryptic soy agar plates. Such bacterial growth inhibition activity could also be found in the water extract 
of  balsam  foliage,  and  was  suggested  to  be  due  to  tannins.  This  result  explains  the  role  of  allelochemicals  affecting  
septicemia  in spruce budworms,  and hence the  efficacy, when using Bacillus thuringinesis delta-endotoxin as  a biologic 
control agent. 

Keywords: Spruce budworm, Choristoneura fumiferana, bacteriostatic, gut juice, tannins.  

INTRODUCTION 

 
Spruce  budworm,  Choristoneura  fumiferana,  is  a  forest 
pest  in  Eastern  Canada.  Biologic  control  agents,  Bacillus 
thuringinesis  (cid:1)-endotoxin  and  viruses,  have  been  developed 
and  used  in  controlling  this  forest  pest.  However,  field  re-
sults are far less satisfactory than those from the laboratories 
[1,  2].  Though  there  are  many  factors  affecting  the  field  re-
sults, e.g., size of droplets, temperature, wind speed, sunlight 
etc. little attention has been paid to the insect diets. 

 
In  the  laboratory,  spruce  budworms  are  raised  on  artifi-
cial  diet  containing  antibiotics.  The  natural  diet  of  spruce 
budworms  is  foliage  which  contains  many  allelochemicals. 
These  allelochemicals  may  affect  the  efficacy  of  biologic 
insecticides. Lüthy et al. [3] showed that tannins from plants 
inactivate  B.  thuringinesis  (cid:1)-endotoxin,  and  suggested  that 
interaction between host plant tannins and B. thuringinesis (cid:1)-
endotoxin might be a major factor where the field efficacy of 
B.  thuringinesis  preparations  is  unexpectedly  low.  Bacterial 
septicemia  also  appears  to  play  a  very  important  role  in  the 
mortality  of  spruce  budworm  larvae  [4].  In  this  study,  we 
investigated  whether  gut  contents  of  the  insects,  reared  in 
different diets, would affect the growth of the bacteria in the 
insect guts. 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 

Insects 

Spruce  budworms  were  usually  raised  in  artificial  diet 
 
containing  aureomycin  from  1st  to  5th  instar  in  this  Centre.  
 

*Address correspondence to this author at the Great Lakes Forestry Centre, 
CFS,  NRCan,  1219  Queen  Street  East,  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  Ontario,  Canada 
P6A  2E5, Canada; Fax: 705-759-5700;  
E-mail: Anthony.Pang@NRCan-RNCan.gc.ca 
 
 

1874-2858/10 

First day 6th instar insects were then divided into two popula-
tions. One population was fed on artificial diet without  anti-
biotics,  while  the  other  fed  on  balsam  foliage.  After  three 
days, their gut juice and hemolymph were collected.  

Collection of Insect Gut Juice and Hemolymph 

Insect gut juice was collected by placing a Pasteur pipette 
 
to  its  mouth  while  squeezing  its  body  gently.  Insect  hemo-
lymph  was  collected  into  a  microtube  with  a  few  grains  of 
phenylthiourea, to prevent melanization, by punching  a hole 
to  its  body  with  a  hypodermic  needle.  Both  gut  juice  and 
hemolymph  samples  were  centrifuged  and  the  clear  super-
natant  was  either  used  immediately  or  stored  at  -800C  until 
use. 

Bacterial Strains 

  E.  coli  wild  strain  EmG31,  P.  aeruginosa  insect  strain 
P11-1  and  B.  cereus  were  obtained  from  Dr.  J.  Chadwick, 
Department  of  Microbiology  and  Immunology,  Queen’s 
University,  Kingston,  Ontario,  Canada.  B.  thuringinesis 
strain HD-76 was from a  collection  at  GLFC.  Bacteria were 
grown in tryptic soy broth for 24 hrs before use. 

Extraction of Balsam Foliage and Insect Frass 

  Balsam  foliage  was  freeze-dried  overnight  and  ground 
into powder using a blender. One volume of foliage was sus-
pended  into  10  volumes  of  distilled  water.  The  suspension 
was  either  boiled  in  a  water  bath  for  30  min  or  soaked  with 
shaking  at  RT  overnight.  Frass  from  insects  was  collected 
and soaked in 4 volumes of distilled water overnight  at 40C. 
All the suspensions were then centrifuged and filtered with a 
0.22μm  filter.  The  clear  filtrates  were  either  used  immedi-
ately or stored at -800C before use. 

2010 Bentham Open 

Possible Role of Plant Allelochemical in Clearance of Bacteria 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4    27 

Antibacterial Assays 

Radial Diffusion Growth Inhibition Assay  

  One  to  4  x  106  CFU  of  bacteria  suspended  in  10  ml  of 
tryptic  soy  agar  (4%)  at  500C  was  poured  into  a  petri  dish. 
After  the  agar  had  set,  wells  with  a  diameter  of  3  mm  were 
made  using  a  gel  puncher.  Six  μl  of  sample  or  control  was 
added  to  the  wells.  The  plates  were  then  incubated  at  RT 
(260C ) for three hrs to allow samples to diffuse radially into 
the  agar.  The  plates  were  then  incubated  at  370C  overnight. 
Inhibition  of  bacterial  growth  was  indicated  by  a  clear  
ring  around  the  well.  To  enhance  the  results,  the  gels  were 
stained  for  24hr  in  a  dilute  solution  of  Coomassie  brilliant 
blue  R-250  (dye:  2mg,  methanol:27  ml,  water:63  ml,  37% 
formaldehyde: 15 ml), and then washed with 10% acetic acid 
containing 2% dimethylsuphoxide for 10 minutes [5]. 

Micro-Culture Assay  

Fifty  μl of  insect gut  juice or  sample was added  to 25 μl 
 
of  a  10-5  dilution  of  an  overnight  culture  of  bacterium  in  a 
96-well  microtiter  plate.  The  diluent  was  20%  tryptic  soy 
broth  in  0.85%  saline.  The  mixtures  were  incubated  at  RT 
for 30 min. Two hundred μl of tryptic soy broth were  added 
to each well,  and the plate was  incubated at 370C overnight. 
The plate was  then read at OD600nm using an ELISA scanner 
(Elx-808, Bio-Tek Instrument).  

Detection of Bacteria in Insect Gut Juice 

Sixth  instar  spruce  budworms,  which  had  been  fed  on 
 
either antibiotic-free artificial diet or balsam foliage for three 
days, were used in this experiment. Two μl of E. coli suspen-
sion  containing  about  5  x  104  CFU  were  force-fed  into  the 
insects. The insects were then allowed to continue to feed on 
their  respective  diets  overnight.  Insects  gut  juices  were  col-
lected and 100 μl of diluted gut juice (1:10 with sterile PBS) 
were plated in  a tryptic soy  agar plate.  Bacterial  colonies on 
the  agar  plate  were  then  counted  after  24  hr  incubation  at 
370C 

Paper Chromatography 

Strips  of  1  1/2cm  wide Whatman  No.2  filter  paper  were 
 
cut. Five hundred μl samples of insect gut juice fed on Balsm 
folige,  commercial  tannins  (Sigma  Chemicals)  and  water 
extract  of  balsm  foliage  were  applied  to  about  5  cm  to  one 
end. They were then suspended vertically in a 2 litre measur-
ing  cylinder.  The  cylinder  contained  enough  distilled  water 
to wet about 2 cm of the filter paper strips. The cylinder was 
then covered with  tin foil,  and the water  was  allowed to run 
against gravity until the water front reached about 5 cm from 
the top. The filter paper was cut into small pieces of about 1 
cm long. These small pieces of filter strips were then placed 
on  tryptic  soy  agar  plates  containing  E.  coli.  Inhibition  of 
bacterial  growth  surrounding  the  filter  paper  was  observed 
after 16 hr incubation at 370C. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Antibacterial Activity 

balsam  foliage  for  three  days  showed  very  strong  bacteria 
growth  inhibition  (well  C).  Since  the  pH  in  both  gut  juices 
was the same (pH10), the bacterial growth inhibition was not 
due  to  the  high  pH  of  the  gut  juice.  No  inhibition  was  ob-
served  in either hemolymph (well G  and F), suggesting  that 
the  bacterial  growth  inhibition  factor(s)  were  restricted 
within  the  gut  and  would  not  pass  into  the  hemocoel.  Frass 
extract  from  insects  fed  on  foliage  (Well  E)  and  water  ex-
tracts  of  balsam  foliage  exhibited  similar  bacterial  growth 
inhibition (wells B and D). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.  (1).  Radial  diffusion  growth  inhibition  assay.  Tryptic  soy  agar 
plate  contained  about 4  x 106 E.  coli.  Six  μl  of  sample  was  applied  
to  the  wells.  The  plate  was  incubated  at  RT  to  allow  the  sample  to 
diffuse  radially  into  the  agar,  and  then  incubated  at  370C overnight. 
Bacterial  growth  inhibition  was  indicated  by  clear  area  surrounding 
the  well.  A:  spruce  budworm  (artificial  diet)  gut  juice,  B:  balsam 
foliage water extract, C: spruce budworm (foliage diet) gut juice, D: 
balsam  foliage  water  extract  boiled  for 30  min, E:  spruce  budworm 
(foliage diet)  frass  water  extract,  F:  spruce  budworm  (artificial  diet) 
hemolymph, G: spruce budworm (foliage diet) hemolymph. 

 
In  the  micro-culture  assay,  it  gave  similar results.  Culture 
media  in  those  wells  containing  bacteria  and  gut  juice  from 
insects  fed  with foliage were  completely  clear,  suggesting no 
bacterial growth. Heavy bacterial growth was observed in both 
hemolymph and gut juice from insects fed on artificial diet. 

  Table  1  shows  a  list  of  bacteria  tested.  The  bacteria 
growth  inhibition  was  non-specific,  and  gut  juice  from 
spruce budworms fed on balsam foliage showed the greatest 
inhibition. 

Fig.  (1)  shows  that  gut  juice  obtained  from  spruce  bud-
 
worm  fed  on  artificial  diet  (well  A)  had  little  bacterial 
growth  inhibition.  In  contrast,  gut  juice  from  insects  fed  on 

Detection of Bacteria in Insect Gut Juice 

First  day  6th  instar  spruce  budworms  were  raised  on  ei-
 
ther artificial diet or balsam foliage for three days, and were 

28    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4 

Table 1.  Summary of Bacterial Growth Inhibition 

Anthony S.D. Pang 

Insects Fed on Antibiotic 

Free Artificial Diet 

Insects Fed on Balsam Foliage 

 

Gut Juice 

Hemolymph 

Gut Juice 

Hemolymph 

Insect Frass 

Balsam foliage 

Extract 

Extract 

E. coli 

P. aeruguinosa 

B. cereus 

B. thuringiensis (HD-76) 

+/- 

+/- 

+/- 

+/- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

+++ 

+++ 

+++ 

+++ 

- 

- 

- 

- 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

-  no  growth  inhibition  (OD=3  mm  size  of  the  gel  punch)  +/-  Little  or  marginal  growth  inhibition  (3 mm  <OD>5  mm);  +  strong  growth  inhibition  (5mm<OD>10mm);  +++  very 
strong growth inhibition (12 mm<OD). 

then force-fed with 2 μl of 5 x 104 E.  coli. The  insects were 
then  fed  on  their  respective  diets.  After  24  hr,  insect  gut 
juices  were  collected  and  100  μl  of  diluted  gut  juice  were 
plated in the tryptic soy agar plates. Very few bacterial colo-
nies  (under  10)  were  observed  in  the  gut  juice  of  those  in-
sects  fed  on  balsam  foliage.  However,  143  (±30)  bacterial 
colonies  were  observed  in  the  gut  juice  from  insects  fed  on 
artificial  diet.  This  suggests  that  most  of  the  bacteria  in  the 
insect guts were cleared when they fed on balsam foliage but 
not on artificial diet after 24 hr. 

 
Since  the  bacterial  growth  inhibition  in  the  insect  gut 
juice  and  the  clearance  of  bacteria  in  their  guts  are  related  
to  its  diet,  it  is  likely  that  allelochemicals  from  the  balsam 
foliage may be the contributor for such properties. 

Some  Properties  and  Possible  Identification  of  the  Anti-
bacterial Component(s) 

The  Effect  of  pH  and  BSA  on  the  Antibacterial  Activity  of 
the Foliage Extract 

  The  pH  of  the  balsam  foliage  water  extract  was  about  5, 
and the insect gut juice (either on artificial diet or foliage) is 
about 10.2. To determine whether the bacteria growth inhibi-
tion in the balsam foliage extract is due to pH, the water ex-
tract was adjusted to a different pH. Fig. (2) shows that water 
extract  of  balsam  foliage  at  pH  5  gave  the  best  bacterial 
growth  inhibition.  Its  ability  to  inhibit  bacteria  growth  de-
creased  as  its  pH  increased  to  10  (Fig. 2  Upper  row).  Phos-
phate saline at pH5 and 10 would not inhibit bacteria growth 
(not shown). The color of the extract also changed from light 
green to reddish brown as its pH was  adjusted from 5 to 10. 
The  color  of  the  spruce  budworm  gut  juice  fed  on  balsam 
foliage is reddish brown with pH about 10.2 

  The  bacterial  growth  inhibition  ability  of  balsam  foliage 
extracts,  though  heat  stable  (Fig  1,  well  D),  was  further  
reduced  when  excess  BSA  was  added  to  the  extracts  (Fig.  
2  Lower  row).  This  result  suggests  that  bacterial  growth  
inhibition  is  probably  due  to  some  protein  precipitating  
allelochemical(s) present in the balsam foliage. 

  Because  the  color  of  the  balsam  foliage  extract  changes 
to  red  when  its  pH  was  adjusted  to  10,  and  it  precipitated 
BSA,  it  is  suggested  that  the  inhibition  property  in  the  
balsam  foliage  extract  is  due  to  the  presence  of  tannins.  To 

confirm  this, ferric  salt was added  to balsam foliage  extract,  
gut juice and frass extract from foliage fed insects. All these 
three  samples  gave  dark  blue  precipitate  indicating  the  
presence of tannins. On the other hand, gut juice from insects 
fed  on  artificial  diet  did  not  give  blue  color,  indicating  
the absence of tannins.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Fig. (2). Radial diffusion growth inhibition assay. Tryptic soy agar 
plate contained about 4 x 106 E. coli. The pH of the balsam foliage 
water extract was adjusted to 7 and 10 using 0.01M NaOH. Powder 
BSA was added to the foliage extract until no more precipitate was 
formed.Upper  row:  balsam  foliage  water  extract  at  pH5,  7  and  10. 
Lower row: balsam foliage water extract saturated with BSA. 

Paper Chromatographies 

  Gut juice from insects fed on balsam foliage, commercial 
tannic  acid  and  water  extract  of  balsam  foliage  (all  at 
pH10.2)  were  applied  to  the  filter  papers  for  paper  chroma-
tography.  Maximum  bacterial  growth  inhibition  appeared  at 
approximately  the  same  position  for  all  three  samples.  This 
indicated that the inhibition factor(s) in the three samples are 
similar or identical. 

  The  possible  identification  of  tannins  as  the  responsible 
agent  for  bacterial  growth  inhibition  in  the  spruce  budworm 
gut juice is summarized in Table 2.  

Possible Role of Plant Allelochemical in Clearance of Bacteria 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4    29 

Table 2. 

Identification of the Bacterial Growth Inhibition Factor(s) 

 

Test 

BSA 

Fe+++ 

Paper  

chromatography 

* From Sigma Chemicals. 

Gut Juice from Insect 

Balsam Foliage 

Commercial 

fed on balsam foliage 

precipitation 

dirty dark blue ppt 

water extract 

precipitation 

dark blue ppt 

tannic acid* 

precipitation 

dark blue ppt 

Bacterial growth inhibition appeared at approximately the same position  

in all three samples, and stained dark blue when Fe+++ was added. 

Possible  Role  of  Plant  Tannins  in  Preventing  Bacterial 
Infection and Biologic Insecticides 

  One of the main differences between field and laboratory 
insects is their diets. Laboratory raised spruce budworm feed 
on  artificial  diet  with  addition  of  antibiotics.  Field  insects 
feed  on  foliage.  Therefore  the  gut  contents  in  both  insect 
populations  are  quite  different.  It  is  expected  that  the  field-
raised  insect  gut  juice  contains  high  concentrations  of  al-
lelochemicals.  Some  of  these  allelochemicals  may  have  ef-
fects on the bacteria in the insect gut. In this communication, 
we  showed  that  gut  juice  from  spruce  budworm  fed  on  foli-
age inhibited bacterial growth in a tryptic soy agar plate, and 
cleared bacteria from the insect gut. Though the allelochemi-
cal(s)  responsible  of  such  activity  has  not  been  isolated  in 
this study, our experiments suggested that it belonged to tan-
nins. However, it does not exclude other allelohemicals, and 
needs further identification. 

 
 B. thuringiensis is the most successful biological insecti-
cide. When  it is used in  controlling forest pests,  e.g., spruce 
budworm,  the  results  are  not  consistent,  and  seldom  match 
with those from the laboratory [1, 2]. Lüthy et al. [3] showed 
that  plant  tannins  would  inactivate  B  thuringiensis  (cid:1)-
endotoxin.  The  high  pH  in  the  insect  gut  may  have  some 
effects  on  certain  bacteria,  however,  it  has  been  shown  that 
B.  thuringiensis  spores  would  germinate  at  pH10.0  in  the 
insect guts [6]. Septicemia also plays an important role in the 
efficacy of B. thuringiensis [4]. The present study shows that 
plant  tannins  would  clear  the  bacteria  from  the  insect  guts, 
and  inhibit  their  growth.  All  these  may  partially  explain  the 
lack of consistency of B. thuringiensis in the field trials.  

  Although the mechanisms by which tannins inhibit bacte-
rial  growth  and  clears  bacteria  from  insect  guts,  is  not  yet 
known at this time, one would assume that plant tannins bind 
to the bacterial cells, thus preventing them from growing and 
adhering to the gut. These tannins-bound bacteria would then 
pass  out  of  the  insect  gut  with  the  frass.  It  is  interesting  to 
note  that  consumption  of  cranberry  juice  has  been  recom-
 
 
Received: February 24, 2010 
 

mended  for  the  prevention  of  urinary  tract  infection  [7].  
Recently,  tannins  have  been  identified  as  the  compounds  in 
cranberries that are responsible for preventing uropathogenic 
phenotypes  of  P-fimbriated E.  coli from  adhering  to  urinary 
tract  [8].  Moreover,  our  preliminary  in  vitro  study  also 
showed  that  pre-treatment  of  CfNPV  with  balsam  foliage 
extract reduces viral infection in insect cells (not shown).  

  Tannins  are  important  constituents  of  many  plants.  The 
concentration  of  plant  tannins  in  the  insect  guts  would  be 
expected  to  be  the  lowest  as  the  insects  coming  out  from 
their  molts,  or  when  their  guts  are  empty.  Based  on  this 
study,  it  is  expected  that  biological  insecticides,  e.g.  B. 
thuringiensis,  would  be  most  effective  if  they  are  applied  at 
the time immediately following the molt. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

Avorn  J,  Monane  M,  Gurwitz  JH,  Glynn  RJ,  Choodnovskiy  I, 
Lipzitz  LA.  Reduction  of  bacteriuria  and  pyuria  after  ingestion  of 
cranberry juice. JAMA 1994; 271: 751-4. 
Howell AB, Marderosian AD, Foo LY. Inhibition of the adherence 
of  P-  fimbriated  E.  coli  to  uroepithelial-cell  surfaces  by  proantho-
cyanidin extracts from cranberries. N Engl J Med 1998; 339: 1085-
6. 
Lehrer RI, Rosenman M, Harwig  SSSL, Jackson R, Eisenhauer P. 
Ultrasensitive assays for endogenous antimicrobial polypeptides. J 
Immunol Methods 1991; 137: 167-73. 
Lüthy P, Hoffmann C, Jaquet F. Inactivation of delta-endotoxin of 
Bacillus  thuringiensis  by  tannin.  FEMS  Microbiol  Lett  1985;  28: 
31-3. 
Morris  ON.  Report  of  the  1979  CANUSA  cooperative  Bacillus 
thuringiensis  (Bt)  spray  trials.  Forest  Pest  Management  Institute 
Report 1980; FPM-X-40: p.75. 
Morris ON. Report of the 1980 Cooperative Bacillus thuringiensis 
(Bt)  spray  trials.  Forest  Pest  Management  Institute  Report  1981; 
FPM-X-48 pp. 74. 
van Frankenhuyzen K. Effect of temperature on the pathogenesis of 
Bacillus  thuringiensis  Berliner  in  larvae  of  the  spruce  budworm, 
Choristoneura  fumiferana  Clem.  (Lepidoptera:  tortricidae).  Can 
Entomol 1994; 126:1061-5. 
Wilson  GR,  Benott  TG.  Activation  and  germination  of  Bacillus 
thuringiensis  spores  in  Manduca  sexta  larval  gut  fluid.  J  Invert 
Pathol 1990; 56: 233-6. 

Revised: March 08, 2010 

Accepted: March 10, 2010 

 Anthony S.D. Pang; Licensee Bentham Open. 

 

This  is  an  open  access  article  licensed under  the  terms of  the  Creative Commons  Attribution  Non-Commercial  License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/3.0/) which permits unrestricted, non-commercial use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the work is properly cited. 

 

