 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, 4, 103-105 

103 

 Open Access 

An Unusual Presentation of Endocarditis Caused by Staphylococcus warneri 

Ganesh D. Kini1,*, Ketan Patel1, Addison R. Parris 2 and Jane S. Tang3. 

1Department  of  Medicine  and  2Department  of  Infectious  Diseases,  Rockingham  Memorial  Hospital,  Harrisonburg,  
Virginia; 3Noblis Falls Church, Virginia 

Abstract: Staphylococcus warneri does not generally cause serious infections in humans. We report a case of endocarditis 
in a healthy individual with no known past medical history. S. warneri was identified in her blood cultures and echocar-
diographic evidence confirmed the diagnosis of bacterial endocarditis. There was no apparent cause for her infection, and 
risk  factors  such as invasive treatment or medical  implant were not present. This rare clinical presentation illustrates the 
importance  of  not  overlooking  low  virulence  species  of  Staphylococcus,  as  they  can  potentially  serve  as  opportunistic 
etiological agents for endocarditis, especially among the elderly population. 

Keywords: Staphylococcus warneri, coagulase negative staphylococci, endocarditis, immunocompetent. 

INTRODUCTION 

Staphylococcus  warneri  is  part  of  the  normal  microbial 
 
flora on the skin [1-3] and generally is not considered patho-
genic  [4].  As  a  member  of  the  coagulase  negative Staphylo-
coccus (CoNS)  group,  this  organism  does  not  raise  as  much 
concern as S. epidermidis, which has been associated with an 
increasing number of nosocomial infections [2-4]. S. warneri 
occasionally  caused  septicemia,  osteomyelitis  and  other 
types of infections [2-7]. Most of the clinical cases due to S. 
warneri  infection  have  occurred  in  immunocompromised 
patients with invasive treatments or medical device implants. 
S.  warneri  has  rarely  been  reported  to  cause  disease  in 
healthy people [4, 6].  

 
In  the  past  few  years,  several  endocarditis  cases  were 
traced  to  S.  warneri  as  the  etiological  agent.  These  inci-
dences  often  involved  certain  medical  devices,  such  as  the 
insertion of prosthetic heart valves or shunts in  immunosup-
pressed  patients  [1,  6].  One  clinical  case  described  an  un-
usual  endocarditis  from  an  immunocompetent  individual 
who had a native  aortic valve  that was  contaminated with S. 
warneri,  and  a  prosthetic  lumbar  disc  implanted  26  months 
prior  was  suggested  as  the  probable  source  of  infection  [5]. 
Apparently  there  was  precedence  of  another  endocarditis 
case  which  developed  one  year  after  the  implantation  of  a 
hip prosthesis [6]. These observations led the authors to cau-
tion  that  S.  warneri  could  potentially  cause  endocarditis  in 
patients with foreign body implants. In addition, endocarditis 
cases  involving  community-acquired  native  valve  or  pros-
thetic valve replacements have been reported [8, 9]. 

CASE PRESENTATION  

  A  78-year-old  Caucasian  woman  with  no  known  past 
medical history presented to the  emergency department with 
complaints of bilateral  lower  extremity edema and erythema 
 

*Address  correspondence  to  this  author  at  the  Department  of  Medicine, 
Rockingham Memorial Hospital, 2010 Health Campus Drive, Harrisonburg, 
VA 22801, USA; Tel: 540-689-1100; Fax: 540-689-1119;  
E-mail: gkini@rhcc.com 
 
 

1874-2858/10 

with  a clear serous discharge. The patient first noticed some 
small blisters on her left lower extremity which subsequently 
opened  with  some  clear  serous  drainage.  She  also  experi-
enced progressively worsening swelling first of the left lower 
extremity and then her right lower extremity which prompted 
her to come into the hospital. Except for a cough, the patient 
had no other symptoms. 

 
Preliminary  evaluation  at  the  emergency  department  in-
dicated  the  patient  had  cardiomegaly  and  bilateral  pleural 
effusions with a BNP of 1260. She also had atrial fibrillation 
with  rapid  ventricular  response.  The  patient  was  not  com-
plaining of any chest pain, fevers, chills, nausea, vomiting or 
diarrhea.  Her  chest  x-ray  showed  evidence  of  cardiac  en-
largement  with  interstitial  densities  and  bilateral  air-space 
processes  possibly  associated  with  asymmetric  pulmonary 
edema. Large bilateral pleural effusions were noted, with the 
left  greater  than  the  right  side.  Incidentally,  some  evidence 
indicating  a  compression  fracture  of  indeterminate  age  in-
volving the upper lumbar/lower dorsal spine was observed.  

  The  patient  had  no  known  medical  history.  In  fact,  she 
had  not  been  seen  by  a  physician  for  the  last  15  years.  Be-
sides taking aspirin occasionally, she was not on any medica-
tions. She did not use alcohol, tobacco or illicit drugs. Physi-
cal  examination  did  not  reveal  any  specific  concerns  other 
than bilateral lower extremity edema. 

  CT angiogram of the chest showed large bilateral pleural 
effusions  with  bilateral  lower  lobe  enhancing  volume  loss 
and  worse  on  the  left.  Cardiomegaly  was  noted  and  there 
was no evidence for a pulmonary embolus. In addition, there 
was  no  evidence  of  deep  venous  thrombosis  in  the  venous 
Doppler studies of her lower extremities bilaterally.  

  Echocardiogram  indicated  the  left  ventricle  with  some 
mild  hypertrophy.  Systolic  function  was  normal  with  an 
ejection fraction estimated  at  about 60%. The right ventricle 
was mildly enlarged and mildly hypokinetic. The left  atrium 
showed  marked  enlargement  and  the  right  atrium  was  mod-
erately  enlarged  as  well.  The  aortic  valve  was  mildly  scle-
rotic  and  trileaflet.  The  pulmonic  valve  was  unremarkable. 

2010 Bentham Open 

104    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4 

The mitral valve showed flail motion of  the posterior leaflet 
and  there  was  a  small  mobile  echo  seen  in  the  left  atrium 
which  strongly  indicated  endocarditis  as  the  cause  for  pul-
monary  edema.  Doppler  examination  showed  severe  mitral 
regurgitation  that  tracked  underneath  the  anterior  leaflet 
along  the  interatrial  septum.  There  was  mild  aortic  insuffi-
ciency.  The  inferior  vena  cava  was  dilated  indicating  ele-
vated  right  atrial  pressure  and  the  pulmonary  systolic  pres-
sure was estimated at about 50 mmHg. 

  Gram  positive  cocci  in  diploids,  tetrads,  and  clusters 
were isolated from three sets of blood cultures. The organism 
was  catalase  positive  and  produced  a  negative  coagulase 
reaction  by  SlidexTM  (BioMérieux,  NC).  The  Vitek  2  GP 
card  (BioMérieux,  MO)  identified  the  bacterium  as  Staphy-
lococcus warneri. It produced acid from trehalose and lacked 
phosphatase  enzyme,  two  key  characteristics  that  differenti-
ate this species from S. epidermidis - one of the most recog-
nized CoNS [1].  

  The patient was initially treated with Unasyn, 3 grams IV 
every  6  hours  for  presumed  bilateral  lower  extremity  cellu-
litis.  After  the  diagnosis  of  bacterial  endocarditis  was  made 
and  supported  by  the  echo-cardiographic  results,  the  patient 
was started on nafcillin with gentamicin following  consulta-
tion  with  the  infectious  diseases  specialist.  In  addition,  con-
gestive  heart  failure  was  treated  initially  with  lasix  IV  and 
subsequently  with  lasix  orally.  Atrial  fibrillation  was  rate 
controlled with diltiazem. Gentamicin was later discontinued 
due  to  acute  renal  failure,  and  the  patient  was  discharged 
with  a  PICC  line  for  treatment  with  2  grams  Nafcillin  intra-
venously every 4 hours for a total of 6 weeks.  Repeat blood 
cultures were negative for 48 hours prior to discharge.  

COMMENTS 

  The most common causative bacterial agents for infective 
endocarditis  (IE)  are  viridans  streptococci  and  they  have 
been  recovered  from  a  significant  portion  of  IE  patients  (up 
to  50%)  [10-12].  Aside  from  viridans  streptococci,  different 
species  of  Staphylococcus  have  been  reported  to  cause  IE. 
Among  them,  S.  aureus  was  the  most  frequently  isolated 
species  [10].  Other  bacteria  associated  with  endocarditis  are 
presented in the Table 1 below [13].  

Table 1.  Bacteria Associated with Infective Endocarditis 

Common bacterial agents 

Less common bacterial agents 

Gram positive organisms 

Gram positive organisms 

Viridan streptococci  

Abiotrophia 

Staphylococcus aureus 

Gemella 

Coagulase negative staphylococci 

Nocardia 

Enterococci 

Clostridia 

Gram negative organisms 

Gram negative organisms 

Haemophilus 

Actinobacillus 

Bartonella 

Legionella 

Cardiobacterium 

Coxiella burnetii 

Eikenella 

Kingella 

Pasteurella 

Brucella 

Kini et al. 

 
Several  endocarditis  cases  were  traced  to  S.  warneri  as 
the  etiological  agent  and  they  generally  involved  foreign 
body implants or medical device insertions in patients. These 
observations  indicate  S.  warneri  has  the  potential  to  cause 
serious  invasive  infections  [8].  The  case  reported  here  is  a 
rare  presentation  of  endocarditis  which  occurred  in  a  fairly 
healthy  individual  without  an  apparent  source  of  infection. 
The  patient  has  not  sought  medical  treatment  for  at  least  15 
years.  High-risk  conditions  for  endocarditis,  such  as  con-
genital  heart  disease,  IV  drug  use,  implants,  central  venous 
catheters,  as  well  as  various  invasive  procedures  were  not 
found  in  the  patient’s  medical  history.  The  only  possible 
predisposition  to  illness  is  her  age,  and  one  plausible  mode 
of  etiological  agent  introduction  is via  the  oral  cavity.  A  re-
cent  study  reported  S.  warneri  as  one  of  the  staphylococci 
identified  in  saliva  of  health  adults.  Although  its  occurrence 
rate  was  relatively  low  when  compared  to  other  Staphylo-
coccus species, results of the study suggested oral cavity as a 
route  of  entry  for  infective  endocarditis  [10].  Furthermore, 
the  frequency  of  staphylococci  recovered  from  saliva  
increases  with  age  [14],  and  most  patients  suffering  from 
endocarditis  are  elderly  [15].  Thus,  S.  warneri  can  poten-
tially  infect  older  population  who  are  in  relatively  good 
health.  

  As  medical  practices  continue  to  involve  more  invasive 
procedures,  the  importance  of  detecting  CoNS  members  
has  been  communicated  in  the  clinical  community  [4,  16, 
17].  Among  the  concerns  is  the  ability  of  these  bacteria  to 
resist  antibiotics  and  interfere  with  host  defense  mechanism 
[2,  16,  17].  Although  S.  warneri  is  often  innocuous  and  
susceptible  to  antimicrobial  treatments,  it  should  not  be  
dismissed  as  a  skin  flora  contaminant  when  isolated  from 
blood cultures. 

 
In  conclusion,  clinicians  should  be  cognizant  of  S.  
warneri  as  a  possible  low  virulence  but  invasive  pathogen. 
Its  ability  to  cause  infection  is  not  limited  to  patients  with 
implants  or  catheters.  As  with  many  other  organisms  with 
low  virulence  potential,  it  may  pose  as  a  risk  factor  for  
elderly patients susceptible to different types of infections. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

  The author would like to acknowledge Jennifer Clevinger, 
Clinical  Microbiology  Senior  Technologist  at  Rockingham 
Memorial Hospital, for microbiological testing and data. 

REFERENCES  

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

Dan M, Marien GJ, Goldsand G. Endocarditis caused by Staphylo-
coccus warneri on a normal aortic valve following vasectomy. Can 
Med Assoc J 1984; 131: 211-3. 
Bannerman TL. Staphylococcus, Micrococcus, and Other Catalase-
positive Cocci that Grow Aerobically. In: Murray PR, Ed. Manual 
of  Clinical  Microbiology,  8th  ed.  Washington  DC,  ASM  Press 
2003; pp. 384-404. 
Leighton  PM,  Little  JA.  Identification  of  coagulase-negative 
staphylococci  isolated  from  urinary  tract  infection.  Am  J  Clin 
Pathol 1986; 85: 92-5. 
Tufariello  AM,  Lowy  FD.  Microbiology,  pathogenesis,  and epide-
miology  of  coagulase-negative  staphylococci.  UpToDate  2008. 
Available from: http: //www.uptodate.com/patients/content/topic.do? 
topicKey=gram_pos/3019 
Stollberger C, Wechsler-Fordos A, Geppert F, et al. Staphylococcus 
warneri endocarditis after implantation of a lumbar disc prosthesis 
in an immunocompetent patient. J Infect 2006; 52: e15-8. 

An Unusual Presentation of Endocarditis Caused by Staphylococcus warneri 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4    105 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

Wood  CA,  Sewell,  DL,  Strausbaugh,  LJ.  Vertebral  osteomyelitis 
and  native  valve  endocarditis  caused  by  Staphylococcus  warneri. 
Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1989; 12: 251-3. 
Kamath  U,  Singer  C,  Isenberg  HD.  Clinical  significance  of  
Staphylococcus  warneri  bacteremia.  J  Clin  Microbiol  1992;  30: 
261-4. 
Wood CA. Significant infection caused by Staphylococcus warneri. 
J Clin Microbiol 1992; 30: 2216-7. 
Abgrall  S,  Meimoun  P,  Buu-Hoi  A,  Couetil  JP,  Gutmann  L, 
Mainardi  JL.  Early  prosthetic  valve  endocarditis  due  to  Staphylo-
coccus warneri with negative blood culture. J Infect 2001; 42: 166-
9. 
Ohara-Nemoto  Y,  Haraga  H,  Kimura  S,  Nemoto,  TK.  Occurrence 
of staphylococci in the oral cavities of healthy adults and nasal-oral 
trafficking of the bacteria. J Med Microbiol 2008; 57: 95-9. 
Strom  BL,  Abrutyn  E,  Berlin  JA,  et  al.  Dental  and  cardiac  risk 
factors for infective endocarditis. A population-based, case-control 
study. Ann Intern Med 1998; 129: 761-9. 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

[17] 

Di  Filippo  S,  Delahaye  F,  Semiond  B,  et  al.  Current  patterns  of 
infective  endocarditis  in  congenital  heart  disease.  Heart  2006;  92: 
1490-5. 
Brouqui P, Raoult D. Endocarditis due to rare and fastidious bacte-
ria. Clin Microbiol Rev 2001; 14: 177-207. 
Hoen B, Alla F, Selton-Suty C, et al. Changing profile of infective 
endocarditis.  Results  of  a  1  year  survey  in  France.  JAMA  2002; 
288: 75-81. 
Percival  RS,  Challacombe  SJ,  Marsh,  PD.  Age-related  microbio-
logical  changes  in  the  salivary  and  plaque  microflora  of  healthy 
adults. J Med Microbiol 1991; 35: 5-11. 
Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  Laboratory  detection 
of  coagulase  negative Staphylococcus  species  with  decreased  sus-
ceptibility to the glycopeptides vancomycin and teicoplanin. 1999. 
Available  from:  http:  //www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/ar_lab_IntStaph. 
html.  
Kloos  WE,  Bannerman  TL.  Update  on  clinical  significance  of 
coagulase-negative staphylococci. Clin Microbial Rev 1994; 7: 117-40.  

 
 
Received: July 09, 2010 
 

 Kini et al.; Licensee Bentham Open. 

 

Revised: July 23, 2010 

Accepted: July 28, 2010 

This is an open access article licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ 
by-nc/3.0/) which permits unrestricted, non-commercial use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the work is properly cited.  

 

