98 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, 4, 98-102 

 

 Open Access 

Strong  Strand  Composition  Bias  in  the  Genome  of  Ehrlichia  canis  
Revealed by Multiple Methods 

Wen Wei and Feng-Biao Guo*  

School  of  Life  Science  and  Technology,  University  of  Electronic  Science  and  Technology  of  China,  Chengdu,  
610054, China 

Abstract:  Genes  located  on  the  two  replicating  strands  are  found  to  have  two  separate  base/codon  usages  in  Ehrlichia 
canis  genome.  Although  strand-specific  codon  usage  is  not  the  first  observation,  for  the  first  time  we  have  applied  
multiple methods to the analysis of strand composition bias. By combining multiple methods, comprehensive and interest-
ing results are obtained. Among three types of correspondence analysis (COA), absolute codon usages between genes on 
the  two  replicating  strands  are  more  distinct  than  relative  synonymous  codon  usage  (RSCU)  and  base  usages  are  more 
sensitive than both types of codon usages. PR2-plots show that replication-induced bias is much higher than transcription/ 
translation associated bias in  the genome. By using the Z  curve method, two common genomic characters,  i.e.,  stronger 
strand  composition  bias  and  lower  rearrangement  frequency  are  found  to  exist  in  11  obligate  intracellular  bacteria  with 
separate base/codon usages. We hope more and more researchers will use the multiple methods to analyze strand compo-
sition bias in sequenced microbes, particularly obligate intracellular bacteria.  

Keywords:  Strand  composition  bias;  separate  base/codon  usages;  obligate  intracellular  bacteria;  correspondence  analysis;  Z 
curve; PR2-plot. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

  Chromosomal  replication,  particularly  that  for  microbes, 
includes a set of asymmetric mechanisms, among which is a 
division into lagging and leading strands [1]. In 1991 strand-
specific  nucleotide  composition  bias  was  first  found  in  ge-
nomes  of  echinoderm  [2]  and  vertebrate  mitochondria  and 
then in several bacterial genomes [3]. With the rapid growth 
in the number of sequenced genomes, more  and more bacte-
ria  are  found  to  have  the  consistent  strand  composition  bias 
[4]. That is to say, there is always the excess of bases G rela-
tive to  C  in the leading strands  and of C to G  in the lagging 
strands,  which  is  frequently  accompanied  by  the  bias  of  T 
versus A. Now, the underlying causes of strand composition 
bias  have  not  been  completely  understood  [5].  Two  pub-
lished  papers  reviewed  numerous  explanations  for  the  com-
position  bias  [6,  7].  These  explanations  either  attribute  the 
bias  to  replication  induced  mutation/repair  asymmetry  or  to 
transcription/translation  coupled  mutation/repair  asymmetry 
[5, 8]. For either kind of hypothesis, cytosine deamination of 
single-stranded  DNA  performs  a  vital  role  in  the  generation 
of strand composition bias [9].  

 
In 1998 [10], an exceptionally strong strand composition 
bias  was  observed  in  Borrelia  burgdorferi,  the  causative 
agent  of  Lyme  disease.  The  bias  is  so  strong  that  genes  on 
the  two replicating strands could be discriminated according 
to their codon usages. In the past decade, another 9 bacterial  
 

 

*Address  correspondence  to  this  author  at  the  School  of  Life  Science  and 
Technology,  University  of  Electronic  Science  and  Technology  of  China, 
Chengdu, 610054, China; Fax: +86 28 83201018;  
E-mail: fbguo@uestc.edu.cn 

genomes were also found to have extremely strong composi-
tion bias [11-13]. In other words, genes on the two replicating 
strands  were  found  to  have  separate  base/codon  usages  in 
genomes  of  10  bacteria.  Interestingly,  all  of  these  bacteria 
are obligate intracellular [7]. Rocha attributed the association 
between obligate  intracellular niches and strong strand  com-
position  bias  to  the  extreme  stability  of  most  of  these  ge-
nomes  [7].  He  supposes  that  repeats  induce  frequent  chro-
mosomal  rearrangements,  and  may  thus  reduce  strand  com-
position  bias.  On  the  other  hand,  Klasson  and  Andersson 
[14] found that strong strand composition bias in three endo-
symbionts  Blochmannia  floridanus,  Blochmannia  pennsyl-
vanicus  and  Buchnera  aphidicola  coincided  with  loss  of 
genes for replication restart pathways. 

 
In almost all prior works that reported the separate codon 
usages  of  genes  located  on  the  two  replicating  strands,  only 
one  single  method,  namely  correspondence  analysis  (COA) 
of relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU) was employed 
[15].  To  deeply  analyze  and  obtain  more  reliable,  complete 
information  about  the  phenomenon  existing  in  special  
genomes,  here  we  adopt  three  methods,  i.e.,  COA,  the  Z 
curve and PR2-plot, to investigate strand composition bias in 
Ehrlichia  canis  str.  Jake  genome.  E.  canis  is  an  obligate  
intracellular member of the order Rickettsiales  and infection 
with it could cause ehrlichiosis in dogs.  

2. MATERIALS AND METHODS 

2.1. The Database 

  The complete DNA sequence and annotation information 
of  E.  canis  (AC  number:  NC_007354)  were  downloaded 
from  GenBank  ftp  site  (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genbank/).  To-

 
 

1874-2858/10 

2010 Bentham Open 

Strong Strand Composition Bias in the Genome of Ehrlichia canis 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4    99 

tally,  925  protein-coding  genes  are  listed  in  the  annotation. 
Positions  of  replication  origin  and  terminus  the  same  with 
that  provided  by  DoriC  database http://tubic.tju.edu.cn/doric/. 
The origin is assigned to lie before gene Ecaj_0011, whereas 
the  terminus  between  genes  Ecaj_0446  and  Ecaj_0447.  
Consequently,  532  genes  are  located  on  the  leading  strands 
and the other 393 on the lagging strands.  

2.2.  Z  Curve  and  Nine  Variable  of  Phase-Specific  Z 
Curve  

  The Z curve is a 3-D space curve constituting the unique 
representation of a given DNA sequence in the sense that for 
the  curve  and  sequence  each  can  be  uniquely  reconstructed 
from  the  other  [16].  Denoting  the  cumulative  occurring 
numbers of the bases A, C, G and T in a DNA sequence read 
from  the  5'  to  the  3'-end  by  An,  Cn,  Gn  and  Tn,  respectively, 
we define the Z curve in the following. The Z curve consists 
of a series of nodes Pn, where n = 1, 2, ..., N, whose coordi-
nates are denoted by Xn, Yn and Zn. It is shown that [16]: 

Xn = (An + Gn) - (Cn + Tn)  

Yn = (An + Cn) - (Gn + Tn)   

 

 

       (1) 

Zn = (An + Tn) - (Cn + Gn)  

n = 0, 1, 2, ..., N, Xn, Yn, Zn (cid:1) [-N,N], 

where A0 = C0 = G0 = T0 = 0 and hence x0 = y0 = z0 = 0. P0  
is  the  origin  of  coordinate  system.  The  connection  of  the 
nodes  P0,  P1,  P2,  ...,  until  PN  one  by  one  sequentially  by 
straight  lines  is  called  the  Z  curve  for  the  DNA  sequences 
inspected. 

  As is known, a protein-coding gene has three codon posi-
tions. For a gene, we could make three Z curves for all codon 
positions and each of them has three components. Therefore, 
a gene could be represented by nine components. Each com-
ponent  curve  could  be  fitted  as  a  straight  line  by  using  least 
squares  technique.  To  mathematically  describe  the  gene,  we 
use the slopes of their fitting lines to denote nine component 
curves.  For  simplicity,  we  often  use  mean  frequencies  of 
bases  to  replace  fitting  slope.  The  so  generated  nine  values, 
denoted  by  u1-u9,  are  called  as  nine  variables  of  phase-
specific z curve. For details of this method, please refer [16]. 
In  fact,  the  nine  variables  u1-u9  represent  base  usage  for  a 
gene.  

2.3. COA and PR2-Plot 

  COA is a classical technique to reduce the dimensionality 
of  the  dataset  by  transforming  to  a  new  set  of  variables  (the 
principal  components)  to  summarize  the  feature  of  the  data 
[15].  The  new  set  of  variables  is  derived  from  the  linear 
combination of the original variables. The first principal axis 
is  chosen  to  maximize  the  standard  deviation  of  the  derived 
variable  and  the  second  principal  axis  is  the  direction  to 
maximize  the  standard  deviation  among  directions  un-
correlated  with  the  first,  and  so  forth.  For  details  about  this 
method,  refer  to  Dillon  and  Goldstein  [17].  The  results  of  a 
COA are viewed graphically, usually by plotting the  coordi-
nates  of  all  genes  along  the  first  eigenvectors  [15].  Here, 
COA  is adopted to show  the different base and  codon usage 
of genes located on the  leading and lagging strands.  COA  is 
computed  on  the  variables  u1-u9,  59  codon  counts  and  59 
RSCU values, respectively.  

  According  to  the  parity  rule  2,  the  average  nucleotide 
composition is theoretically expected to be A = T and G = C 
within each strand when there are no strand-specific biases in 
the  substitution  rates  between  the  two  strands  of  DNA.  De-
viations  from  these  equalities  are  therefore  evidences  for  an 
asymmetry  in  mutation  and/or  selection  between  the  two 
strands.  PR2-plot,  proposed  by  Lobry  and  Sueoka  [4],  do-
nates  G/(G+C)  against  A/(A+T)  at  the  3rd  codon  position  in 
genes  and  it  could  reflect  the  deviations.  Here,  we  adopt 
PR2-plot  method  to  show  nucleotide  composition  bias  of 
gene in E. canis genome. 

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

3.1.  Separate  Base/Codon  Usage  Revealed  by  Three 
Types of COA  

 
For each of the 925 genes in E. canis genome, we calcu-
late  59  codon  counts  (excluding  three  stop  codons  and 
codons encoding for Met and Trp), 59 RSCU values and u1-
u9.  Each  of  these  three  types  of  variables  for  a  gene  corre-
sponds to a point in 59-D, 59-D and 9-D space, respectively. 
In  order  to  visualize  the  distribution  of  925  mapping  points 
in  high  dimensional  space,  project  them  to  a  2-D  plane 
spanned  by  the  first  and  second  principal  axes  by  using  the 
COA method. Figs. (1a), (b) and (c) show the position of the 
genes on the 2-D principal plane after COA on codon counts, 
RSCU  values  and  u1-u9,  respectively.  As  can  be  seen  from 
each  of  the  figure,  all  the  genes  are  divided  into  two  quite 
distinct  clusters  with  little  overlap,  which  indicates  that 
genes  in  the  two  clusters  have  different  codon  and  base  us-
ages.  

  On inspection, it is found that the two groups correspond 
to the genes that  are transcribed either in the  leading strands 
or  in  the  lagging  strands,  respectively.  This  phenomenon, 
i.e., separate base/codon usages of the genes in the two repli-
cating  strands,  is  similar  to  that  observed  previously  in  ge-
nomes  of  B.  burgdorferi,  Treponema  pallidum,  Chlamydia 
trachomatis,  B.  aphidicola,  B.  floridanus,  Bartonella  hense-
lae,  Bartonella  quintana,  Tropheryma  whipplei,  Chlamydia 
muridarum  and  Lawsonia  intracellularis  [10-13].  All  of  the 
ten  bacteria  and  here  the  E.  canis  are  all  obligate  intracellu-
lar.  They  have  extreme  strand  composition  bias  and  thus 
their genes have two separate base/codon usages.  

3.2.  Two  Common  Genomic  Characters  Revealed  by  y 
Component of Z Curve  

  Eleven  obligate  intracellular  bacteria  have  been  found  to 
have separate base/codon usages according to whether genes 
located  on  the  leading  or  lagging  strands.  Investigating  the 
common genomic characters of them may be interesting and 
important.  In  previous  works  [12],  we  have  tried  to  do  this 
by  using  Z  curve  method  shown  in  Equation  (1).  In  this 
work, only y component curve is needed. 

 
In Fig. (2), y component curves are shown for four repre-
sentatives  of  11  obligate  intracellular  bacteria.  For  conven-
ient observation,  the other 7 bacteria  are not shown but  they 
have similar y component curves. For comparison, y compo-
nent  curve  of  E.  coli  K12  chromosome  is  also  shown.  In E. 
coli,  there  also  exists  strand  specific  composition  bias, 
whereas  it  is  not  strong  enough  to  generate  separate  codon 
usages. From this figure, we could make the following two  

100    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4 

Wei and Guo 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. (1). The distribution of points based on the two most important 
axes  by  using  the  COA  for  925  genes  of  the  E.  canis  genome. 
Genes  located  on  leading  strands  are  denoted  by  open  circles, 
whereas  filled  circles  indicate  lagging  strand  genes.  (a)  COA  on 
codon  counts;  (b)  COA  on  RSCU  values;  (c)  COA  on  nine  vari-
ables (u1-u9) of phase-specific Z curve. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. (2). Y component curves for four representatives of 11 obligate 
intracellular  bacteria  and  that  for  the  free-living  bacterium  E.coli 
K12.  To  allow  convenient  observation  and  direct  comparison,  the 
first  base  of  the  chromosome  is  shifted  to  the  origin  of  replication 
for each genome. 

 
observations.  Firstly,  changing  rates  of  y  component  curves 
for  the  four  representative  obligate  intracellular  bacteria  are 
much higher than that of the free-living E. coli. According to 
equation  (1),  the  y  component  curve  represents  the  cumula-
tive  excess  of  G  over  C  plus  T  over  A.  Therefore,  compari-
son between y component curves of the two groups of bacte-
ria  suggests  that  11  obligate  intracellular  bacteria  have 
stronger strand composition bias. Secondly, all of the y com-
ponent curves for four bacteria  are  much smoother  than  that 
of E. coli. In y component curve for the latter, there are many 
prickles along the chromosome, whereas not so many for the 
former. As shown in Grigoriev [18], prickles  in the chromo-
some  diagrams  usually  denote  sequence  inversions  or  direct 
translocations  to  another  half  of  a  chromosome,  or  integra-
tion  of  foreign  DNA  into  the  chromosome.  In  other  words, 
chromosome  rearrangements  usually  are  exhibited  as  little 
prickles  in  the  y  component  curves.  Therefore,  we  could 
make  the  conclusion  that  the  11  obligate  intracellular  chro-
mosomes  are  highly  stable  and  have  very  few  rearrange-
ments. As suggested by Rocha [7] and others, stronger strand 
composition  bias  and  lower  rearrangements  frequency  are 
just  the  most  likely  reasons  for  the  appearance  of  separate 
base/codon  usages  in  some  obligate  intracellular  bacteria. 
Our results confirmed their speculations.  

3.3.  Using  PR-2  Plots  to  Differentiate  Replication  and 
Transcription Associated Biases 

  As  mentioned  above,  composition  bias  among  genes  is 
very strong in E. canis genome. These biases are induced by 
asymmetric  replication  mutation  pressure  or  by  asymmetric 
transcription/translation-associated  mutation/selection  pres-
sure.  To  differentiate  replication-induced  bias  and  transcrip-
tion/translation  associated  bias,  PR2-plots  for  single  gene 
and  gene  clusters  are  drawn  in  Figs.  (3a)  and  (b),  respec-
tively. As can be seen from figure (a), the strand bias of G/C, 
which could be reflected by the values of the horizontal axis 
of  the  plot  [4],  is  much  stronger  than  that  of  T/A  (reflected 
by  the  vertical  axis).  In  figure  (b),  BI  denotes  the  distance 
between  the  centers  of  two  clusters  of  genes,  whereas  BII 

Strong Strand Composition Bias in the Genome of Ehrlichia canis 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4    101 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Fig.  (3).  PR2-plot  for  E.canis  chromosome.  Genes  located  on  the 
leading  strands  are  denoted  as  open  circles,  whereas  filled  circles 
indicate lagging strand genes. In figure (a), each gene is denoted by 
a  circle  and  whereas  in  (b),  each  category  of  genes,  as  a  whole,  is 
denoted by a larger circle. 

denotes the distance from the origin of coordinates system to 
the  midpoint  of  two  centers.  In  fact,  BI  means  the  extent  of 
replication-induced  bias  and  BII  reflect  that  of  transcrip-
tion/translation-associated  bias  [4].  Values  of  BI  ,  BII  are 
0.438  and  0.013,  respectively.  Therefore,  replication  effect 
on  composition  bias  of  genes  is  much  higher  than  that  of 
transcription/translation effect in E. canis genome.  

3.4. Why do We Combine Multiple Methods in This Work? 

 
In  this  work,  we  have  employed  three  methods  to  reveal 
the  strong  strand  composition  bias  in  E.  canis.  Merits  and 
advantages of each method are described as follows.  

 
Plane plots after  COA could intuitively visualize the dif-
ference of nucleotide composition between genes located on 
the  two  replicating  strands.  As  long  as  strand  composition 
bias  is  strong  enough  to  affect  base/codon  usage,  it  will  be 
exposed to COA plots. Three types of COA are employed in 
this work. Contents reflected by them are different. COA on 
u1-u9  reflects  distribution  pattern  of  base  usages  of  genes. 
COA  on  codon  reflects  distribution  of  absolute  codon  num-
bers, whereas COA on RSCU reflects distribution of relative 
synonymous codon usage [15]. By using three types of COA 
plots  in  this  work,  we  could  make  the  conclusion  that  base 
usage,  absolute  codon  usage,  relative  codon  usage  are  all 
separated between genes on the two replicating strands  in E. 
canis genome. Furthermore, division of two clusters of genes 
in Figure (a) is significantly clearer than that in Figure (b). In 
fact,  COA  on  codon  counts  also  has  the  advantage  over 
RSCU when  analyzing separate  codon usages  in L.  intracel-
lularis genome [13]. On the other hand, division of two clus-
ters  in  Figure  (c)  is  slightly  clearer  than  that  in  Figure  (a). 
This is consistent with previous observation that base usages 
are  more  sensitive  than  codon  usages  for  discriminating 
genes  on  the  two  replicating  strands  in  four  bacterial  
genomes.  

  We  used  y  component  curves  of  the  Z  curve  method  
to  investigate  the  common  genomic  characters  among  11 
obligate  intracellular bacteria. After comparison with E.  coli 
K12,  they  are  found  to  have  two  common  genomic  charac-
ters,  i.e.  stronger  strand  composition  bias  and  lower  rear-
rangement  frequency.  Therefore,  Z  curve  is  a  useful  tool  to 
analyze  the  global  genomic  characters  of  bacteria.  By  using 
it, important results may be obtained. 

 
PR2-plot [4], as a diagram tool, could not only differenti-
ate  replication-induced  bias  and  transcription/translation-
associated  bias  but  also  evaluate  the  relative  strength  be-
tween bias of G/C and that of T/A.  

 
In  brief,  each  method  has  its  merits.  Complete,  reliable 
and  interesting  results  (or  conclusions)  may  be  obtained 
when  combining  the  multiple  methods  to  analyze  strand 
composition  bias  in  bacteria.  The  methods  could  be  applied 
to other sequenced microbes, particularly obligate intracellu-
lar bacteria.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

  We  are  grateful  to  the  anonymous  reviewers  for  their 
valuable  suggestions  and  comments,  which  have  led  to  the 
improvement of this paper. The present study was supported 
by  Doctoral  Fund  of  Ministry  of  Education  of  China  (grant 
20070614011)  and  by  Committee  of  Science  and  Technol-
ogy of Sichuan Province (grant 2008JY0053). 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

Rocha  EP.  The  organization  of  the  bacterial  genome.  Annu  Rev 
Genet 2008; 42: 211-33. 
Asakawa  S,  Kumazawa  Y,  Araki  T,  Himeno  H,  Miura  K,  Wata-
nabe K. Strand-specific nucleotide composition bias in echinoderm 
and vertebrate mitochondrial genomes. J Mol Evol 1991; 32: 511-
20. 
Lobry  JR.  Asymmetric  substitution  patterns  in  the  two  DNA 
strands of bacteria. Mol Biol Evol 1996; 13: 660-5.  
Lobry JR, Sueoka N. Asymmetric directional mutation pressures in 
bacteria. Genome Biol 2002; 3: RESEARCH0058.  

102    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

Necsulea  A,  Lobry  JR.  A  new  method  for  assessing  the  effect  of 
replication  on  DNA  base  composition  asymmetry.  Mol  Biol  Evol 
2007; 24: 2169-79. 
Frank AC, Lobry JR. Asymmetric substitution patterns: a review of 
possible  underlying  mutational  or  selective  mechanisms.  Gene 
1999; 238: 65-77. 
Rocha  EP.  The  replication-related  organization  of  bacterial  ge-
nomes. Microbiology 2004; 150: 1609-27. 
Beletskii  A,  Bhagwat  AS.  Transcription-induced  mutations:  in-
crease in C to T mutations in the nontranscribed strand during tran-
scription  in  Escherichia  coli.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  USA  1996;  93: 
13919-24. 
Francino  MP,  Ochman  H.  Deamination  as  the  basis  of  strand-
asymmetric  evolution  in  transcribed  Escherichia  coli  sequences. 
Mol Biol Evol 2001; 18: 1147-50. 

[10]  Mcinerney JO. Replicational and transcriptional selection on codon 
usage in Borrelia burgdoreferi. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998; 95: 
10698-703. 
Das  S,  Paul  S,  Dutta  C.  Evolutionary  constraints  on  codon  and 
amino acid usage in two strains of human pathogenic actinobacteria 
Tropheryma whipplei. J Mol Evol 2006; 62: 645-58. 

[11] 

Wei and Guo 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

[17] 

[18] 

Guo FB, Yu XJ. Separate base usages of genes located on the lead-
ing and lagging strands in Chlamydia muridarum revealed by the Z 
curve method. BMC Genomics 2007; 8: 366. 
Guo  FB,  Yuan  JB.  Codon  usages  of  genes  on  chromosome,  and 
surprisingly,  genes  in  plasmid  are  primarily  affected  by  strand-
specific  mutational  biases  in  Lawsonia  intracellularis.  DNA  Res 
2009; 16: 91-104. 
Klasson  L,  Andersson  SG.  Strong  asymmetric  mutation  bias  in 
endosymbiont genomes coincide with loss of genes for replication 
restart pathways. Mol Biol Evol 2006; 23: 1031-9. 
Perriere  G,  Thioulouse  J.  Use  and  misuse  of  correspondence  
analysis in codon usage studies. Nucleic Acids Res 2002; 30: 4548-
55. 
Zhang  CT,  Wang  J,  Recognition  of  protein  coding  genes  in  the 
yeast  genome  at  better  than  95%  accuracy  based  on  the  Z  curve. 
Nucleic Acids Res 2000; 28: 2804-14. 
Dillon WR, Goldstein M. Multivariate analysis, method and appli-
cation. New York: Willey; 1984. 
Grigoriev A. Analyzing genomes with cumulative skew diagrams. 
Nucleic Acids Res 1998; 26: 2286-90. 

 
 
Received: July 15, 2010 
 

 Wei and Guo; Licensee Bentham Open. 

 

Revised: July 26, 2010 

Accepted: July 30, 2010 

This is an open access article licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ 
by-nc/3.0/) which permits unrestricted, non-commercial use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the work is properly cited.  

 

 

