22 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2012, 6, 22-28 

 

Open Access 

AFM  Specific  Identification  of  Bacterial  Cell  Fragments  on  Biofunctional 
Surfaces 

Evgeniy V. Dubrovin*,1, Galina N. Fedyukina2, Sergey V. Kraevsky3, Tatiana E. Ignatyuk3,  
Igor V. Yaminsky1 and Sergei G. Ignatov2 

1M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, 1/2 Leninskie gory, Moscow, 119991, Russia 
2State Research Center for Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, Obolensk, 142279, Russia 
3Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics, 25 Bolshaya Cheremushkinskaya, Moscow, 117218, Russia 

Abstract:  Biointerfaces with  a highly  sensitive  surface designed for specific interaction with biomolecules  are  essential 
approaches  for  providing  advanced  biochemical  and  biosensor  assays.  For  the  first  time,  we  have  introduced  a  simple 
AFM-based recognition system capable of visualizing specific bacterial nanofragments and identifying the corresponding 
bacterial  type.  For  this  we  developed  AFM-adjusted  procedures  for  preparing  IgG-based  surfaces  and  subsequently 
exposing them to antigens. The AFM images reveal the specific binding of Escherichia coli cell fragments to the prepared 
biofunctional  surfaces.  Moreover,  the  binding  of  bacterial  cell  fragments  to  the  affinity  surfaces  can  be  characterized 
quantitatively, indicating a 30-fold to 80-fold increase in the quantity of bound antigenic material in the case of a specific 
antigen-antibody  pair.  Our  results  demonstrate  significant  opportunities  for  developing  reliable  sensing  procedures  for 
detecting pathogenic bacteria, and the cell can still be identified after it is completely destroyed. 

Keywords: Atomic force microscopy, affine surfaces. biosensors, Escherichia coli, antibodies. 

1. INTRODUCTION 

recognition  between 

  Because  molecular 
specific 
receptors  and  ligands  plays  a  key  role  in  biological 
processes,  developing  bioselective  surfaces  based  on  this 
recognition  is  a  large  challenge  in  science  and  applications 
[1,  2].  Atomic  force  microscopy  (AFM)  has  opened  a  wide 
range  of  novel  possibilities  for  exploring  biofunctional 
surfaces and biomolecules [3, 4] and is currently widely used 
to solve fundamental and applied problems in the biological 
sciences.  Because  AFM  is  capable  of  molecular-resolution 
imaging  of  single  particles  binding  to  a  surface,  it  can  be 
used as a research tool for investigating processes that occur 
on the surfaces of biosensing devices. Moreover, AFM itself 
can  be  used  to  detect  bacterial  antigens  with  the  high 
accuracy. 

  Detecting  pathogenic  bacteria  remains  one  of 
the 
challenging  tasks  in  the  applied  biological  and  medical 
sciences  [1,  5,  6].  The  basic  principles  of  developing  bio-
functional surfaces responsible for the specific binding with 
a microbiological analyte in model systems for the purposes 
of  biological  detection  have  been  studied  using  different 
techniques for investigating surfaces including quartz crystal 
microbalance,  surface  plasmon  resonance,  and  ellipsometry 
[5,  7-13].  These  techniques  are  based  on  immobilizing 
specific  antibodies  on  a  substrate  surface  and  subsequently 
exposing it to an antigen-containing suspension. 

 

 

*Address  correspondence  to  this  author  at  the  M.V.  Lomonosov  Moscow 
State University, Leninskie gory, 1-2, 119991 Moscow, Russia; Tel: +7 495 
926 3743; Fax: +7 495 939 2988; E-mail: dubrovin@genebee.msu.ru 

  The  proper  orientation  and  immobilization  of  antibodies 
determines  the  sensitivity  and  specificity  of  the  recognition 
system  for  the  analytes  of  interest  [14].  There  are  three  main 
strategies for immobilizing antibodies on a solid support: direct 
adsorption, the use of avidin-biotin binding, or a self-assembled 
monolayer  [7].  Direct  adsorption,  the  simplest  technique  for 
depositing antibodies, yields the lowest affinity of the resulting 
layer because of  the  chaotic positioning of  the antigen-binding 
region (Fab). But immobilizing protein G beneath the antibodies 
significantly  improves  their  organization  into  a  monolayer 
because of the ability of protein G to specifically bind IgG in the 
Fc region [15]. As a result, the Fab regions of immunoglobulin 
molecules  in  a  layer  are  exposed  outside  the  surface  of  the 
substrate,  significantly  increasing  the  resulting  functionality  of 
the layer. This approach has been widely used to investigate the 
specific  binding  of  bacterial  cells  using  QCM,  SPR, 
ellipsometry, and other surface-based  techniques [16], where  a 
significant  change  in  the  signal  (whose  nature  depends  on  the 
technique  used)  indicates  the  binding  of  bacterial  cells  to  the 
surface. 

  Direct  high-resolution  studies  of  the  process  of  the 
specific  binding  of  a  microbiological  analyte 
to  a 
biofunctional  surface  are  still  lacking.  One  of  the  most 
appropriate exceptions is the AFM and SEM investigation of 
Salmonella  typhimurium  specific  adhesion  to  an  anti-
Salmonella  antibody-modified  surface  [17].  These  results 
together  with  multiple  works  on  the  AFM  of  microbial 
surfaces  (e.g.,  [18-20])  show  that  AFM  is  a  powerful  and 
effective  tool  for  directly  studying  the  functioning  of 
biosensor surfaces. 

 
In our work, we used AFM to investigate antibody-based 
biofunctional  surfaces  before  and  after  their  exposure  to 

 
 

1874-2858/12 

2012 Bentham Open 

AFM Specific Identification of Bacterial Cell Fragments 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2012, Volume 6    23 

antigen-containing  suspensions.  To 
the  best  of  our 
knowledge,  whole  bacterial  cells  were  used  as  antigens  in 
previous  works  on  surface-based  microbiological  detection 
[12,  13,  21-24].  Our  goal  here  was  to  study  the  specific 
binding of small bacterial fragments, which is a relevant task 
for  microbiological  biosensing  for  two  reasons:  first,  it  will 
allow detecting the specified pathogen based on part of it (or 
on  a  destroyed  cell);  second,  it  will  allow  intentionally 
destroying  the  cells  before  they  are  analyzed.  We  have 
therefore  also  modified 
the  mode  of  bacterial  cell 
fragmentation for further AFM imaging. 

solution 
(pH  8.0)  without  antigens.  The  obtained 
biofunctional  surfaces  were  exposed  to  a  droplet  (20  μl)  of 
analyte suspension for ten minutes at a temperature of 32ºC. 
These pH and temperature values favor  the specific binding 
reaction  [26].  The  mica  plate  was  then  immersed  in  the 
buffer  solution  and  rotated  in  the  shaker  at  100  revolutions 
per  minute  for  ten  minutes.  The  mica  surface  was  finally 
rinsed  in  a  droplet  (100  μl)  of  distilled  water  to  avoid 
possible  salt  deposition  upon  drying  of  the  buffer  and  then 
dried in a nitrogen flow. 

2.4. AFM Imaging 

2. MATERIALS AND METHODS 

2.1. Obtaining Bacterial Fragments 

 
In  this  work,  we  used  Escherichia  coli  08  and  Bacillus 
subtilis cells from the collection of the State Research Center 
of Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology. Microbial cells 
were grown for 16-20 hours on LB broth (ICN Company) at 
a temperature of 37ºC, precipitated by ultracentrifugation at 
9300 g for five minutes (for Escherichia coli) or ten minutes 
(for  Bacillus  subtilis),  and  washed 
times  with 
physiological  solution  in  the  same  mode.  The  obtained 
precipitate  was  resuspended  in  distilled  water  until  the 
concentration  of  cells  reached  109  cells/ml  according  to  the 
opacity standard. 

three 

  Cells  were  disrupted  and  their  fragments  were  obtained 
in  two  ways.  The  ultrasound  method  involved  exposing  the 
suspension 
(Virtis 
Company)  in  an  ice  bath  with  alternating  30  seconds  of 
ultrasound and a 30-second pause for five minutes. 

the  disintegrator  Virsonic-100 

in 

  The other way involved the freeze-thaw method. The cell 
suspension  in water (1  ml) was frozen at  a temperature of  -
80ºC for one hour and then warmed in a water bath at room 
temperature.  This  procedure  was  repeated  five 
times. 
Undestroyed  cells  were  separated  by  centrifugation  at  5000 
g.  Disrupted  cells  were  inspected  using  a  light  microscope 
with immersion and a 90-fold zoom of the objective. 

2.2. Preparing the Biofunctional Surface 

 
Freshly  cleaved  mica  was  first  modified  in  a  glow 
discharge  (current  0.2  mA,  V=1.5  kV)  for  one  minute  and 
then  exposed  to  a  droplet  (20  μl)  of  protein  G  solution 
(concentration  0.6  mg/ml)  in  Tris-HCl  buffer  (20  mM  Tris, 
200  mM  NaCl,  pH  8.0)  for  one  minute.  The  protein  G 
modified mica plate was washed for one minute in a droplet 
(50  μl)  of  distilled  water  and  then  exposed  to  an  anti-
Escherichia  coli  monoclonal  antibody  (the  clone  number  is 
C1H3)  solution  (concentration  0.1  mg/ml)  in  the  Tris-HCl 
buffer (pH 8.0) for ten minutes. This surface was washed one 
more time in a distilled water droplet (50 μl) for one minute 
and then dried in a nitrogen flow. 

 
For  production  of  monoclonal  antibodies  IgG  was  used 
as described before [25]. This procedure included additional 
purification  by  the  protein  A/G  that  favors  the  formation  of 
more stable antibody layer on protein G. 

2.3. Exposing the Biofunctional Surfaces to the Analyte 

  We  used  three  types  of  analyte  suspensions  in  our 
experiments:  suspensions  containing  Escherichia  coli  or 
Bacillus  subtilis bacterial fragments in buffer and the buffer 

  All  experiments  were  performed  using  a  Nanoscope  III 
multimode  atomic  force  microscope  (Veeco  Instruments 
Inc.,  USA)  in  contact  mode  in  air.  Commercial  silicon 
CSC11 
cantilevers 
(MikroMasch)  were  used.  The  FemtoScan 
software 
(Advanced Technologies Center, Russia) was used for image 
processing. The scan rate was typically 2 Hz with 512 lines. 

0.35  N/m) 

constant 

(spring 

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

  To obtain surfaces that are affinitive to bacterial cells, we 
used  a  conventional  approach  based  on  depositing 
monoclonal  antibodies  on  top  of  a  protein  G  modified 
substrate  [16].  Because  protein  G  can  specifically  bind  the 
heavy  chain  of  immunoglobulin  G  in  the  Fc  region  [15],  it 
fosters  IgG  molecules  to  expose  their  antigen-binding  sites 
on  the  surface;  the  presence  of  protein  G  thus  increases  the 
total  functionality  of  the  IgG  layer.  But  in  this  work,  we 
introduced  some  additional  stages  of  affinity  surface 
preparation  and  adjusted  the  protein  G  and  IgG  deposition 
parameters  to  increase  the  resulting  surface  specificity  and 
sensitivity  to  an  antigen.  The  developed  procedure  is 
described  in  the  Materials  and  Methods  section.  We  gave 
much attention to arranging the conditions for modifying the 
mica  in  the  glow  discharge,  depositing  the  antibody  layer, 
and  rinsing  the  surface  in  different  specimen  preparation 
stages (the rinsing procedure and duration). 

  We  used  muscovite  mica  as  a  substrate 
in  our 
experiments. The mica surface has a natural negative charge 
in  an  aqueous  environment.  The  protein  G  molecule  at  pH 
8.0  also  has  a  total  negative  charge  (the  pI  of  protein  G  is 
5.0).  We  did  not  use  coagulants  and  crosslinking  agents  to 
fix  protein  G  on  the  mica  surface.  Those  fixatives  cause 
substantial  conformational  changes  of  protein  [27].  We 
therefore  treated  freshly  cleaved  mica  in  a  glow  discharge 
before  depositing  the  protein  G  layer  (see  Materials  and 
Methods).  This  makes  the  adsorption  of  protein  more 
effective  because  different  chemical  bonds  on  the  mica 
surface  are  activated  [28-30].  The  antibody  layer  was 
deposited  at  pH  8.0,  which  is  the  optimal  value  for  the 
specific binding of protein G with the Fc region of IgG [31]. 
The pH value 8.0 is very important because lowering the pH 
causes a reversal of this binding. 

  Topography  of  all  successive  steps  of  affinity  surface 
preparation (including glow-discharged mica, protein G layer 
and  IgG  layer)  and  the  results  of  scratching  experiments  on 
the  final  surface  are  presented  in  Fig.  (1).  Anti-Escherichia 
coli  monoclonal  antibodies  were  used  in  all  the  presented 
experiments.  The  resulting  layer  remained  stable  in  an 
aqueous  environment  and  after  the  rinsing  procedure.  The 

24   The Open Microbiology Journal, 2012, Volume 6 

Dubrovin et al. 

Fig.  (1).  AFM  height  images  of  a  mica  surface  modified  in  glow  a  discharge  (current  0.2  mA,  duration  one  minute)  (a)  and  successively 
exposed  to  a  protein  G  solution  (concentration  0.1  mg/ml)  (b)  and  then  (after  rinsing)  to  a  solution  of  anti-Escherichia  coli  monoclonal 
antibodies (c). The dark square in (c) is a result of scratching experiments on this surface; the height difference is 24 nm. (d) Cross section 
along the dotted line in the AFM image. 

 

total  thickness  of  the  final  layer  is  slightly  more  than  6  nm 
(and  1.5  about  nm  for  the  protein  G  layer  alone),  and  its 
surface  root  mean  square  roughness  is  about  0.6  nm.  The 
observed  height  agrees  well  with  the  height  of  the  similar 
structure  consisting  of  protein  A  and  anti-Salmonella 
antibody reported by Lee et al. [17]. 

  Because  our  goal  was  to  use  bacterial  fragments  as 
antigens, we modified the cell destruction procedures for our 
purposes  (see  Materials  and  Methods).  Light  microscopy 
experiments  showed  that  the  freeze-thaw  method  does  not 
disrupt  microbial  cells  effectively,  while  the  ultrasound 
treatment  allows  obtaining  nearly  complete  bacterial  cell 
destruction. We therefore used ultrasound for cell disruption 
in the further experiments. 

  We  exposed  the  droplet  of  antigen  suspension  (analyte) 
in  buffer  to  the  biofunctional  surface  for  ten  minutes  and 
then  rinsed  the  surface  by  immersing  the  mica  bed  in  the 
same buffer with subsequent shaking. The rinsing step helps 
to  minimize  the  number  of  nonspecifically  bound  particles 
because their adhesion is weaker than the affinitive binding. 
Because  of  additional  hydrodynamic  flows  in  the  surface 

proximity, such a rinsing method increases the efficiency of 
purifying 
from  physisorbed 
bacterial fragments and impurities. 

the  biofunctional  surface 

  The specific adsorption of Escherichia coli fragments on 
the  affinity  surface  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  (2),  where  typical 
AFM  images  of  three  different  specimens  are  depicted:  a 
droplet of buffer in the first sample (Fig. 2a, b) and droplets 
with bacterial fragments of Bacillus subtilis cells (Fig. 2c, d) 
and  Escherichia  coli  cells  (Fig.  2e,  f)  in  the  respective 
to  an  anti-
second  and 
Escherichia  coli  antibody  modified  surface.  In 
these 
experiments,  the  concentration  of  bacterial  fragments  was 
equivalent  to  108  cells/ml.  The  AFM  images  in  the  left  and 
right  columns  were  obtained 
the 
respective scan sizes of 50 (cid:1)m and 10 (cid:1)m. All the presented 
AFM images have the same scale of height contrast. 

third  samples  were  exposed 

independently  with 

  The  contrast  between  the  AFM  images  of  the  third 
sample  (Fig.  2e,  f)  illustrating  specific  binding  and  the  first 
two  samples  (Fig.  2a-d)  illustrating  the  control  experiment 
and nonspecific adsorption to the functionalized surface can 
be clearly seen. To characterize and compare the adsorption 

AFM Specific Identification of Bacterial Cell Fragments 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2012, Volume 6    25 

Fig. (2). AFM images of surfaces modified with protein G  and anti-Escherichia coli antibodies  and exposed  to ((cid:2), b)  the buffer,  (c,  d) the 
suspension containing Bacillus  subtilis  cell  fragments  with  the  concentration 108 cells/ml, and  (e, f) the  suspension containing Escherichia 
coli cell fragments with the concentration 108 cells/ml. The surfaces were rinsed by immersion in the buffer and rotation in the shaker. The 
images sizes are (a, c, e) 50 (cid:1)m and (b, d, f) 10 (cid:1)m. The height difference is 400 nm in all images. 

 

ability of the studied surfaces quantitatively, we developed a 
procedure  for  analyzing  the  quantity  of  bound  material 
observed  in  the  AFM  images.  Because  we  study  the 
adsorption  of  bacterial  fragments  of  different  sizes  and 
shapes in our experiments, the number of fragments and their 
height  cannot  be  used  to  characterize  the  quantity  of  bound 
material correctly and to compare the surface binding ability 
adequately in different experiments. For this we can use the 
total  volume  per  area  v=V/S  as  a  parameter,  where  V  is 

calculated as V=

Vi

(cid:1) , Vi is the volume of the ith particle in 

i

the  AFM  image,  and  S  is  the  area  of  the  AFM  image.  The 
value  v,  which  has  the  meaning  of  the  quantity  of  adsorbed 
material  on  the  unit  surface,  serves  as  an  indicator  for 
estimating the presence or absence of specific binding. 

 
In practice,  to calculate the value  v, we must first detect 
all  objects  in  the  image  and  calculate  their  volume.  Both 
procedures  (detecting  the  objects  and  calculating  their 

26   The Open Microbiology Journal, 2012, Volume 6 

Dubrovin et al. 

volume)  are  integrated  in  the  software  we  used.  The  lower 
height  threshold  of  detected  bacterial  fragments  depends  on 
the background noise or, more precisely, on the mean purity 
(roughness)  of  the  control  sample  (which  contains  buffer 
instead of the antigen suspension). In other words, we ignore 
the lower height values that are typical for the control image. 
Of  course,  the  control  image  will  never  be  perfectly  flat, 
because  of  possible  impurities  in  the  buffer  solution  and 
imperfections  of  the  obtained  protein  surfaces.  In  our 
experiments,  the  height  distribution  histogram  and  integral 
probability  function  showed  that  95%  of  the  observed 
objects  are  below  20  nm  (Fig.  3a),  and  we  considered  only 
particles  higher  than  20  nm  in  the  further  analysis.  The 
height distribution histograms of objects on the AFM images 
referring  to  “specific  antigen”  and  “nonspecific  antigen” 
samples  show  a  significant  difference  (~30-fold)  in  the 
number of bound objects (Fig. 3b, c). 

 
In the next series of experiments, we decreased the initial 
concentration  of  the  analyte  ten  times.  The  resulting  AFM 
images  of  specific  and  nonspecific  adsorption  together  with 
the  blank  experiment  are  presented  in  Fig.  (4).  We  again 
observe a significant number of specific binding events (Fig. 
4c),  while  the  number  of  objects  adsorbed  from  the  buffer 
(Fig.  4a)  or  from  the  suspension  of  nonspecific  bacterial 
fragments (Fig. 4b) remains extremely low. 

  The  values  of  v  for  the  samples  obtained  by  exposing 
Escherichia  coli-  affinitive 
suspensions 

surfaces 

to 

containing  Bacillus  subtilis  and  Escherichia  coli  cell 
fragments  with  the  concentrations  108  and  107  cells/ml  (see 
Figs. 2, 4) compared with control experiments are presented 
in  Fig.  (5a).  The  presented  diagram  shows  a  more  than  10-
fold 
to  specific  surfaces 
compared  with  the  unspecific  surface  and  “background 
noise.” 

increase  of  material  bound 

  The results presented in Figs. (2-5) not only demonstrate 
the possibility of AFM visualization of single binding events 
between  biofunctional  surfaces  and  bacterial  fragments  but 
also  indicate  that  the  developed  procedure  for  preparing 
samples  allows  significantly  minimizing  the  number  of 
physisorbed  particles.  Therefore,  we  can  confirm  that  the 
developed  affinity 
sample  preparation 
procedure  allow  obtaining  a  selective  sensitivity  of 
biofunctional surface and determining binding specificity by 
analyzing  AFM 
important  for 
developing  biosensor  applications  based  on  biofunctional 
surfaces of this type. 

surfaces  and 

images.  This 

is  very 

other 

surface 

techniques 

(QCM,  SPR, 
  Unlike 
ellipsometry,  etc.)  that  involve  analyzing  the  integral  signal 
from  the  whole  surface  for  detection,  the  sensivity  of  AFM 
as a sensor of bacterial cells is not practically limited by the 
sensivity  of  AFM  itself,  because  antigen  sizes  usually 
considerably  exceed  the  typical  size  of  objects  reliably 
detected  by  AFM.  In  other  words,  even  a  single  cell 
adsorbed  to  an  AFM  scanning  surface  area  will  always  be 

Fig.  (3).  ((cid:3))  Height  distribution  histogram  (bottom)  of  objects  detected  in  the  control  AFM  image  (Escherichia  coli-  affinitive  surface 
exposed to the buffer) and integral probability function (top). (b) height distribution histogram of objects detected in the AFM image of the 
cross-control sample (Escherichia coli- affinitive surface exposed to the suspension of Bacillus subtilis fragments with the concentration 108 
cells/ml). ((cid:4)) Height distribution histogram of objects detected in the AFM image of the Escherichia coli-  affinitive surface  exposed  to the 
suspension of Escherichia coli fragments with the concentration 108 cells/ml. All histograms were built for the particles detected from 50x50 
(cid:1)m2 AFM images. 

 

AFM Specific Identification of Bacterial Cell Fragments 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2012, Volume 6    27 

Fig.  (4).  AFM  images  of  surfaces  modified  with  protein  G  and  anti-Escherichia  coli  antibodies  and  exposed  to  ((cid:2))  the  buffer,  (b)  the 
suspension containing Bacillus subtilis cell fragments with the concentration 107 cells/ml, and (c) the suspension containing Escherichia coli 
cell  fragments  with  the  concentration  107  cells/ml.  The  surfaces  were  rinsed  by  immersion  in  the  buffer  and  rotation  in  the  shaker.  The 
images sizes are 50 (cid:1)m. The height difference is 400 nm in all images. 

 

reliably  detected.  Hence,  the  only  remaining  limitation  is 
connected  with  nonspecifically  bound  material  (so-called 
noise),  and  the  amount  of  “noise”  can  be  minimized  by 
appropriate  protocols  of  biofunctional  surface  preparation 
and deposition of the analyte solution as well as by the purity 
of  the  initial  reagents.  In  order  to  demonstrate  the  behavior 
of our system at extremely low concentrations of an antigen 
we  have  made  the  adsorption  experiments  of  E.  coli 
fragments  from 
the  suspension  with  concentration  10 
cells/ml (Fig. 5b). Though the difference of v values was not 
so  significant  in  this  case  and  we  cannot  speak  about  the 
reliable  detection,  the  estimation  of  v  value  was  2  times 
higher for specific adsorption rather than for unspecific one. 

 
In the case of a known topography of an antigen (e.g.,  a 
particular  bacterial  strain),  its  AFM  image  analysis  allows 
distinguishing  an  antigen  from  other  adsorbed  material  and 
thus  allows  minimizing 
sensivity 
limitation.  Because  our  aim  here  was  to  demonstrate  the 
system  for  AFM  detection  of  bacterial  fragments  on 
biofunctional  surface,  we  did  not  analyze  minimization  of 
the  detection  threshold  of  the  analyte.  However,  our  results 
show  that  there  is  large  room  for  decreasing  the  detection 
threshold. 

the  corresponding 

CONCLUSIONS 

  Using  atomic  force  microscopy,  we  have  demonstrated 
the  possibility  of  detecting  bacterial  fragments  in  a  solution 
for  the  first  time.  For  this  we  developed  a  biofunctional 
surface  with  a  selective  sensitivity  to  a  particular  pathogen 
and  elaborated  a  procedure  for  preparing  specimens  for 
AFM. We started from the conventional approach of protein 
G  linked  antibodies  as  a  basis  for  the  affinity  surface  and 
introduced  some  additional  stages  of  treating  it  to  meet  the 
specific needs of preparing samples for biological AFM. We 
gave  much  attention  to  the  premodification  of  the  substrate 
in  a  glow  discharge,  the  conditions  of  protein  immobili-
zation, and the procedures for rinsing. 

  To  minimize  unspecific  binding  to  the  biofunctional 
surfaces, we developed a special two-stage rinsing procedure 
that  includes  immersing the specimen  in the buffer, rotating 
it on the shaker, and then rinsing with a water droplet. 

 

 

Fig. (5). Diagrams of v values for the samples prepared by exposing 
Escherichia  coli  –  affinitive  surfaces  to  suspensions  of  Bacillus 
subtilis  and Escherichia  coli  fragments with  concentrations (a) 108 
and 107 and (b) 10 cells/ml compared with the control sample. The 
estimation error for v values was below 1%. 

  The  volume  of  material  adsorbed  onto  the  surface  per 
unit  area (v) can serve  as a quantitative measure of specific 
binding.  This  value  showed  a  30-fold  difference  between 
specific  and  nonspecific  suspensions  at  a  concentration  of 
107  cells/ml  and  an  80-fold  difference  at  a  concentration  of 
108 cells/ml. 

for 
  Our 
developing  reliable  AFM-based  sensing  procedures  for 

results  demonstrate  great  opportunities 

28   The Open Microbiology Journal, 2012, Volume 6 

Dubrovin et al. 

detecting  pathogenic  bacteria,  and  cell  detection  remains 
possible  after  its  complete  destruction.  Moreover,  the 
possibility  of  visualizing  single  binding  events  offers  the 
challenge 
to  detect  ultra-low  antigen  concentrations, 
although  additional  efforts  should  be  made  in  this  case  to 
further minimize nonspecific binding. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

  Declared none. 

CONFLICT OF INTEREST 

  Declared none. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

Su  L,  Jia  W,  Hou  C,  Lei  Y.  Microbial  biosensors:  a  review. 
Biosens Bioelectron 2011; 26: 1788-99. 
He T, Shi ZL, Fang N, Neoh KG, Kang ET, Chan V. The effect of 
adhesive  ligands  on  bacterial  and  fibroblast  adhesions  to  surfaces. 
Biomaterials 2009; 30: 317-26. 
Dupres V, Verbelen C, Dufrêne YF. Probing molecular recognition 
sites on biosurfaces using AFM. Biomaterials 2007; 28: 2393-402. 
Fotiadis D, Scheuring S, Müller SA, Engel A, Müller DJ. Imaging 
and  manipulation  of  biological  structures  with  the  AFM.  Micron 
2002; 33: 385-97. 
Velusamy  V,  Arshak  K,  Korostynska  O,  Oliwa  K,  Adley  C.  An 
overview  of  foodborne  pathogen  detection:  in  the  perspective  of 
biosensors. Biotechnol Adv 2010; 28: 232-54. 
Signoretto  C,  Canepari  P.  Towards  more  accurate  detection  of 
pathogenic Gram-positive bacteria in waters. Curr Opin Biotechnol 
2008; 19: 248-53. 
Lazcka  O,  Del  Campo  FJ,  Munoz  FX.  Pathogen  detection:  a 
perspective  of 
traditional  methods  and  biosensors.  Biosens 
Bioelectron 2007; 22: 1205-17. 
Kim  N,  Park  IS,  Kim  DK.  Characteristics  of  a  label-free 
piezoelectric  immunosensor  detecting  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa. 
Sens Actuators B: Chem 2004; 100: 432-8. 
Fung YS, Si SH, Zhu DR. Piezoelectric crystal for sensing bacteria 
by  immobilizing  antibodies  on  divinylsulphone  activated  poly-m-
aminophenol film. Talanta 2000; 51: 151-8. 
Ivnitski D, Abdel-Hamid I, Atanasov P, Wilkins E. Biosensors for 
detection  of  pathogenic  bacteria.  Biosens  Bioelectron  1999;  14: 
599-624. 
Lee  SH,  Stubbs  DD,  Cairney  J,  Hunt  WD.  Rapid  detection  of 
bacterial  spores  using  a  quartz  crystal  microbalance  (QCM) 
immunoassay. IEEE Sens J 2005: 5: 737-43. 
Su XL, Li Y. A QCM immunosensor for Salmonella detection with 
simultaneous  measurements  of  resonant  frequency  and  motional 
resistance. Biosens Bioelectron 2005; 21: 840-8. 

[13]  Wong  YY,  Ng  SP,  Ng  MH,  Si  SH,  Yao  SZ,  Fung  YS. 
Immunosensor  for  the  differentiation  and  detection  of  Salmonella 
species  based  on  a  quartz  crystal  microbalance.  Biosens 
Bioelectron 2002; 17: 676-84. 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

[17] 

[18] 

IgGs  on 

for  displaying 

Iijima M, Kadoya H, Hatahira S, et al. Nanocapsules incorporating 
IgG  Fc-binding  domain  derived  from  Staphylococcus  aureus 
protein  A 
immunosensor  chips. 
Biomaterials 2011; 32: 1455-64. 
Sauer-Eriksson  AE,  Kleywegt  GJ,  Uhlen  M,  Jones  TA.  Crystal 
structure of the C2 fragment of streptococcal protein G in complex 
with the Fc domain of human IgG. Structure 1995; 3: 265-78. 
Kim DC, Kang DJ. Molecular recognition and specific interactions 
for biosensing applications. Sensors 2008; 8: 6605-41. 
Lee  KG,  Pillai  SR,  Singh  SR,  Willing  GA.  The  investigation  of 
protein  A  and  Salmonella  antibody  adsorption  onto  biosensor 
surfaces by atomic force microscopy. Biotechnol Bioeng 2008; 99: 
949-59. 
Dufrêne  YF.  Application  of  atomic  force microscopy  to  microbial 
surfaces:  from  reconstituted  cell  surface  layers  to  living  cells. 
Micron 2001; 32: 153-65. 

[20] 

[21] 

[19]  Meyer RL, Zhou X, Tang L, Arpanaei A, Kingshott P, Besenbacher 
F.  Immobilisation  of  living  bacteria  for  AFM  imaging  under 
physiological conditions. Ultramicroscopy 2010; 110: 1349-57. 
Bolshakova  AV,  Kiselyova  OI,  Yaminsky  IV.  Microbial  surfaces 
investigated  using  atomic  force  microscopy.  Biotechnol  Progr 
2004; 20: 1615-22. 
Babacan  S,  Pivarnik  P,  Letcher  S,  Rand  AG.  Evaluation  of 
antibody 
immobilization  methods  for  piezoelectric  biosensor 
application. Biosens Bioelectron 2000; 15: 615-21. 
Oh  BK,  Lee  W,  Bae  YM,  Lee  WH,  Choi  JW.  Surface  plasmon 
resonance immunosensor for detection of Legionella pneumophila. 
Biotechnology Bioprocess Eng 2003; 8: 112-6. 
Park  IS,  Kim  WY,  Kim  N.  Operational  characteristics  of  an 
antibody-immobilized  QCM  system  detecting  Salmonella  spp. 
Biosens Bioelectron 2000; 15: 167-72. 

[23] 

[22] 

[25] 

[24]  Wu  VCH,  Chen  SH,  Lin  CS.  Real-time  detection  of  Escherichia 
coli O157: H7 sequences using a circulating-flow system of quartz 
crystal microbalance. Biosens Bioelectron 2007; 22: 2967-75. 
Coyle  PV,  Wyatt  D,  McCaughey  C,  O'Neill  HJ.  A  simple 
standardised  protocol  for  the  production  of  monoclonal antibodies 
against viral and bacterial antigens. J Immunol Methods 1992, 153: 
81-4. 

[26]  Mikhailov  AT,  Simirsky  VN.  Immunochemical  methods 

in 

developmental biology (a manual). Moscow: Nauka 1991. 

[28] 

[29] 

[27]  Melan  MA.  Overview  of  cell  fixation  and  permeabilization.  In: 
Javois  LC,  Ed.  Methods  in  molecular  biology.  Totowa,  NJ: 
Humana Press 1994; vol. 34: pp. 55-66. 
Droz E, Taborelli M, Descouts P, Wells TNC. Influence of Surface 
and  Protein  Modification  on  Immunoglobulin  G  Adsorption 
Observed  by  Scanning  Force  Microscopy.  Biophys  J  1994;  7: 
1316-23. 
Vesenka J, Guthold M, Tang CL, Keller D, Delaine E, Bustamante 
C.  Substrate  preparation  for  reliable  imaging  of  DNA  molecules 
with  the  scanning  force  microscope.  Ultramicroscopy  1992;  42: 
1243-9. 
Soman  P,  Rice  Z,  Siedlecki  CA.  Immunological  identification  of 
fibrinogen  in  dual-component  protein  films  by  AFM  imaging. 
Micron 2008; 39: 832-42. 
Kent UM. Purification of antibodies using protein A-sepharose and 
FPLC.  In:  Javois  LC,  Ed.  Methods  in  molecular biology.  Totowa, 
NJ: Humana Press 1994; vol. 34: pp. 37-41. 

[31] 

[30] 

 

 

Received: December 8, 2011 
 

 Dubrovin et al.; Licensee Bentham Open. 

 

Revised: January 5, 2012 

Accepted: January 9, 2012 

This is an open access article licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/ 
3.0/) which permits unrestricted, non-commercial use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the work is properly cited. 

 

 

