30 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, 4, 30-33 

 

Open Access 

Usefulness  of  the  Paralens™  Fluorescent  Microscope  Adaptor  for  the 
Identification of Mycobacteria in Both Field and Laboratory Settings 

Walter Kuhn1,*, Derek Armstrong2, Suzanne Atteberry1, Euline Dewbrey3, Diane Smith3 and  
Nancy Hooper3 

1Department of Emergency Medicine,  Center  for Operational  Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, 1120 15th Street, 
Augusta, Georgia 30912  

2MTW/SIM HIV/AIDS Care and Treatment Project, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia  

3Maryland  State  Department  of  Health  and  Mental  Hygiene,  Mycobacteriology  Laboratory  Section,  201  W.  Preston 
Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21201  

Abstract:  The  presence  of  acid-fast  bacilli  (AFB)  in  laboratories  has  traditionally  been  demonstrated  using  the  fluoro-
chrome method, which requires a fluorescent microscope or the Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) method employing light microscopy. 
Low sensitivity of the ZN method and high costs of fluoroscopy make the need for a more effective means of diagnosis a 
top priority, especially in developing countries where the burden of tuberculosis is high. The QBC ParaLens™ attachment 
(QBC  Diagnostic  Inc.,  Port  Matilda,  PA)  is  a  substitute  for  conventional  fluoroscopy  in  the  identification  of  AFB.  To 
evaluate the efficacy of the ParaLens LED (light-emitting diode) system, the authors performed a two-part study, looking 
at  usefulness,  functionality  and  durability  in  urban/rural  health  clinics  around  the  world,  as  well  as  in  a  controlled  state 
public  health  laboratory  setting.  In  the  field,  the  ParaLens  was  durable  and  functioned  well  with  various  power  sources 
and  lighting  conditions.  Results  from  the  state  laboratory  indicated  agreement  between  standard  fluorescent  microscopy 
and  fluorescent  microscopy  using  the  ParaLens.  This  adaptor  is  a  welcome  addition  to  laboratories  in  resource-limited  
settings as a useful alternative to conventional fluoroscopy for detection of mycobacterial species. 

Keywords: Tuberculosis, mycobacteria, fluorescent microscopy, acid-fast staining, paraLens.  

INTRODUCTION 

  Tuberculosis  is  a  leading  cause  of  disease  and  death 
worldwide, especially  in resource poor settings  in the devel-
oping  world  [1].  Staining  of  slides  by  Ziehl-Neelsen  (ZN) 
methods  for  AFB  diagnosis  remain  the  main  procedure  util-
ized  in  these  countries,  while  fluorescent  microscopy  has 
been used in developed countries for decades in  the identifi-
cation of M. tuberculosis in clinical specimens [2]. Acid fast 
staining and microscopy is technically challenging and labor 
intensive.  Culture  techniques,  the  gold  standard  for  tubercu-
losis  diagnosis,  are  also  expensive,  technically  difficult  and 
generally  not  available  in  developing  countries.  Fluorescent 
microscopy  of  sputum  smears  is  an  alternative  to  traditional 
AFB (acid fast bacilli) staining and light microscopy. A port-
able  LED  (light-emitting  diode)  fluorescent  adaptor,  called 
ParaLens™ (QBC Diagnostic Inc., Port Matilda, PA), allows 
a 
fluorescent 
technology. However, little  is known about  the functionality 
of  LED-based  systems  for  AFB  fluorescent  microscopy  in 
the  developing  world.  Therefore  the  purpose  of  this  study 
was to  test  this  ParaLens system (an updated version from a 
previous  non-QBC  based  attachment)  and  thus  fluorescent  
 

light  microscope 

to  utilize 

traditional 

*Address  correspondence  to  this  author  at  the  Department  of  Emergency 
Medicine,  Center  for  Operational  Medicine,  Medical  College  of  Georgia, 
1120 15th Street, Augusta, Georgia, 30912, USA; Tel: (706) 721-4412;  
Fax: (706) 721-7718; E-mail- Tkuhn@mail.mcg.edu 

microscopy in various urban and rural resource poor settings 
lacking  conventional  laboratory  facilities  to  determine  its 
usefulness in these environments. The authors also compared 
the accuracy of the ParaLens versus  a traditional fluorescent 
microscope in a controlled setting for the diagnosis of myco-
bacterial  disease  in  a  public  health  laboratory  in  the  United 
States.  

MATERIALS AND METHODS 

  The  ParaLens  system  was  tested  in  various  health  post 
settings:  portable  health  clinics  in  remote  rural  villages  in 
Bangladesh, a rural and urban clinic in Trinidad and an urban 
laboratory  in  Ethiopia.  The  project  was  approved  by  the 
Human  Assurance  Committee  at  the  Medical  College  of 
Georgia  and the Institutional  Review Board at the  Maryland 
State  Department  of  Health  and  Mental  Hygiene.  The 
ParaLens  was  provided  at  no  charge  to  the  investigators  by 
QBC Diagnostics, Inc for evaluation in this  and other ongo-
ing  research.  The  ParaLens  is  a  commercially  available 
product,  in  use  for  detection  of  blood-borne  parasites  and 
other  infectious  diseases  using  fluorescent  technology.  It  
is  a  portable  fluorescent  attachment,  providing  blue  violet 
light  through  AC  outlets  or  a  12V  electrical  source.  The  
attachment  utilizes  a  60x  oil  objective  lens,  using  standard 
RMS  (Royal  Microscopy  Society)  threading  which  allows 
compatibility with standard light microscopes (See Fig. 1). 

 
 

1874-2858/10 

2010 Bentham Open 

Usefulness of the Paralens™ Fluorescent Microscope Adaptor 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4    31 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. (1). Schematic of the QBC ParaLens™  attachment  for fluorescent microscopy [3]. 1. Standard threading. 2. Blue LED light source. 3. 
Focusing  Lens.  4.  Excitation  filter  (385-480  nm).  5.  Dichroic  beam  splitter  (reflects  blue  light  downward,  allows  fluorescent  light  from 
specimen to pass to user). 6. Objective lens (60x oil). 7. Emission filter. 

Field Setting 

  The  durability  portion  of  this  study  was  conducted  in 
various resource-limited settings. Parameters  tested included 
ease  of  use,  use  with  various  power  sources,  and  ease  of 
visualization of fluorescing Mycobacterium spp. under vary-
ing ambient  lighting  in field conditions.  Ease of use was re-
ported  by  each  practitioner  in  subjective  terms.  Ambient 
lighting  was  reported  subjectively  on  a  scale  from  1-10,  1 
representing bright light (whether it be sunlight or an indoor 
lighting  electric  source)  and  10  representing  complete  dark-
ness.  Visualization of Mycobacterium spp. using fluorescent 
verses  light  microscopy  was  reported  in  objective  terms 
(Was  it  present?  –  Yes  or  No).  Durability  parameters  in-
cluded  ease  of  transport,  and  any  damage  or  malfunction 
during transport or routine use. Durability in terms of the life 
of  the  LED  bulb  was  not  evaluated  as  clinical  hours  did  not 
exceed  the  estimated  lifespan  of  the  LED.  Laboratory 
equipment included a conventional light microscope (Ameri-
can  Optical),  110v  and  220v  battery  power  sources  and  the 
ParaLens system. Standard, unstained control slides prepared 
in  the  United  States  were  used  to  test  the  adaptor.  Approxi-
mately  25  slides  (with  included  positive  and  negative  con-
trols  on  each)  were  prepared  and  examined  by  the  authors 
with  both  conventional  Ziehl-Neelsen  staining  (using  light 
microscopy) and Auramine-O fluorescent microscopy (using 
the ParaLens).  

Laboratory Setting 

  The ParaLens was also  tested  in the controlled setting of 
a state reference laboratory. In this part of the study, clinical 
pulmonary specimens submitted to the laboratory for routine 
smear and culture were  included  in  this comparison study  if 
initial  smear  results  were  positive  for  AFB  by  traditional 
fluorescent  methods  (Auramine-Rhodamine  stain,  Truant 
modifications).  Negative  smear  slides  were  prepared  using 
E.  coli  stock  solutions.  Initial  smears  were  read  by  a  skilled 
laboratory  technician  on  a  Nikon  fluorescent  scope,  using 

CDC  guidelines  for  AFB  smear  grading  [4].  For  the  com-
parison study, the ParaLens was attached to a Reichart A450 
light  microscope,  and  slides  were  read  by  a  skilled  micro-
scopist  unaware  of  the  initial  smear  results.  Slides  were 
viewed using the attached 60x ParaLens objective lens using 
oil immersion,  and results were compared to  the initial find-
ings  using  conventional  fluorescent  methods.  Mycobacterial  
species  included  in  this  study  were  M.  tuberculosis,  M. 
avium  complex  and  M.  kansasii,  as  identified  by  subsequent 
culture results. 

RESULTS 

Field Setting 

Portability, Durability and Ease of Use 

  The investigators found no inconvenience in transporting 
the ParaLens. Given its compact size and lightweight stature, 
the  attachment  easily  fit  into  a  regular  microscope  carrying 
case. The equipment was transported as airline checked bag-
gage,  as  an  airline  carry-on,  on  city  buses,  in  rugged-terrain 
vehicles and by canoe. We found the ParaLens adaptor easy 
to  attach  and  detach  to  the  light  microscope.  The  ParaLens 
adaptor  threaded  easily  to  the  microscope,  but  when  
attached,  its  presence  limited  the  use  of  the  other  lenses.  
Attachment  of  the  ParaLens  precluded  rotation  of  the  other 
lenses,  limiting  the  magnification  and  the  use  of  the  micro-
scope temporarily for other tasks. This was an inconvenience 
in a lab being used for multiple microscopic  tests. The opti-
mal  lighting  for  fluorescent  microscopy  is  total  darkness, 
however  in  field  conditions  lighting  is  most  often  ambient. 
Viewing 
fluorescing  mycobacteria  was  slightly  more  
difficult in brighter  lighting, nevertheless in full sunlight we 
were still able to correctly identify the positive control slides. 
We found no difficulties or differences in the field operating 
the  ParaLens  using  110  volt,  220  volt  or  12  volt  batteries  
as  power  sources  and  experienced  no  detrimental  effects 
stemming from local power fluctuations. 

 

32    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4 

Laboratory Setting 

Comparison with Standardized Fluorescent Microscopy 

  Twenty-five  samples  were  tested  using  the  ParaLens  
attachment  at  the  Maryland  State  Department  of  Health  and 
Mental  Hygiene  Mycobacteriology  Reference  Laboratory. 
Five control slides were negative for acid-fast bacilli (AFB), 
while  twenty  slides  of  patient  samples  were  of  various  de-
grees  of  positivity  for  AFB.  These  twenty-five  slides  were 
observed in random order by a skilled microscopist who had 
no knowledge of the positivity/negativity of the slides. When 
results  were  compared,  there  was  100%  agreement  between 
both  the  conventional  fluorescent  microscope  and  the 
ParaLens adaptor, with each slide being accurately identified 
as positive or negative. In addition, each positive smear slide 
was precisely identified  according to its proper smear grade. 
Non-tuberculosis  mycobacteria used in  this study fluoresced 
at the same intensity as M. tuberculosis. 

DISCUSSION 

  Tuberculosis  is a  leading  cause of morbidity and mortal-
ity  worldwide,  especially  in  resource-limited  settings  [1,  5]. 
The  WHO  has  made  the  recognition  and  treatment  of  pa-
tients with tuberculosis one of its highest priorities. Research 
and development of improved diagnostics is one of the main 
goals  set  in  The  Global  Plan  to  Stop  TB  2006-2015 (WHO) 
[5].  To  meet  these  needs,  diagnostic  tools  must  be  made 
more adequate than currently utilized methods and must also 
be safe, affordable and easy to use [6].  

 
Fluorescent  microscopy methods for the identification of 
acid-fast organisms have become  the mainstay of many my-
cobacteriological  laboratories  in  the  United  States  and 
around  the  world  [7].  In  standard  acid-fast  microscopy,  the 
oil  immersion lens  is used to scan the slide (1000x magnifi-
cation) while in fluorescent microscopy, lesser magnification 
is  used,  thus  saving  a  significant  amount  of  time  on  each 
negative  slide.  Fluorescent  microscopy  is  preferred  in 
healthcare settings with large numbers of specimens submit-
ted for suspected mycobacterial disease.  

  The  use  of  improved  diagnostics  including  fluorescent 
microscopy  (such  as  the  ParaLens  system)  in  developing 
nations  has  been  limited  by  lack  of  infrastructure,  trained 
laboratory staff and lack of funding [8, 9]. However, fluores-
cent  microscopy  is  potentially  more  sensitive  and  less  labor 
intensive  than  traditional  light  microscopy  using  the  Ziehl-
Neelsen or Kinyoun method for the identification of acid-fast 
bacilli  [6,  10-12].  Thus  microscopists  trained  using  conven-
tional  fluorescent  staining  and  dark-field  microscopy  will 
have  no  problem  reading  slides  with  the  ParaLens,  as  the 
technology is virtually the same.  

  Therefore  the  ParaLens  system  is  uniquely  suited  for 
application  in  developing  countries.  Lower  costs  than  tradi-
tional fluorescent scopes provides  affordability, and as dem-
onstrated in this study, it is functional, durable, accurate and 
easy  to  use  in  rural,  resource  poor  field  environments  and 
with  various  power  options.  The  attachment  avoids  the  pur-
chase  of  a  second  microscope,  since  it  utilizes  an  already 
existing  compound microscope. Previous studies have tested 
a  non-QBC  ParaLens  system  utilizing  a  halogen  bulb  and 
fiber-optic  cable,  which  limited  the  bulb  life  and  luminosity 
[13, 14]. The use of LED bulbs in place of standard fluores-

Kuhn et al. 

cent bulbs provides extended life (estimated to be 15-30,000 
hours),  much  longer  compared  to  the  life  of  a  standard  bulb 
(estimated  800  hours).  The  attachment  can  be  used  with 
standard 110V electricity, 220V electricity and with a battery 
for  locations  without  electricity.  The  attachment  compared 
favorably  with  more  expensive  conventional  fluorescent  
microscopes  in  brightness,  clarity  and  ease  of  viewing  (see 
Figs. 2 and 3). Other authors have also found that the use of 
such  equipment  can  indeed  provide  an  excellent  tool  for 
identification of mycobacteria and can be a useful alternative 
to conventional fluorescent microscopy [12-15].  

A 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. (2). (A). AFB stained using QBC ParaLens™ system, Auramine-
O/Rhodamine  B  (Truant’s  Modification)  (60x  ParaLens  objective 
w/oil,  Olympus  CH40  compound  microscope).  (B).  AFB  stained 
using  conventional  fluorescent  microscope,  Auramine-O/Rhodamine 
B  (Truant’s  Modification)  (x40  Uplan  objective,  Olympus  BX51 
Fluorescent Microscope). 

  One  limitation  of  this  study  was  that  the  results  were 
based  on  known  positive  and  negative  control  slides  pre-
pared  in  the  United  States.  While  this  does  not  affect  the 
durability  portion  of  the  study,  it  is  possible  that  sputum 
samples collected from patients outside the controlled setting 

Usefulness of the Paralens™ Fluorescent Microscope Adaptor 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4    33 

of a public health laboratory in the United States under field 
conditions in the developing world may stain differently.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Fig. (3). Negative control (E. coli) using the QBC ParaLens™ sys-
tem,  (60x  ParaLens  objective  w/oil,  Olympus  CH40  compound 
microscope). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.  (4).  The  QBC  ParaLens™  attachment  in  use  by  the  author  
(WK) in a rural clinic in Bangladesh. 

CONCLUSION 

 
In developing countries with a high incidence of tubercu-
losis and limited resources, this portable device could aid in 
 
 
Received: April 16, 2010 
 

increasing  sensitivity  of  tuberculosis  smears,  leading  to  
a  decreased  delay  between  identification  of  mycobacterial 
disease  and  treatment.  Therefore,  the  ParaLens  system  is  
a  welcome  addition  to  AFB  smear  microscopy,  and  is  a  
useful diagnostic tool in the global fight against tuberculosis 
(Fig. 4). 

CONFLICT OF INTEREST 

  Derek  Armstrong  has  worked  as  a  consultant  for  QBC 
Diagnostics,  and  has  received  financial  compensation  for 
projects  unrelated  to  this  study.  Other  authors  in  this  study 
have  no  conflict  of  interest  or  financial  relationship  with  
the  manufacturer  or  distributor  of  the  ParaLens  or  QBC  
Diagnostics.  

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

World  Health  Organization. Global  Tuberculosis  Control  Report 
WHO, Geneva 2008. 
Perkins M, Cunningham J. Facing the crisis: improving the diagnosis 
of tuberculosis in the HIV era. J Infect Dis 2007; 196: S15-27. 
QBC Diagnostics Inc. ParaLens Microscope Attachment [pamphlet]. 
USA: QBC Diagnostics 2009. 
Kent  PT,  Kubica  GP.  Public  Health  Mycobacteriology:  a  guide  for 
the level III laboratory. Centers for Disease Control. US Department 
of Health and Human Services, Atlanta Georgia 1985; 25. 
World  Health  Organization.  Stop  TB  Partnership and  World  Health 
Organization. Global Plan to Stop TB. WHO, Geneva 2006. 
Palomino JC. Non-conventional and new methods in the diagnosis of 
tuberculosis:  Feasibility  and Applicability  in  the  Field. Eur  Respir  J 
2005; 26: 339-50.  
Wright P, Wallace R, Wright N, Brown B, Griffith D. Sensitivity of 
fluorochrome  microscopy  for detection  of  Mycobacterium  tubercul- 
osis versus non-tuberculous mycobacteria. J Clin Microbiol 1998; 36: 
1046-9. 
Cohen  GM.  Access  to diagnostics  in support  of  HIV/AIDS  and  tu-
berculosis treatment in developing countries. AIDS 2007; (21 Suppl). 
4: S81-7.  
Hanscheid  T.  The  future  looks  bright:  low-cost  fluorescent  micro-
scopes  for  detection  of  Mycobacterium  tuberculosis  and  Coccidi-
ae. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 2008; 102: 520-21. 
Steingart  KR,  Henry  M,  Ng  V,  et  al.  Fluorescence  versus  conven-
tional  sputum  smear  microscopy  for  tuberculosis:  a  systematic  
review. Lancet Infect Dis 2006; 6: 570-81.  
Singh  NP,  Parija  SC.  The  value  of  fluorescence  microscopy  
of Auramine-stained sputum  smears for  the  diagnosis  of pulmonary 
tuberculosis. SE  Asian  J  Trop  Med  Public  Health  1998;  29:  860- 
3.  

[12]  Marais  B, Brittle  W,  Painczyk  K, et al.  Use  of  light-emitting diode 
fluorescence  microscopy  to  detect  acid-fast  bacilli  in  sputum.  Clin  
Infect Dis 2008; 47: 203-7. 
Patterson K, McDonald C, Miller B, Chapin K. Use of UV ParaLens 
adapter for detection of  acid-fast organisms.  J Clin  Microbiol 1995; 
33: 239-241. 

[13] 

[14]  Mattia A, Waldron MA, Sierra L. Use of the UV ParaLens adapter as 
an alternative to conventional fluorescence microscopy for detection 
of  Pneumocystis  carinii  in  direct  immunofluorescent  monoclonal  
antibody-stained  pulmonary  specimens.  J  Clin  Microbiol  1993;  31: 
720-1. 
Perkins  MD,  Roscigno  G,  Zumla  A.  Progress  towards  improved 
tuberculosis diagnostics for developing countries. Lancet 2006; 367: 
942-3.  

[15] 

 Kuhn et al.; Licensee Bentham Open. 

 

This  is  an  open  access  article  licensed under  the  terms of  the  Creative Commons  Attribution  Non-Commercial  License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/3.0/) which permits unrestricted, non-commercial use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the work is properly cited. 

Revised: April 21, 2010 

Accepted: April 23, 2010 

