 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2009, 3, 67-68 

67 

Open Access 

A Rare Presentation of Sepsis from Staphylococcus caprae 

Ganesh D. Kini1,*, Addison R. Parris2 and Jane S. Tang3 

1Department  of  Internal  Medicine  and  2Department  of  Infectious  Diseases,  Rockingham  Memorial  Hospital, 
Harrisonburg, Virginia; 3Noblis, Falls Church, Virginia 

Abstract: As a coagulase negative Staphylococcus species, S. caprae is not considered as a clinically-significant member, 
unlike S. epidermidis. In this report, we describe a case of sepsis resulting from S. caprae infection. This relatively young 
woman was in generally good health and contracted S. caprae most probably during her treatment of an acute pulmonary 
embolism. The purpose of this report is to raise awareness of this otherwise innocuous staphylococcal species in clinical 
settings. 

Key Words: Staphyloccocus caprae, coagulase negative staphylococci, nosocomial, sepsis.  

INTRODUCTION 

  Coagulase  negative  staphylococci  are  one  of  the  most 
common  nosocomial  agents  for  causing 
in 
healthcare facilities [1, 2]. Among the species, S. caprae has 
not  been  a  concern  in  human  clinical  cases.  It  was  first  
isolated in milk sample taken from healthy goats in 1983 [3]. 
Since then, this bacterium is considered a commensal organ-
ism  in  goats  as  it  is  most  prevalent  on  their  udder  skins  and 
in the mammary glands. 

infections 

Strains  of  S.  caprae  have  been  isolated  from  human 
 
cases;  however,  it  was  not  always  clear  whether  this  organ-
ism was responsible for causing infections [4, 5]. This bacte-
rium  has  been  associated  with  bone  and  joint  infections,  
bacteremia, recurring sepsis, urinary infections, endocarditis, 
meningitis, and cases of acute otitis externa [2, 4-9]. Most of 
these  infections  were  contracted  in  the  hospitals,  and  a  few 
community-acquired have also been reported. A recent paper 
reported  S.  caprae  was  responsible  for  causing  six  out  
of  eighteen  episodes  of  coagulase  negative  staphylococcal 
bacteremia  in  the  neonatal  intensive  care  unit  of  a  medical 
institution [2].  

CASE PRESENTATION 

  A 30-year old African American woman presented to the 
emergency  department  complaining  of  shortness  of  breath  
on exertion and chest pain with deep  inspiration. Otherwise, 
the  patient  stated  she  was  well.  There  was  no  indication  of 
recent infections. 

  Her physical examination did not yield any abnormalities 
or  concerns.  A  VQ  scan  indicated  high  probability  for  
pulmonary emboli  in her right  lobe.  The  chest x ray showed 
possible  development  of  small  bilateral  pleural  effusions. 
Multiple  nodular  opacities  scattered  throughout  the  lungs 
were also noted and they seemed to be more prominent  than  
 

 

 

*Address correspondence to this author at the Department of Internal Medi-
cine,  Rockingham  Memorial  Hospital,  235  Cantrell  Avenue,  Harrisonburg, 
VA 22801. USA; Tel: 540-433-4100; Fax: 540-564-7365;  
E-mail: kingan02@yahoo.com 

before.  The  CT  scan  of  the  abdomen  showed  moderate  
alveolar  consolidation  in  the  right  lower  lobe  which  was  
consistent with a pulmonary infarct or pneumonia. Her EKG 
and  2D  echocardiograms  were  normal  and  there  was  no  
indication of endocarditis. 

  The  patient  was  admitted  for  treatment  of  an  acute  
pulmonary  embolism  and  a  Heparin  drip,  by  protocol,  was 
initiated. While the management of her pulmonary embolism 
was  proceeding  well,  the  patient  developed  high  fevers  
during  her  hospital  stay  associated  with  tachycardia.  Her 
blood  cultures  were  positive  (four  out  of  four  bottles), 
yielded  Gram  positive  cocci  in  pairs  and  clusters  indicative 
of  Staphylococcus  species.  Subsequent  identification  by 
Vitek  2  GP  card  (bioMérieux,  MO)  indicated  the  bacterium 
was S. caprae. Antibiotic susceptibility results of this isolate 
are presented below. 

Antimicrobial Agents 

Result (mm) 

Interpretation 

Ampicillin 

Ampicillin/Sulbactam 

Clindamycin 

Cephalothin 

Erythromycin 

Gentamcin 

Imipenem 

Oxacillin 

Penicillin 

Rifampin 

22 

27 

28 

35 

33 

31 

53 

20 

19 

35 

Resistant 

Sensitive 

Sensitive 

Sensitive 

Sensitive 

Sensitive 

Sensitive 

Sensitive 

Resistant 

Sensitive 

 
  The patient was initially started on vancomycin. When S. 
aureus was ruled out, her antibiotics were changed to Kefzol 
2  gm  IV  every  8  hours.  The  patient’s  fever  resolved  and  
she  showed  significant  clinical  improvement.  Incidentally,  a 
urinalysis  indicated  the  presence  of  E.  coli.  Antibiotic  
susceptibility  testing  indicated  it  was  sensitive  to  all  17  
antimicrobial agents in the panel (Vitek E. coli panel). Three 

 
 

1874-2858/09 

2009 Bentham Open 

68    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2009, Volume 3 

days  of  Ciprofloxacin  was  administered  to  treat  the  urinary 
tract infection. 

  Echocardiogram  did  not  reveal  any  evidence  of  
endocarditis,  and  it  is  unclear  what  caused  the  infection. 
There  was  no  indication  that  the  patient  recently  visited  a 
farm or had  contact with goats,  the  likely  sources to  acquire 
this  bacterium.  Other  risk  factors  reported  to  be  associated 
with S. caprae infection such as transplants, internal fixation 
for orthopedic prosthesis, or foreign subject implants [4, 5, 7, 
9] were not in the patient’s medical history.  

COMMENTS 

 
It  is  conceivable  that  the  patient  contracted  S.  caprae 
during  her  hospital  stay,  as  this  bacterium  has  been  impli-
cated  in  several  nosocomial  infections  [1,  5].  S.  caprae  had 
been  misidentified  in  the  past  [2,  6,  7,  10],  which  suggest 
there are probably more cases associated with this bacterium 
than  previously  reported.  In  this  case  report,  the  identity  of  
S. caprae was established by the current Vitek 2 GP system 
which  allows  more  reliable  identification  of  the  caprae  
species than previous versions [personal communication with 
bioMérieux].  Additionally,  this  isolate  produced  acid  from 
mannitol and was urease positive, two important biochemical 
traits  recommended  for  differentiating  this  species  from 
other coagulase negative staphylococcal members [10].  

 
In  conclusion,  clinicians  should  be  cognizant  of  infec-
tions  caused  by  S.  caprae,  particularly  in  hospital  settings 
and  healthcare  facilities.  Although  this  species  has  been  
regarded as innocuous in the past, it should not be dismissed 
readily  especially  when  isolated  from  the  elderly  and  
immunocompromised  patients.  Some  S.  caprae  strains  have 
acquired  methicillin  resistance,  and  their  ability  to  persist  in 
the environment for a long time (i.e., 28 months or more) has 
been  reported  [2,  6].  Furthermore,  slime  production  and 
biofilm formation are traits of S. caprae and they may play a 
role in conferring virulence to this species [11, 12]. All these 
properties  of  S.  caprae  are  certainly  reasons  for  healthcare 
professionals to be concerned and keep vigilance. Therefore, 
early  detection  and  accurate  identification  of  this  bacterium 
will  help  preventing  serious  complications  that  may  result 
from the colonization and invasion of this skin flora. 

Kini et al. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

to  acknowledge  Jennifer  
  The  authors  would 
Clevinger,  Clinical  Microbiology  Senior  Technologist  at 
Rockingham  Memorial  Hospital,  for  microbiological  testing 
and data. 

like 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

Couto  I,  Pereira  S,  Miragaia  M,  Sanches  IS,  de  Lencastre  H.  
Identification  of  clinical  staphylococcal  isolates  from  humans  
by  internal  transcribed  spacer  PCR.  J  Clin  Microbiol  2001;  39: 
3099-103.  
Ross  TL,  Fuss  EP,  Harrington  SM,  Cai  M,  Perl  TM,  Merz  WG. 
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus caprae in a neonatal intensive 
care unit. J Clin Microbiol 2005; 43: 363-7. 
Moroni  P,  Pisoni  G,  Antonini  M,  et  al.  Subclinical  mastitis  
and  antimicrobial  susceptibility  of  Staphylococcus  caprae  and 
Staphylococcus epidermidis isolated from two Italian goat herds. J 
Dairy Sci 2005; 88: 1694-704. 
Shuttleworth  R,  Behme  RJ,  McNabb  A,  Colby  WD.  Human  
isolates of Staphylococcus caprae: association with bone and joint 
infection. J Clin Microbiol 1997; 35: 2537-41.  
Vandenesch F, Eykyn SJ, Bes M, Meugnier H, Fleurette J, Etienne 
J.  Identification  and  ribotypes  of  Staphylococcus  caprae  isolates 
isolated as human pathogens and from goat milk. J Clin Microbiol 
1995; 33: 888-92. 
Kanda K, Suzuki E, Hiramatsu K, et al. Identification of a methicil-
lin-resistant strain of Staphylococcus caprae from a human clinical 
specimen. Antimicrob Agent Chemother 1991; 35: 174-6. 
Blanc V, Picaud J, Legros E, et al. Staphylococcus caprae infection 
after  total  hip  replacement:  a  case  and  review.  Pathol  Biol  1999; 
47: 409-13. 
Takemura K, Takagi S, Baba T, Goto Y, Nonogi H. A 72 year-old 
man with recurrent sepsis due to Staphylococcus caprae. J Cardiol 
2000; 36: 269-71. 
Benedetti P, Pellizzer G, Furlan F, Nicolin R, Rassu M,  Setfon A. 
Staphylococcus  caprae  meningitis  following  intraspinal  device  
infection. J Med Microbiol 2008; 57: 904-6. 
Kawamura Y, Hou X, Sultana F, et al. Distribution of Staphylococ-
cus  species  among  human  clinical  specimens  and  emended  
description  of  Staphylococcus  caprae.  J  Clin  Microbiol  1998;  36: 
2038-42. 
Allignet J, Aubert S, Dyke KG, El Solh N. Staphylococcus caprae 
strains  carry  determinants  known  to be  involved  in  pathogenicity:  
a  gene  encoding  an  autolysin-binding  fibronectin  and  the  ica  
operon  involved  in  biofilm  formation.  Infect  Immunol  2001;  69: 
712-8. 
Arciola CR, Campoccia D, An YH, et al. Prevalence and antibiotic 
resistance  of  15  minor  staphylococcal  species  colonizing orthope-
dic implants. Int J Artif Organs 2006; 29: 395-401.  

 

 

Received: March 31, 2009 
 

 Kini et al.; Licensee Bentham Open. 

 

Revised: April 7, 2009 

Accepted: April 9, 2009 

This  is  an  open  access  article  licensed under  the  terms of  the  Creative Commons  Attribution  Non-Commercial  License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/3.0/) which permits unrestricted, non-commercial use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the work is properly cited. 

 

