54 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2011, 5, (Suppl 1-M1) 54 

 

Open Access 

Escherichia  coli-Related  Diseases  in  Latin  America  Remain  in  the  Spotlight:  the 
Brazilian Efforts to Understand E. coli Pathogenesis 

EDITORIAL 

Alfredo Torres* 

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Pathology and Sealy Center for Vaccine Development, 
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555-1070, USA 

  Although  the  21st  century  has  seen  significant  changes  in 
health  care  reforms  and  practices,  and  has  experienced  quick 
progression  in  the  understanding  of  infectious  diseases, 
diarrhea  caused  by  enteric  infections  is  a  major  factor  in 
morbidity  and  mortality  worldwide  and  it  is  estimated  2-4 
billion episodes of infectious diarrhea occur each year and are 
especially  prevalent  in  infants.  Further,  diarrhea  as  well  as 
other 
infections  associated  with  different  pathogenic 
Escherichia  coli  strains  continue  to  be  a  health  problem  in 
some tropical and subtropical areas and are one of the leading 
causes  of  disease  and  death  in  humans  and  animals  [1].  In 
Latin  America,  infectious  disease  research,  as  well  as  basic 
and  applied  science  in  general,  is  receiving  significant  atten- 
tion,  despite  many  challenges  that  the  scientific  community 
are  still  facing  in  this  region.  In  response  to  the  significant 
increase in the number of scientific papers published by Latin 
American  authors,  governments  (particularly  those  of  Brazil, 
Argentina, Chile, and Mexico) have announced packages and 
incentives to foster science and technology [2]. 

  A  good  example  from  incentives  that  have  begun  to 
deliver  results  are  those  made  by  the  Brazilian  government 
which  in  the  past  15  years  have  increased  the  number  of 
graduate  school  programs,  support  research  centers  of 
excellence,  and  to  establish  and  to  consolidate  a  national 
system  for  science,  technology  and  innovation  [2].  Apart 
from the country's estimated 7.5% economic growth in 2010, 
efforts  continue  for  the  consolidation  and  expansion  of 
research  at  traditional  Universities  and  Institutes,  allowing 
the  investigators  to  partner  with  private  investors  and/or 
companies, advancing Research and Development [3], while 
promoting science and technology to Society. 

  The  significant  scientific  advances  currently  happening 
in  different  Brazilian  laboratories  is  represented  in  this  mini  
 

*Address correspondence to this author at the Department of Microbiology 
and  Immunology,  Department of  Pathology and  Sealy,  Center  for  Vaccine 
Development,  University  of  Texas  Medical  Branch,  Galveston,  Texas 
77555-1070, USA; Tel: (409) 747 0189; Fax: (409) 747 6869;  
E-mail: altorres@utmb.edu 
 
 
Received: December 21, 2010 
 
 Alfredo Torres; Licensee Bentham Open. 

hot  topic  issue  entitled  “Recent  advances  in  the  study  of 
pathogenic  Escherichia  coli  in  Brazil”.  The  issue  highlights 
the  diversity  of  research  topics  in  the  E.  coli  field  currently 
explored  in  this  country;  including  the  identification  of 
potentially  virulent  E.  coli  strains  in  parrots  and  parakeets; 
the  discovery  that  different  avian  pathogenic  E.  coli 
subgroups are associated to a specific infectious syndrome in 
poultry; 
the  characterization  of  different  phenotypic 
characteristics  of  human  pathogenic  E.  coli  strains;  and  the 
importance of Shiga toxin-producing E.  coli O157 as  agents 
of Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome in Brazilian patients.  

  The highlighted research papers in this issue are part of a 
largest  effort  in  Latin  America  by  the  pathogenic  E.  coli 
scientific  community  to  foster  long-standing  continent-wide 
collaborations  for  the  promotion  and  dissemination  of  their 
research  and  to  educate  and  prepare  the  next  generation  of 
Latin  American  E.  coli  investigators.  In  response  to  this 
effort,  the  Latin  American  Coalition  for  Escherichia  coli 
Research  (LACER)  was  created,  consisting  of  a  multi- 
disciplinary  network  of  more  than  60  international  research 
groups working on pathogenic E. coli, with the ultimate goal 
of advancing our understanding and disseminating the E. coli 
research  in  this  region.  One  of  the  fist  accomplishments  of 
LACER  was  the  publication  of  an  e-book  that  contains  a 
comprehensive  analysis  of  the  most  common  categories  of  
E.  coli  associated  with  diarrheal  illness  in  Latin  America  
[1].  As  a  second  major  effort  to  disseminate  the  research 
performed  in  specific  laboratories  in  the  region,  the  mini- 
hot  topic  issue  in  The  Open  Microbiology  Journal  became  
a reality. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

 

Pathogenic  Escherichia  coli  in  Latin  America.  Bentham  Science  
e-books. Torres, A.G. Editor. 2010. ISBN: 978-1-60805-192-2. 
Triunfol ML. Latin American science moves into the spotlight. Cell 
2007; 131:1213-6. 
Rodrigues DG. Brazil: An emerging partner in drug R&D. IDrugs 
2009; 12:497-502. 

Revised: December 28, 2010 

Accepted: December 28, 2010 

 

This is an open access article licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License  
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/) which permits unrestricted, non-commercial use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
work is properly cited.  
 
 

2011 Bentham Open 

1874-2858/11 

