 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2011, 5, (Suppl 2-M6) 159-164 

159 

 Open Access 

Treatment of Acute Viral Bronchiolitis 

Ernst Eber* 

Respiratory and Allergic Disease Division, Pediatric Department, Medical University of Graz, Austria 

Abstract:  Acute  viral  bronchiolitis  represents  the  most  common  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  in  infants  and  young 
children  and  is  associated  with  substantial  morbidity  and  mortality.  Respiratory  syncytial  virus  is  the  most  frequently 
identified virus, but many other viruses may also cause acute bronchiolitis. There is no common definition of acute viral 
bronchiolitis used  internationally,  and this  may  explain part of the confusion in the literature.  Most children with bron-
chiolitis have a self limiting mild disease and can be safely managed at home with careful attention to feeding and respira-
tory status. Criteria for referral and admission vary between hospitals as do clinical practice in the management of acute 
viral bronchiolitis, and there is confusion and lack of evidence over the best treatment for this condition. Supportive care, 
including administration of oxygen and fluids, is the cornerstone of current treatment. The majority of infants and children 
with bronchiolitis do not require specific measures. Bronchodilators should not be routinely used in the management of 
acute viral bronchiolitis, but may be effective in some patients. Most of the commonly used management modalities have 
not been shown to have a clear beneficial effect on the course of the disease. For example, inhaled and systemic corticos-
teroids, leukotriene receptor antagonists, immunoglobulins and monoclonal antibodies, antibiotics, antiviral therapy, and 
chest physiotherapy should not be used routinely in the management of bronchiolitis. The potential effect of hypertonic 
saline  on  the  course  of  the  acute  disease  is  promising,  but  further  studies  are  required.  In  critically  ill  children  with  
bronchiolitis,  today  there  is  little  justification  for  the  use  of  surfactant  and  heliox.  Nasal  continuous  positive  airway  
pressure may be beneficial in children with severe bronchiolitis but a large trial is needed to determine its value. Finally, 
very little is known on the effect of the various interventions on the development of post-bronchiolitic wheeze. 

Keywords: Viral bronchiolitis, bronchodilators, corticosteroids, ribavirin, hypertonic saline. 

INTRODUCTION 

  Clinical  definitions  of  acute  viral  bronchiolitis  vary  
between  countries.  While  in  many  countries  including  the 
USA wheezing is fundamental for the diagnosis, in the U.K., 
Australia  and  New  Zealand  wheezing  is  not  an  obligatory 
diagnostic  criterion  [1,  2].  These  differences  in  definition 
may  account  for  part  of  the  variability  in  study  results; 
clearly, uniformity is needed to allow a comparison between 
studies performed in different parts of the world [3]. 

  Acute viral bronchiolitis is the  most common lower res-
piratory  tract  infection  in  infants  and  young  children.  Al-
though  only  2-3%  of  all  children  with  bronchiolitis  need 
hospitalisation, the disease is the leading cause of infant hos-
pitalisation  in  the  USA  and  has  been  associated  with  sub-
stantial morbidity in both inpatient and outpatient settings [4-
7]. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is  the most frequently 
identified virus, but many respiratory viruses such as parain-
fluenza virus,  influenza virus, rhinovirus and human  metap-
neumovirus have been associated with acute viral bronchioli-
tis;  further,  young  children  with  bronchiolitis  often  are  in-
fected with more than one virus, most commonly with  RSV 
and  either  human  metapneumovirus  or  rhinovirus  [5,  7,  8].  
 

 

*Address  correspondence  to  this  author  at  the  Klinische  Abteilung  für  
Pulmonologie  und  Allergologie,  Univ.-Klinik  für  Kinder-  und  Jugendheil-
kunde, Auenbruggerplatz 34, 8036 Graz, Österreich;  
Tel: +43 316 385 12620; Fax: +43 316 385 14621;  
E-mail: ernst.eber@medunigraz.at 
 
 

1874-2858/11 

While a relation between acute viral bronchiolitis and subse-
quent recurrent wheeze (“post-bronchiolitic wheeze”) in later 
life  has  consistently  been  shown  in  clinical  studies,  there  is 
no clear explanation for this association [5]. 

TREATMENT 

  Most  children  with  acute  viral  bronchiolitis  have  a  self 
limiting  mild  disease  and  can  be  safely  managed  at  home 
with careful attention to feeding and respiratory status. Man-
agement  mainly  consists  of  good  supportive  care,  and  most 
infants do not require specific measures. Criteria for referral 
and  admission  may  vary  between  hospitals.  Generally,  the 
decision to admit an infant with bronchiolitis to the hospital 
is  based  on  the  age  of  the  patient,  the  phase  of  illness,  the 
presence  of  risk  factors,  the  severity  of  respiratory  distress, 
the  ability  to  take  oral  fluids,  and  social  and  local  circum-
stances  [8].  Clinical  practice  in  the  acute  management  of 
bronchiolitis  varies  widely  even  between  centres  in  one 
country, and there is much controversy, confusion, and lack 
of  evidence  over  the  best  treatment  for  this  common,  life-
threatening condition [5]. 

Oxygen Supplementation 

  Treatment  of  hospitalised  infants  very  often  includes 
oxygen supplementation to maintain haemoglobin saturation 
(cid:1)  92%.  There  is,  however,  no  evidence  on  which  to  base 
haemoglobin  saturation  limits  for  admission,  during  admis-
sion or for discharge from the emergency department or hos-

2011 Bentham Open 

160    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2011, Volume 5 

pital.  While  the  effect  of  supplemental  oxygen  on  recovery 
from  bronchiolitis  is  not  known,  oxygen  supplementation  is 
the  prime  determinant  of  the  length  of  hospitalisation  for 
infants  with  acute  viral  bronchiolitis  [9].  Thus,  the  use  of 
pulse  oximetry  has  likely  contributed  to  longer  hospitalisa-
tions and greater use of health care resources [7]. In the most 
recent  clinical  practice  guideline  of  the  American  Academy 
of Pediatrics (AAP) [1] the following options (options define 
courses  that  may  be  taken  when  either  the  quality  of  
evidence  is  suspect  or  carefully  performed  studies  have 
shown  little  clear  advantage  to  one  approach  over  another) 
are presented: 

 
Supplemental oxygen is indicated if haemoglobin satura-
tion  falls  persistently  below  90%  in  previously  healthy  in-
fants. In  this  case,  adequate supplemental oxygen should be 
used  to  maintain  haemoglobin  saturation  at  or  above  90%. 
Oxygen may be discontinued if haemoglobin saturation is at 
or above 90% and the infant is feeding well and has minimal 
respiratory distress. 

  As  the  child’s  clinical  course  improves,  continuous 
measurement  of  haemoglobin  saturation  is  not  routinely 
needed. 

Nasogastric Vs. Intravenous Fluids 

 
It  is  strongly  recommended  that  clinicians  should  assess 
hydration and ability to take fluids orally [1]. Frequent small 
foods  are  often  used  but  nasogastric  or  intravenous  fluids 
may  be  required  to  maintain  hydration.  However,  fluid  re-
placement  strategies  have  not  been  validated  in  randomised 
controlled trials (RCTs). A recent study comparing manage-
ment of acute viral bronchiolitis between different centres in 
Australia  and  New  Zealand  concluded  that  practice  is 
equally split between nasogastric and intravenous hydration, 
reflecting the current lack of evidence [10]. 

Bronchodilators (Beta 2 Agonists, Epinephrine) 

  As the contribution of airway smooth muscle constriction 
to  airway  obstruction  in  most  cases  is  less  than  the  one  of 
mucus  plugs,  cellular  debris  and  mucosal  oedema,  the  ra-
tionale for treatment especially with beta 2 agonists is weak. 
Epinephrine  by  stimulating  the  alpha  adrenoreceptor  also 
causes vasoconstriction in the airway mucosa, and thus may 
result  in  a  decrease  of  the  mucosal  oedema.  Inhaled  bron-
chodilators  are  widely  used  in  the  treatment  of  infants  with 
acute  viral  bronchiolitis  [5];  in  emergency  departments,  es-
pecially  nebulised  epinephrine  is  frequently  used  [11].  Nu-
merous clinical trials and systematic reviews of the literature 
examined  the  role  of  bronchodilators  in  the  treatment  of 
bronchiolitis.  A  recent  meta-analysis  of  RCTs  comparing 
bronchodilators (other than epinephrine) with placebo in the 
treatment  of  bronchiolitis  including  1428  infants  concluded 
that bronchodilators produce small short-term improvements 
in clinical scores but no significant improvement in oxygena-
tion  overall  or  in  the  rate  of  hospital  admission  [12].  Obvi-
ously,  results  of  studies  which  employed  a  variety  of  thera-
pies  and  outcome  measures  are  difficult  to  compare,  and 
pooling heterogeneous results from a number of studies may 
result in a significant difference of questionable clinical  im-
portance.  Moreover,  the  inclusion  of  studies  that  enrolled 

Ernst Eber 

infants with recurrent wheezing may have biased the results 
in  favour  of  bronchodilators  [12].  Similarly,  both  a  large 
RCT and a  Cochrane review concluded that there is  insuffi-
cient evidence to support the use of epinephrine in inpatients 
with bronchiolitis [13, 14]; however, there is some evidence 
to suggest that epinephrine may be favourable to salbutamol 
or placebo among outpatients, although admission rates were 
not significantly different [14]. 

  With  bronchodilators  having  no  proven  effect  on  the 
course  of  acute  viral  bronchiolitis,  it  is  currently  recom-
mended  that  they  should  not  be  routinely  used  in  the  man-
agement of this disease [1, 3, 5]. A carefully monitored indi-
vidual  trial of nebulised alpha-adrenergic or beta-adrenergic 
medication  may  be  justified,  but  inhaled  bronchodilators 
should  be  discontinued  unless  a  clear  positive  effect  is 
documented  [1,  3].  Epinephrine  may  be  the  preferred  drug 
for such a trial. 

Inhaled Corticosteroids (ICS) 

 
In  three  studies,  no  effect  of  ICS  was  seen  on  clinical 
scores  or  length  of  hospitalisation  [15-17].  ICS  have  also 
been used with the idea to prevent post-bronchiolitic wheez-
ing.  A  recent  systematic  review  of  5  studies  involving  374 
infants did not demonstrate an effect of ICS given during the 
acute  phase  of  bronchiolitis  in  the  prevention  of  recurrent 
wheezing  following  bronchiolitis.  However,  the  small  num-
ber of included participants and the inability to pool all clini-
cal outcomes precluded the authors from making strong rec-
ommendations  [18].  Very  recently,  another  RCT  in  243  in-
fants  with  RSV  related  lower  respiratory  tract  infection  did 
not find an effect of early initiated, prolonged high dose in-
haled  corticosteroids  on  recurrent  wheeze  [19].  The  authors 
thus concluded that the general use of inhaled corticosteroids 
during RSV bronchiolitis should not be advocated. 

Systemic Corticosteroids (Oral, Intramuscular, Intravenous) 

  A  meta-analysis  performed  on  13  RCTs  involving  1198 
patients  (managed  as  outpatients  or  inpatients)  found  no 
positive effects of systemic corticosteroids on clinical scores, 
hospital  admission rates,  length of stay or readmission rates 
[20].  More  recently,  an  RCT  in  previously  healthy  infants 
hospitalised for acute bronchiolitis (n=174) showed a modest 
benefit of a single intramuscular injection of dexamethasone 
on  several  outcomes,  including  length  of  hospital  stay  [21]. 
In contrast, a large RCT did not show any effect of a single 
oral  dose  of  dexamethasone  in  600  infants  presenting  with 
moderate-to-severe  bronchiolitis  at  the  emergency  depart-
ment  [22].  Similarly  to  ICS,  oral  prednisolone  during  the 
acute phase of RSV bronchiolitis does not appear to be effec-
tive  in  preventing  post-bronchiolitic  wheezing  or  asthma 
[23].  Based  on  the  data  available,  the  current  recommenda-
tion  is  that systemic corticosteroids  should not be used rou-
tinely  in  the  management  of  acute  viral  bronchiolitis,  irre-
spective of the mode of application or the dose [1]. 

Combination of Epinephrine and Dexamethasone 

  Recently,  an  RCT involving 800 infants with acute viral 
bronchiolitis  who  were  seen  in  the  emergency  department 
examined the effects of inhaled epinephrine, oral dexametha-

Treatment of Acute Viral Bronchiolitis 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2011, Volume 5    161 

in 

the 

infants 

sone,  and  a  combination  of  both,  with  hospital  admission 
within seven days as  the primary outcome [24]. In an unad-
justed  analysis,  only 
the  epinephrine-
dexamethasone  group  were  significantly  less  likely  than 
those  in  the  placebo  group  to  be  admitted  by  day  7.  After 
adjustment  for  multiple  comparisons,  however,  the  differ-
ence did not reach statistical significance. If confirmed by a 
sufficiently  powered  study,  the  suggested  moderate  effect 
(11  infants  would  have  to  be  treated  to  prevent  one  admis-
sion) due to the frequency of the disease  could represent  an 
important  reduction  in  the  number  of  hospitalisations.  At 
present, however, this combination treatment cannot be rec-
ommended. 

Leukotriene Receptor Antagonists 

  Cysteinyl  leukotrienes  are  significantly  increased  in  res-
piratory secretions from infants with acute viral bronchiolitis 
and remain so at short-term follow-up, suggesting a possible 
role  of  these  substances  in  the  pathogenesis  of  the  disease 
[25].  An  RCT  compared  montelukast,  a  specific  cysteinyl 
leukotriene receptor antagonist, with placebo in infants with 
a  first  episode  of  bronchiolitis;  treatment  was  given  from 
hospital  admission  until  discharge.  Montelukast  did  not  im-
prove length of stay, clinical severity scores or cytokine lev-
els  in  nasal  lavage  fluid  [26].  Another  RCT,  serving  as  a 
pilot study, in 130 infants hospitalised with acute viral bron-
chiolitis  showed  that  a  4-week-course  of  montelukast  re-
duced respiratory symptoms subsequent to RSV bronchiolitis 
[27]. Subsequently,  in a larger study infants hospitalised for 
a first or second episode of RSV bronchiolitis (n=979) were 
treated with montelukast for 24 weeks; in this study, monte-
lukast  did  not  improve  respiratory  symptoms  of  post-RSV 
bronchiolitis  [28].  Similarly,  a  recent  small  RCT  found  that 
treatment  with  montelukast  for  three  months  after  hospital 
admission  for  RSV  bronchiolitis  did  not  reduce  respiratory 
symptoms during the treatment period and during a 9-month 
follow up period [29]. It follows that montelukast should not 
be used in acute viral bronchiolitis [3]. 

Immunoglobulins and Monoclonal Antibodies 

  A recent Cochrane systematic review assessing immuno-
globulin treatment of RSV  infection rather than its role as a 
prophylactic  measure  identified  four  RCTs  of  which  none 
demonstrated a statistically significant benefit [30]. 

 
Palivizumab,  a  humanised  monoclonal  IgG1  antibody 
specifically  directed  to  the  RSV  fusion  protein  has  been 
shown to be efficacious in preventing serious RSV disease in 
high risk patients [31]. A phase I/II RCT was performed with 
palivizumab in previously healthy children hospitalised with 
acute RSV infection [32]. As this study, showing no signifi-
cant  differences  in  clinical  outcomes,  was  not  adequately 
powered,  the  efficacy  of  palivizumab  as  treatment  of  RSV 
infection  remains  unclear.  The  current  recommendation  is 
that neither immunoglobulins nor RSV monoclonal antibod-
ies should be used in acute viral bronchiolitis [3]. 

Antibiotics 

  Bacteraemia  is  uncommon  in  children  with  RSV  infec-
tion,  unless  they  have  nosocomial  RSV  infection,  cyanotic 

congenital heart disease, or require intensive care unit admis-
sion [33]. Several RCTs have studied the effect of antibiotics 
on the course of acute viral bronchiolitis. An old study inves-
tigating the effect of ampicillin in an outbreak of bronchioli-
tis  reported  no  positive  effect  on  the  disease  course  [34]. 
This  was  the  only  trial  that  met  the  inclusion  criteria  of  a 
systematic  review  on  the  use  of  antibiotics  in  children  with 
bronchiolitis  [35].  Not  surprisingly,  this  review  found  no 
evidence to support the use of antibiotics. More recently, the 
authors  of  a  very  small  study  reported  that  clarithromycin 
was associated with a significant reduction in length of hos-
pital  stay  and  readmission  to  hospital  [36].  In  contrast,  a 
larger trial in infants hospitalised with RSV bronchiolitis did 
not  show  a  positive  effect  of  azithromycin  on  duration  of 
hospitalisation  or  resolution  of  symptoms  [37].  The  anti-
inflammatory  activity  of  macrolides  should  be  studied  in 
larger populations of both outpatients and inpatients. At pre-
sent,  it  is  recommended  to  limit  the  use  of  antibacterial 
medications to children with bronchiolitis who have specific 
indications of the coexistence of a bacterial infection [1, 3]. 

Antiviral Therapy 

  Ribavirin  is  a  broad-spectrum  antiviral  agent  approved 
for treatment of RSV infection, and is the only antiviral drug 
that has been studied in children with acute viral bronchioli-
tis.  Its  use,  however,  is  controversial  because  of  questions 
about its efficacy, safety concerns, and its high cost. A num-
ber of small studies, lacking sufficient power to provide reli-
able  estimates  of  the  effects,  have  been  performed  with  ri-
bavirin;  these  have  been  reviewed  recently  [38].  Ribavirin 
may reduce the duration of mechanical ventilation and days 
of hospitalisation,  and may decrease the  incidence of recur-
rent  wheezing  following  bronchiolitis;  however,  in  the  ab-
sence  of  large  RCTs,  the  effect  of  ribavirin  remains  un-
proven.  Thus,  at  present  ribavirin  should  not  be  used  rou-
tinely in children with acute viral bronchiolitis [1, 3]. 

Hypertonic Saline 

  Airway oedema and mucus plugging are the predominant  
pathological features in acute viral bronchiolitis. Hypertonic  
saline  decreases  airway  oedema,  improves  mucus  rheologic  
properties  and  mucociliary  clearance,  and  thus  decreases  
airway obstruction [39]. Until 2007, four RCTs on the use of  
aerosolised  3%  hypertonic  saline  solution  in  children  with  
acute  viral  bronchiolitis  were  published  [40-43].  One  study  
was a multi-centre trial [43], the other three were conducted  
by the same group of investigators [40-42]. Outpatients were  
recruited  in  one  trial  [40]  and  inpatients  in  the  other  three  
trials  [41-43].  Bronchodilators  were  added  to  the  study  
solution  in  three  studies  [40-42];  in  the  multi-centre  study,  
bronchodilators  were  added  in  a  majority  of  the  treatments  
by  attending  physicians  [43].  A  recent  systematic  review  
which  included  these  four  trials,  involving  254  infants  with  
acute  viral  bronchiolitis  (189  inpatients  and  65  outpatients),  
concluded that nebulised 3% saline may significantly reduce  
the  length  of  hospital  stay  and  improve  the  clinical  severity  
score [44]. Recently, another small RCT investigated the use  
of  hypertonic  saline  in  the  emergency  department  setting,  
and  the  authors  suggested  that  immediate  clinical  benefits  
may  not  be  seen  with  nebulised  hypertonic  saline  [45].  In  

162    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2011, Volume 5 

this study, there was a trend towards a reduction in hospitali- 
sation  rate  with  the  use  of  hypertonic  saline,  but  the  study  
was  not  sufficiently  powered  for  this  outcome  parameter.  
Very  recently,  an  RCT  found  high  volume  normal  saline  to  
be  as  effective  as  3%  saline  in  children  with  very  mild  
bronchiolitis  in  the  emergency  department,  suggesting  that  
the  improvement  in  mucus  clearance  is  not  a  function  of  
the  saline  concentration  but  rather  of  the  total  mass  of  
NaCl  added  to  the  airway  surface  [39,  46].  While  there  is  
a  lack  of  strong  evidence  to  support  the  routine  use  of  
aerosolised  hypertonic  saline  solution  in  children  with  
acute  viral  bronchiolitis,  the  lack  of  side  effects  and  the  
limited  cost  of  the  treatment  deserve  consideration  for  a  
large  RCT.  The  present  recommendation  is  that  hypertonic  
saline  should  probably  be  used  in  the  treatment  of  acute  
viral bronchiolitis [3]. 

Furosemide 

 
Inhaled  furosemide  has  been  reported  to  have  a  positive 
effect  in a number of respiratory conditions. It  acts only lo-
cally  in  the  lung,  but  the  precise  mechanism  of  action  is  as 
yet  unclear.  In  a  small  RCT,  safety  and  the  short  and  long 
term clinical effects of inhaled furosemide were evaluated in 
previously  healthy  children  with  acute  viral  bronchiolitis 
[47]. While inhaled furosemide appeared to be both feasible 
and  safe,  this  pilot  study  did  not  show  significant  clinical 
effects in hospitalised infants with acute viral bronchiolitis. 

Surfactant 

  Clinical  and  laboratory  evidence  suggests  that  severe 
viral bronchiolitis may result in secondary surfactant insuffi-
ciency  [48];  thus,  exogenous  surfactant  represents  a  poten-
tially  promising  therapy.  The  efficacy  of  exogenous  surfac-
tant for the treatment of acute viral bronchiolitis in mechani-
cally  ventilated  infants  and  children  has  been  assessed  in  a 
meta-analysis,  including  three  trials  with  a  total  of  79  pa-
tients  [49].  Use  of  surfactant  was  associated  with  a  non-
significant decrease in duration of mechanical ventilation by 
2.6 days and a borderline significant decrease in ICU length 
of stay by 3.3 days. In summary, presently available data on 
surfactant  are  not  sufficient  to  provide  reliable  estimates  of 
its effects in critically ill children with bronchiolitis. 

Heliox 

  Acute  viral  bronchiolitis  is  characterised  by  airway  ob-
struction,  resulting  in  turbulent  gas  flow.  Heliox,  a  mixture 
of  oxygen  and  the  inert  gas  helium,  may  improve  gas  flow 
through  high-resistance  airways  and  thus  decrease  the  work 
of  breathing.  In  a  very  recent  meta-analysis,  four  trials  in-
volving 84 infants with RSV bronchiolitis who required pae-
diatric intensive care unit hospitalisation were included [50]. 
The  authors  of  this  review  concluded  that  heliox  therapy  in 
addition to standard medical care for acute viral bronchiolitis 
may significantly reduce respiratory distress in the first hour 
after  starting treatment. However,  there was no reduction in 
the rate of intubation, in the need for mechanical ventilation, 
or  in  the  length  of  paediatric  intensive  care  unit  stay.  Pres-
ently,  the  place  for  heliox  in  the  therapeutic  schedule  for 
severe bronchiolitis is unclear. 

Ernst Eber 

Nasal Continuous Positive Airway Pressure 

  One  RCT with a cross-over design compared nasal con-
tinuous  positive  airway  pressure  (CPAP)  with  standard 
treatment  consisting  of  intravenous  fluids  and  supplemental 
oxygen  by  nasal  prongs  or  face  mask  in  infants  with  bron-
chiolitis and hypercapnia [51]. When nasal CPAP was used 
first,  the  reduction  in  partial  pressure  of  carbon  dioxide  in 
arterial blood was significantly greater than when CPAP was 
used  second.  Nasal  CPAP  was  well  tolerated  with  no  com-
plications  identified.  A  large  trial  is  needed  to  investigate 
whether nasal CPAP may reduce the need for invasive venti-
lation. 

Chest Physiotherapy 

  The main goal of chest physiotherapy in paediatric respi-
ratory  diseases  is  to  reduce  airway  resistance  and  thus  the 
work of breathing, and to enhance gas exchange by assisting 
in  the  clearance  of  excessive  respiratory  secretions.  A  sys-
tematic  review  performed  to  determine  the  efficacy  and 
safety of chest physiotherapy in infants with acute bronchio-
litis  included  three  RCTs  [52].  The  three  studies  employed 
vibration and percussion techniques with children in postural 
drainage positions compared to no intervention. The authors 
concluded that with the techniques applied, chest physiother-
apy  does  not  reduce  length  of  hospital  stay  or  oxygen  re-
quirements,  or  improve  clinical  severity  scores  in  infants 
with acute viral bronchiolitis. The current recommendation is 
that  chest  physiotherapy  should  not  be  used  routinely  in 
children with acute viral bronchiolitis [1, 3]. 

CONCLUSIONS 

 
In  1963,  Reynolds  and  Cook  stated  that  “…  oxygen  is 
vitally  important  in  bronchiolitis  and  there  is  little  convinc-
ing  evidence  that  any  other  therapy  is  consistently  or  even 
occasionally  useful  …”  [53].  Now,  almost  fifty  years  later, 
supportive  care  including  administration  of  oxygen  and  flu-
ids  still  is  the  cornerstone  of  treatment  of  acute  viral  bron-
chiolitis, and there is no intervention that is of proven benefit 
on  the  course  of  the  disease  or  the  development  of  post-
bronchiolitic  wheeze.  Bronchodilators  may  be  effective  in 
some patients and may thus be used on a trial-and-error ba-
sis. Preliminary evidence suggests a potential role for nebu-
lised  hypertonic  saline,  and  in  infants  and  children  with  se-
vere disease the use of nasal CPAP appears to be beneficial. 
Some  of  the  discussed  treatments  and  promising  combina-
tions  of  therapies  should  be  studied  in  further  and  larger 
RCTs. 

CONFLICT OF INTEREST 

 
In the past three years Ernst Eber has received travel ex-
penses to attend scientific conferences and/or speaker’s fees 
from  Abbott,  AstraZeneca,  GlaxoSmithKline,  Merck  Sharp 
and Dohme, and Nycomed. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

I am grateful for the assistance of Stefan Kurath with the 

 
literature research. 

 

Treatment of Acute Viral Bronchiolitis 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2011, Volume 5    163 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 
[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

American  Academy  of  Pediatrics.  Diagnosis  and  management  of 
bronchiolitis. Pediatrics 2006; 118: 1774-93. 
Fitzgerald  DA,  Kilham  HA.  Bronchiolitis:  assessment  and  
evidence-based management. Med J Aust 2004; 180: 399-404. 
Lenney W, Boner AL, Bont L, et al. Medicines used in respiratory 
diseases only seen in children. Eur Respir J 2009; 34: 531-51. 
Shay DK, Holman RC, Newman RD, Liu LL, Stout JW, Anderson 
LJ.  Bronchiolitis-associated  hospitalizations  among  US  children, 
1980-1996. JAMA 1999; 282: 1440-6. 
Smyth RL, Openshaw PJ. Bronchiolitis. Lancet 2006; 368: 312-22. 
Hall  CB,  Weinberg  GA,  Iwane  MK,  et  al.  The  burden  of  respira-
tory  syncytial  virus  infection  in  young  children.  N  Engl  J  Med 
2009; 360: 588-98. 
Zorc JJ, Hall CB. Bronchiolitis: Recent evidence on diagnosis and 
management. Pediatrics 2010; 125: 342-9. 
Wainwright C. Acute viral bronchiolitis in children – a very com-
mon  condition  with  few  therapeutic  options.  Paediatr  Respir  Rev 
2010; 11: 39-45. 
Unger  S,  Cunningham  S.  Effect  of  oxygen  supplementation  on 
length of stay for infants hospitalized with acute viral bronchiolitis. 
Pediatrics 2008; 121: 470-5. 
Babl FE,  Sheriff N, Neutze J, Borland M, Oakley E. Bronchiolitis 
management  in  pediatric  emergency  departments  in  Australia  and 
New  Zealand:  a  PREDICT  study.  Pediatr  Emerg  Care  2008;  24: 
656-8. 
Plint  AC,  Johnson  DW,  Wiebe  N,  et  al.  Practice  variation  among 
pediatric  emergency  departments  in  the  treatment  of  bronchiolitis. 
Acad Emerg Med. 2004; 11: 353-60. 
Gadomski  AM,  Bhasale  AL.  Bronchodilators  for  bronchiolitis. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; 3: CD001266. 

[18] 

[17] 

[16] 

[15] 

[14] 

[19] 

[13]  Wainwright  C,  Altamirano  L,  Cheney  M,  et  al.  A  multicenter, 
randomized, double-blind, controlled trial of nebulized epinephrine 
in  infants  with  acute  bronchiolitis.  N  Engl  J  Med  2003;  349:  
27-35. 
Hartling L, Russell KF, Patel H, Klassen TP, Liang Y. Epinephrine 
for bronchiolitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004; 1: CD003123. 
Richter H,  Seddon P. Early nebulized budesonide in the treatment 
of bronchiolitis and the prevention of postbronchiolitic wheezing. J 
Pediatr 1998; 132: 849-53. 
Cade  A,  Brownlee  KG,  Conway  SP,  et  al.  Randomised  placebo 
controlled  trial  of  nebulised  corticosteroids  in  acute  respiratory 
syncytial viral bronchiolitis. Arch Dis Child 2000; 82: 126-30. 
Bentur  L,  Shoseyov  D,  Feigenbaum  D,  Gorichovsky  Y,  Bibi  H. 
Dexamethasone  inhalations  in  RSV  bronchiolitis:  a  double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study. Acta Paediatr 2005; 94: 866-71. 
Blom  DJM,  Ermers  M,  Bont  L,  van  Woensel  JBM,  van  Aalderen 
WMC.  Inhaled  corticosteroids  during  acute  bronchiolitis  in  the 
prevention of post-bronchiolitic wheezing. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 2007; 1: CD004881. 
Ermers MJJ, Rovers MM, van Woensel JB, Kimpen JLL, Bont LJ, 
on  behalf  of  the  RSV  Corticosteroid  Study  Group.  The  effect  of 
high dose inhaled corticosteroids on wheeze in infants after respira-
tory  syncytial  virus  infection:  randomised  double  blind  placebo 
controlled trial. BMJ 2009; 338: b897. 
Patel H, Platt R, Lozano JM, Wang EE. Glucocorticoids for acute 
viral  bronchiolitis  in  infants  and  young  children.  Cochrane  Data-
base Syst Rev 2004; 3: CD004878. 
Teeratakulpisarn J, Limwattananon C, Tanupattarachai S, Limwat-
tananon  S,  Teeratakulpisarn  S,  Kosalaraksa  P.  Efficacy  of  dex-
amethasone  injection  for  acute  bronchiolitis  in  hospitalized  chil-
dren:  a  randomized,  double-blind,  placebo-controlled  trial.  Pediatr 
Pulmonol 2007; 42: 433-9. 
Corneli HM, Zorc JJ, Majahan P, et al. A multicenter, randomized, 
controlled  trial  of  dexamethasone  for  bronchiolitis.  N  Engl  J  Med 
2007; 357: 331-9. 
van  Woensel  JBM,  Kimpen  JLL,  Sprikkelman  AB,  Ouwehand  A, 
van Aalderen WMC. Long-term effects of prednisolone in the acute 
phase of bronchiolitis caused by respiratory syncytial virus. Pediatr 
Pulmonol 2000; 30: 92-6. 
Plint AC, Johnson DW, Patel H, et al. Epinephrine and dexametha-
sone  in  children  with  bronchiolitis.  N  Engl  J  Med  2009;  360:  
2079-89. 

[23] 

[20] 

[21] 

[22] 

[24] 

[25] 

[26] 

[27] 

[28] 

[29] 

[30] 

[31] 

[32] 

[33] 

[34] 

[35] 

[36] 

[37] 

[38] 

Da Dalt L, Callegaro S, Carraro S, Andreola B, Corradi M, Baraldi 
E.  Nasal  lavage  leukotrienes  in  infants  with  RSV  bronchiolitis.  
Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2007; 18: 100-4. 
Amirav  I,  Luder  AS,  Kruger  N,  et  al.  A  double-blind,  placebo-
controlled, randomized trial of montelukast for acute bronchiolitis. 
Pediatrics 2008; 122: e1249-55. 
Bisgaard  H,  for  the  study  group  on  montelukast  and  respiratory 
syncytial  virus.  A  randomized  trial  of  montelukast  in  respiratory 
syncytial virus postbronchiolitis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003; 
167: 379-83. 
Bisgaard  H,  Flores-Nunez  A,  Goh  A,  et  al.  Study  of  montelukast 
for  the  treatment  of  respiratory  symptoms of  post-respiratory  syn-
cytial  virus  bronchiolitis  in  children.  Am  J  Respir  Crit  Care  Med 
2008; 178: 854-60. 
Proesmans M,  Sauer K, Govaere E, Raes M, De  Bilderling G, De 
Boeck K. Montelukast does not prevent reactive airway disease in 
young  children  hospitalized  for  RSV  bronchiolitis.  Acta  Pædiatr 
2009; 98: 1830-4. 
Fuller  H,  Del  Mar  C.  Immunoglobulin  treatment  for  respiratory 
syncytial  virus  infection.  Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev  2006;  4: 
CD004883. 
The IMpact-RSV Study Group. Palivizumab, a humanized respira-
tory  syncytial  virus  monoclonal  antibody,  reduces  hospitalization 
from respiratory syncytial virus infection in high-risk infants. Pedi-
atrics 1998; 102: 531-7. 
Sáez-Llorens  X,  Moreno  MT,  Ramilo  O,  Sánchez  PJ,  Top  FH  Jr, 
Connor  EM,  for  the  MEDI-493  Study  Group.  Safety  and pharma-
cokinetics of palivizumab therapy in children hospitalized with res-
piratory  syncytial  virus  infection.  Pediatr  Infect  Dis  J  2004;  23: 
707-12. 
Bloomfield  P,  Dalton  D,  Karleka  A,  Kesson  A,  Duncan  G,  Isaacs 
D. Bacteraemia and antibiotic use in respiratory syncytial virus in-
fections. Arch Dis Child 2004; 89: 363-7. 
Field CMB, Connolly JH, Murtagh G, Slattery CM, Turkington EE. 
Antibiotic  treatment  of  epidemic  bronchiolitis  –  a  double-blind 
trial. Br Med J 1966; 1: 83-5. 
Spurling  GKP,  Fonseka  K,  Doust  J,  Del  Mar  C.  Antibiotics  for 
bronchiolitis  in  children.  Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev  2007;  1: 
CD005189. 
Tahan F, Ozcan A, Koc N. Clarithromycin in the treatment of RSV 
bronchiolitis:  a  double-blind,  randomised,  placebo-controlled  trial. 
Eur Respir J 2007; 29: 91-7. 
Kneyber  MC,  van  Woensel  JB,  Uijtendaal  E,  Uiterwaal  CS,  Kim-
pen JL; Dutch Antibiotics in RSV Trial (DART) Research Group. 
Azithromycin  does  not  improve  disease  course  in  hospitalized  in-
fants with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) lower respiratory tract 
disease:  a  randomized  equivalence  trial.  Pediatr  Pulmonol  2008; 
43: 142-9. 
Ventre  K,  Randolph  AG.  Ribavirin  for  respiratory  syncytial  virus 
infection  of  the  lower  respiratory  tract  in  infants  and  young  chil-
dren. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007; 1: CD000181. 

[39]  Mandelberg A, Amirav I. Hypertonic saline or high volume normal 
saline  for  viral  bronchiolitis:  mechanisms  and  rationale.  Pediatr 
Pulmonol 2010; 45: 36-40. 
Sarrell  EM,  Tal  G,  Witzling  M,  et  al.  Nebulized  3%  hypertonic 
saline  solution  treatment  in  ambulatory  children  with  viral  bron-
chiolitis decreases symptoms. Chest 2002; 122: 2015-20. 

[40] 

[43] 

[42] 

[41]  Mandelberg A, Tal G, Witzling M, et al. Nebulized 3% hypertonic 
saline solution treatment in hospitalized infants with viral bronchio-
litis. Chest 2003; 123: 481-7. 
Tal G, Cesar K, Oron A, Houri S, Ballin A, Mandelberg A. Hyper-
tonic saline/epinephrine treatment in hospitalized infants with viral 
bronchiolitis  reduces  hospitalization  stay:  2  years  experience.  Isr 
Med Assoc J 2006; 8: 169-73. 
Kuzik BA, Al-Qadhi SA, Kent S, et al. Nebulized hypertonic saline 
in  the  treatment  of  viral  bronchiolitis  in  infants.  J  Pediatr  2007; 
151: 266-70. 
Zhang  L,  Mendoza-Sassi  RA,  Wainwright  C,  Klassen  TP.  Nebu-
lized  hypertonic  saline  solution  for  acute  bronchiolitis  in  infants. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008; 4: CD006458. 
Grewal  S,  Ali  S,  McConnell  DW,  Vandermeer  B,  Klassen  TP.  A 
randomized  trial  of  nebulized 3%  hypertonic  saline  with  epineph-
rine  in  the  treatment  of  acute  bronchiolitis  in  the  emergency  
department. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2009; 163: 1007-12. 

[44] 

[45] 

164    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2011, Volume 5 

[46] 

[47] 

[48] 

[49] 

Anil  AB,  Anil  M,  Saglam  AB,  Cetin  N,  Bal  A,  Aksu  N.  High  
volume normal saline alone is as effective as nebulized salbutamol-
normal  saline,  epinephrine-normal  saline,  and  3%  saline  in  mild 
bronchiolitis. Pediatr Pulmonol 2010; 45: 41-7. 
Bar  A,  Srugo  I,  Amirav  I,  Tzverling  C,  Naftali  G,  Kugelman  A. 
Inhaled furosemide in hospitalized infants with viral bronchiolitis: 
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study. Pediatr 
Pulmonol 2008; 43: 261-7. 
Dargaville PA, South M,  McDougall PN.  Surfactant abnormalities 
in infants with severe viral bronchiolitis. Arch Dis Child 1996; 75: 
133-6. 
Ventre  K,  Haroon  M,  Davison  C.  Surfactant  therapy  for  bron- 
chiolitis in critically ill infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006; 
3: CD005150. 

Ernst Eber 

[50] 

[51] 

[52] 

[53] 

Liet JM, Ducruet T, Gupta V, Cambonie G. Heliox inhalation ther-
apy for bronchiolitis in infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; 
4: CD006915. 
Thia  LP,  McKenzie  SA,  Blyth  TP,  Minasian  CC,  Kozlowska  WJ, 
Carr  SB.  Randomised  controlled  trial  of  nasal  continuous  positive 
airway pressure (CPAP) in bronchiolitis. Arch Dis Child 2008; 93: 
45-7. 
Perrotta  C,  Ortiz  Z,  Roqué  i  Figuls  M.  Chest  physiotherapy  for 
acute bronchiolitis in paediatric patients between 0 and 24 months 
old. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007; 1: CD004873. 
Reynolds EOR, Cook CD. The treatment of bronchiolitis. J Pediatr 
1963; 63: 1205-7. 

 
 
Received: June 28, 2011 
 

Revised: October 12, 2011 

Accepted: October 27, 2011 

 

 Ernst Eber; Licensee Bentham Open. 
This is an open access article licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ 
by-nc/3.0/) which permits unrestricted, non-commercial use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the work is properly cited.  

 

