 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, 4, 5-7 

5 
Open Access 
Primary  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  Liver  Abscess  with  Metastatic  Spread  to 
Lung and Eye, a North-European Case Report of an Emerging Syndrome 

Sara K Sobirk1,*, Carsten Struve2 and Sanda G Jacobsson3 

1Clinical Microbiology, University and Regional Laboratories Region Skåne s-221 85 Lund, Sweden 
2Department of Bacteriology, Mycology and Parasitology, Statens Serum Institut, 2300 Copenhagen S, Denmark 
3Department of Infectious Diseases, County Hospital of Helsingborg, s-251 87 Helsingborg, Sweden 

Abstract: A syndrome of community acquired liver abscess caused by highly virulent hypermucoviscous, rmpA positive 
Klebsiella pneumoniae strains occurs with high incidence in Asia. We here report a case complicated by metastatic infec-
tion, to our knowledge, the  first one described in Northern Europe. This  and other recently reported cases indicate the 
emergence of this severe syndrome outside of Asia. 

Keywords: Klebsiella pneumoniae, metastatic infection, hypermucoviscous, rmpA. 

INTRODUCTION 
 
In recent years a high incidence of community-acquired 
primary  liver  abscess  caused  by  highly  virulent  strains  of 
Klebsiella pneumoniae has been documented in Taiwan and 
other  Asian  countries.  [1-4].  A  syndrome,  with  metastatic 
spread  to  eyes,  meninges,  brain  and  other  sites,  has  been 
described,  and  is  strongly  associated  with  K.  pneumoniae 
strains of capsular serotype K1 of a characteristic hypermu-
coviscous phenotype [4, 5]. Two plasmid encoded virulence 
genes,  rmpA  (regulator  of  the  mucoid  phenotype)  and  the 
iron  siderophore  aerobactin,  as  well  as  two  chromosomal 
encoded virulence genes, kfu encoding an iron uptake system 
and  allS  associated  with  allatonin  metabolism  are  signifi-
cantly  correlated  with  the  high  virulence  of  the  invasive 
strains  [6,  7].  These  highly  virulent  strains  are  so  far  rare 
outside of Asia, but case reports from USA,  Canada, Spain 
and Belgium have been published lately [8-14]. 
  We  here  report  a  Swedish  patient  with  this  emerging 
syndrome caused by a highly virulent K. pneumoniae isolate. 
This is, to our knowledge, the first case described in North-
ern Europe.  

CASE REPORT 
  A  45-year  old  man  of  Vietnamese  origin  was  admitted 
with  a ten day history of fever,  anorexia, fatigue and right-
sided abdominal pain. He had no previous history of disease 
and no medication. At examination, he had signs of peritoni-
tis, hypotension and a red and swollen left eye. He was ini-
tially treated with intravenous fluids and imipenem for sus-
pected septicaemia. Pulmonary X-ray and CT-scan revealed 
right-sided pulmonary infiltrates with pleural effusion and a 
large mass in the liver with the appearance of multiple cysts.  
 
*Address  correspondence  to  this  author  at  the  Clinical  Microbiology,  
University  and  Regional  Laboratories  Region  Skåne  s-221  85  Lund,  
Sweden; Tel: +46-46173287; E-mail: Sara.m.karlssonsobirk@skane.se 
 
 

1874-2858/10 

(Fig.  1)  Examination  of  the  eye  showed  marked  chemosis, 
absence of light reflex and intravitreal hemorrhage. Empiric 
treatment for endophtalmitis was given  intravitreously (cef-
tazidime  and  vancomycin).  Cultures  of  blood,  urine,  aspi-
rates from liver and pleural effusion all grew K. pneumoniae 
sensitive  to  imipenem  and  ceftazidime.  Cultures  that  were 
taken  from  the  eye,  after  initiation  of  intravenous  therapy, 
were  negative.  Despite  adequate  treatment  and  continuous 
drainage  of  both  liver  abscess  and  empyema,  repeated  cul-
tures from these sites showed the same mucoid strain of K. 
pneumoniae up to 23 days after initiation of intravenous an-
tibiotics. Two repeated blood cultures  taken one week after 
initiation of therapy were negative. Following three weeks of 
intravenous therapy, the patient was treated with oral cipro-
floxacin for another five weeks. His recovery, although slow, 
corresponded well with repeated CT-scans of lungs and liver 
showing  regress  of  the  infection.  Although  the  pain  in  his 
left  eye  decreased,  his  vision  is  permanently  damaged,  and 
he is now blind on the affected eye. The patient had  immi-
grated to Sweden 8 years previously, passing a refugee-camp 
in Hong Kong, and had been back to visit Vietnam once, 10 
months before start of symptoms. Initial investigations of the 
patient therefore included TB-analyses and a broad parasitic 
screen, all found to be negative. 
  The K. pneumoniae isolate that caused the infection was 
found to express the hypermucoviscous phenotype as shown 
by  the  formation  of  mucoviscous  strings  when  a  loop  was 
passed through a colony (Fig. 2). Capsular serotyping at the 
International  Eschericia  coli  and Klebsiella  Reference  Cen-
tre  (WHO),  Statens  Serum  Institut  revealed  that  the  isolate 
belongs to the K1 serotype which was confirmed by detec-
tion  of  the  K1  serotype  specific  gene  magA  as  previously 
described (Fig. 3) [15]. Furthermore the isolate was positive 
for all four virulence genes rmpA, aerobactin, kfu and allS as 
revealed by polymerase chain reaction using specific primers 
(Fig. 3) [5]. Thus the isolate exhibited similar characteristics 

2010 Bentham Open 

6    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4 

Sobirk et al. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. (1). CT-scans showing liver abscess and right sided empyema. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. (2). Plate culture demonstrating the hypermucoviscous phenotype of the isolate. 

as the highly virulent K. pneumoniae isolates that have so far 
mainly been observed in Asia.  
DISCUSSION 
  The  rising  incidence  of  K.  pneumoniae  community  
acquired  primary  liver  abscess  in  otherwise  healthy  indi-

viduals  caused  by  highly  virulent  strains  and  often  compli-
cated by severe metastatic infections is disturbing [2, 3, 14]. 
Whereas  this  emerging  infectious  disease  so  far  has  been 
observed mainly in Asia, a rising number of cases from other 
geographic  regions  indicate  that  these  infections  may  de-
velop  into  a  world  wide  problem.  It  is  remarkable  that  the 

Klebsiella Liver Abscess – A Case Report of an Emerging Syndrome 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2010, Volume 4    7 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. (3). Detection of magA (lane 1), rmpA (lane 2), aerobactin (lane 3), kfu (lane 4) and allS (lane 5). PCR amplifications were performed by 
use of specific primers (5, 15). 

majority  of  cases  outside  Asia  have  involved  patients  of 
Asian  ethnicity.  The  reasons  for  the  predominance  of  this 
syndrome in patients of Asian  ethnicity  are not known, but 
suggest  that  genetic  susceptibility  may  play  an  important 
role. Alternatively, it could be speculated that there may be a 
food source of the virulent bacteria. Cases with no history of 
traveling  to  Asia  have  been  reported  demonstrating  that 
highly virulent K. pneumoniae strains are present outside of 
Asia  [10,  12,  13].  However,  although  our  patient  had  only 
had  Swedish  and  Vietnamese  contacts,  he  may  have  been 
colonized with the strain in Vietnam 10 months before onset 
of symptoms. 
 
Patients  with  a  recent  history  of  travelling  in  foreign 
countries  are  often  thoroughly  investigated  for  infections 
with virus, bacteria or parasites that are typical for the region 
visited. Bacterial species that are common all over the world 
can,  with  the  same  antibiotic  susceptibility-pattern,  vary 
geographically  in  regard  to  virulence-factors  corresponding 
to  clinical  picture  and  outcome.  A  connection  between  the 
causative agent, the region visited and the clinical picture is 
easily  overlooked  if  analyses  of  these  bacterial  strains  are 
restricted to identification to species-level and susceptibility-
testing. With this case report, we would like to highlight an 
emerging syndrome caused by a bacterial species common in 
Europe, but of a serotype and with specific virulence genes 
still rare outside of Asia.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
  We  thank  Dr  Johan  Rydberg  at  the  Department  of  
Clinical  Microbiology  and  Immunology  at  the  University 
Hospital in Lund, for his support and valuable comments. 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

Chung DR, Lee SS, Lee HR, et al. Emerging invasive liver abscess 
caused  by  K1  serotype  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  in  Korea.  J  Infect 
2007; 54: 578-83. 
Fung  CP,  Chang  FY,  Lee  SC,  et  al.  A  global  emerging  disease  
of  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  liver  abscess:  is  serotype  K1  an 
important  factor  for  complicated  endophthalmitis?  Gut  2002;  50: 
420-4. 
Fang  CT,  Lai  SY,  Yi  WC,  Hsueh  PR,  Liu  KL,  Chang  SC. 
Klebsiella  pneumoniae  genotype  K1:  an  emerging  pathogen  that 
causes septic ocular or central nervous system complications from 
pyogenic liver abscess. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45: 284-93. 
Yu  VL,  Hansen  DS,  Ko  WC,  et  al.  Virulence  characteristics  of 
Klebsiella  and  clinical  manifestations  of  K.  pneumoniae 
bloodstream infections. Emerg Infect Dis 2007; 13: 986-93. 
Yu  WL,  Ko  WC,  Cheng  KC,  Lee  CC,  Lai  CC,  Chuang  YC. 
Comparison  of  prevalence  of  virulence  factors  for  Klebsiella 
pneumoniae liver abscesses between isolates with capsular K1/K2 
and non-K1/K2 serotypes. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2008; 62: 1-
6. 
Nadasy  KA,  Domiati-Saad  R,  Tribble  MA.  Invasive  Klebsiella 
pneumoniae syndrome in North America. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45: 
e25-e8. 
Fang  FC,  Sandler  N,  Libby  SJ.  Liver  abscess  caused  by  magA+ 
Klebsiella  pneumoniae  in  North  America.  J  Clin  Microbiol 2005; 
43: 991-2. 
Frazee  BW,  Hansen  S,  Lambert  L.  Invasive  Infection  With 
Hypermucoviscous  Klebsiella  pneumoniae:  multiple 
cases 
presenting to a single emergency department in the United States. 
Ann Emerg Med 2009; 53: 639-42 
Keynan Y, Karlowsky JA, Walus T, Rubinstein E. Pyogenic liver 
abscess  caused  by  hypermucoviscous  Klebsiella  pneumoniae. 
Scand J Infect Dis 2007; 39: 828-30. 
Karama  EM,  Willermain  F,  Janssens  X,  et  al.  Endogenous 
endophthalmitis complicating Klebsiella pneumoniae liver abscess 
in Europe: case report. Int Ophthalmol 2008; 28: 111-3. 
Gomez C, Broseta A, Otero JR, Chaves F. Primary pyogenic liver 
abscess  caused  by  magA+  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  in  Spain.  Clin 
Microbiol Newsl 2007; 29: 100-2. 
Lederman  ER,  Crum  NF.  Pyogenic  liver  abscess  with  a  focus  on 
Klebsiella pneumoniae as a primary pathogen: an emerging disease 
with unique clinical characteristics. Am J Gastroenterol 2005; 100: 
322-31. 
Struve  C,  Bojer  M,  Nielsen  EM,  Hansen  DS,  Krogfelt  KA. 
Investigation of the putative virulence gene magA in a worldwide 
collection of 495 Klebsiella isolates: magA is restricted to the gene 
cluster  of  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  capsule  serotype  K1.  J  Med 
Microbiol 2005; 54: 1111-3. 

REFERENCES 
[1] 

Wang  JH,  Liu  YC,  Lee  SS,  et  al.  Primary  liver  abscess  due  to 
Klebsiella pneumoniae in Taiwan. Clin Infect Dis 1998; 26: 1434-
8. 
Tsai FC, Huang YT, Chang LY, Wang JT. Pyogenic liver abscess 
as endemic disease, Taiwan. Emerg Infect Dis 2008; 14: 1592-600. 

[2] 
 
 
Received: January 29, 2010 
 
 Sobirk et al.; Licensee Bentham Open. 
This is an open access article licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/3.0/) which permits unrestricted, non-commercial use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the work is properly cited. 

Accepted: February 10, 2010 

Revised: February 08, 2010 

 

