72 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2011, 5, (Suppl 1-M4) 72-75 

 

Open Access 

Presence  of  a  Human  Diarrheagenic  Escherichia  coli  Clone  in  Captivity 
Kept Psittacidaes  

Guilherme A. Marietto-Gonçalves1, Silvia M. de Almeida2 and Josias Rodrigues1,* 

1Department of Microbiology and Immunology, IB-UNESP, Botucatu SP, Brazil 

2Floravida Institute, Botucatu SP, Brazil 

Abstract:  Bacterial  cultures  of  cloaca  swabs  from  86  captivity  kept  psittacidaes  revealed  17  Escherichia  coli  bearing 
birds sharing strains which, on the basis of enterobacterial repetitive intergenic consensus (ERIC) PCR analysis, proved to 
be genetically similar. Further, triplex PCR specific for the genetic markers chuA, yjaA, and TSPE4.C2 was used to assign 
the  strains  to  the  E.  coli  reference  collection  (EcoR)  B2  group.  One  strain  of  each,  from  the  enteropathogenic  (EPEC),  
enteroaggregative (EAEC) and Shiga toxin (STEC) E. coli pathovars were found among these isolates. 

Keywords: Shiga-toxin, diarrhea, parrots, parakeets, Escherichia coli.  

INTRODUCTION 

Psittacidae  comprise  parrots  and  parakeets,  which  are 
 
often home cared as pets or found in many recreational zoos. 
In  their  natural  habitats,  they  rarely  have  contact  with  the 
soil;  their  water  supply  comes  from  the  fruits  and  some 
flowers  rainfall  deposits.  As  a  consequence  of  this  limited 
soil contact and eventual access to contaminated water, their 
alimentary  tract´s  microbiota  shows  a  reduced  presence  of 
gram  negative  bacteria,  such  as  E.  coli  [1-3].  In  the  case  of 
home  pets  and  institutional  captivity  kept  birds,  bacterial 
contamination  is  facilitated  by  contact  with  humans,  aggre-
gated  animals  and  the  environment  [4].  In  Brazil,  illegally 
owned  wild  birds  recovered  by  environmental  police  are 
usually kept in quarantine in Official Environmental Control 
Agencies  or  Non-Government  Organizations 
facilities, 
which  monitor  eventual  carriage  of  potential  pathogens,  
before their re-introduction into natural habitats.  

 
Pathogenic  E.  coli  are  classified  in  distinct  categories 
according to their virulence properties, symptoms of diseases 
that they cause, species and age group where they are found. 
These criteria have been the basis for the division of human 
diarrheagenic  E.  coli  (DEC)  in  at  least  five  categories  [5]: 
enteropathogenic  (EPEC),  enterotoxigenic  (ETEC),  en-
teroinvasive  (EIEC),  enterohemorrhagic  (EHEC),  and  en-
teroaggregative  (EAEC)  E.  coli.  EPEC  are  an  important 
agent  of  infantile  diarrhea  in  developing  countries;  EIEC 
share  several  features  with  Shigella  including  the  ability  to 
cause  dysentery  in  school-age  children;  EHEC  potentially 
cause  both  hemorrhagic  colitis  and  the  hemolytic  uremic 
syndrome; ETEC are a traveler’s cholera-like diarrhea agent; 
EAEC are an emerging agent of protracted diarrhea found in 
both developed and developing countries.  

 

*Address correspondence to this author at the Department of Microbiology 
and Immunology, Institute of Bioscience of the São Paulo State University 
in Botucatu, ZIP 18618-970, Botucatu, SP Brazil; Tel: 055 14 3811-6240; 
E-mail: josias@ibb.unesp.br 
 
 

1874-2858/11 

  The  possibility  of  captivity-kept  psittacidaes  to  harbor 
pathogenic DEC was here investigated by analyzing cloacae 
swabs  of  16  white-eyed  conure  (Aratinga  leucophthalmus) 
and  70  blue-fronted  parrots  (Amazonia  aestiva).  The  birds 
were  in  a  good  health  condition,  fed  with  fruits  and  sun-
flower  seeds  and  potable  water  and  separated  in  groups  of 
eight  per  regularly  cleaned  wired  suspended  cages.  Origi-
nally  recovered  from  illegal  owners,  they  were  under  care 
and  observation  quarantine  by  experts  from  the  Floravida 
Institute,  Botucatu SP  Brazil, for at least one year, in prepa-
ration  for  re-introduction  into  their  natural  habitats.  Follow-
ing  collection,  swabbed  samples  (one  per  bird)  were  pre-
cultured  overnight  at  40ºC  in  alkaline  peptone  water  and  in 
selenite-cysteine broth. The  enrichment  cultures growth was 
then  simultaneously  streaked  in  Hektoen  and  MacConkey 
agars  and  incubated  under  the  above  culture  condition.  Fi-
nally,  a  number  from  3-to-5  distinct  and  well-isolated  colo-
nies were individually subjected to biochemical tests for bac-
terial identification. This enabled the detection of E. coli in 4 
of  the  16  (25%)  white-eyed  conure  and  in  13  of  the  70 
(18.6%) blue-fronted parrots. The isolates were then cultured 
at  37ºC  overnight  in  trypticase  soy  broth  (TSB)  and  the  re-
sulting  growth  added  with  20%  glycerol  (Sigma)  and  stored 
at -80°C.  

  When  multiple  isolates  from  single  birds  showed  identi-
cal  biochemical  profiles,  only  a  single  isolate  per  bird  was 
taken  for  subsequent  analyses,  which  consisted  of  screening 
for  the  following  virulence-related  features:  Congo  red  ad-
sorption  (CRA),  antibiotic  resistance,  hemolytic  activity, 
HEp-2  cells  adhesion,  and  presence  of  DEC-specific  viru-
lence genes.  

  CRA  and  hemolytic  activity  tests  were  performed  by 
streaking  overnight  TSB  cultures  respectively  in  Congo  red 
and  blood  agar  (Columbia  agar  base  mixed  with  5%  de-
fibrinated  sheep  blood)  plates,  incubation  for  18-24h  and 
observation  of  corresponding  colonies  phenotypes.  Antibi-
otic  bacterial  resistance  was  tested  by  the  disc-diffusion 

2011 Bentham Open 

Presence of a Human Diarrheagenic Escherichia coli Clone in Captivity 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2011, Volume 5    73 

method  against the following drugs: ciprofloxacin, chloram-
phenicol, enrofloxacin, gentamicin, streptomycin, sulphamy-
cin, 
trimethoprim.  Unless  otherwise  
indicated,  all  the  culture  media  employed  were  from  Difco 
(Heidelberg, Germany) or Oxoid (Hampshire, UK). 

tetracycline  and 

  HEp-2  cell  adhesion  tests  were  performed  according  to 
the original method of Cravioto et al. [6]. Twenty microliters 
of  overnight  bacterial  cultures  in  TSB  were  added  to  semi-
confluent  grown  HEp-2  cell  monolayers  in  chamber-slides 
(Nalge  Nunc,  Rochester,  USA)  containing  0.7  –  1.0  ml  of 
Eagle  essential  minimum  medium  (Sigma,  St.  Louis,  USA) 
supplied  with  10%  fetal  calf  serum  (Cultilab,  Campinas, 
Brazil)  and  added  with  1%  D-mannose  (Sigma,  St.  Louis, 
USA). The preparations were incubated for 3h at 37°C in 5% 
CO2 atmosphere and then washed three times with phosphate 
buffered  saline.  Following  methanol  fixation,  Giemsa  stain-
ing,  chamber  removal  and  drying,  the  slides  were  observed 
at  light  microscope  for  cell  monolayer  attached  bacteria.  
In  surveys  of  at  least  200  cells,  adherent  strains  were  
those  showing  a  minimum  average  number  of  1  bacterium/ 
HEp-2 cell.  They were classified according to their adherent 
phenotypes  in  aggregative  (AA),  diffuse  (DA)  and  localized 
(LA). 

  The  E.  coli  isolates  were  screened  by  multiplex-PCR 
with  primers  specific  for  the  following  genetic  markers  [7]: 
ipaH,  aggR,  eae,  stx  and  elt,  respectively  for  EIEC,  EAEC, 
EPEC,  EHEC  and  ETEC.  The  reaction  mixture,  in  a  total 
volume  of  50  μl,  consisted  of  1x  reaction  buffer,  0.15  mM 
MgCl2,  0.2  mM  of  dNTP  mix  (Promega,  Madison,  USA), 
0.125 μM each of SK1, SK2, ipaIII, and ipaIV primers, 0.25 
μM  VTcom-u,  VTcom-d,  LTL,  LTR,  aggRks1  and  aggRk2, 
2.5  U Taq  DNA polymerase  (Promega,  Madison,  USA)  and 
5  μl  of  bacterial  lysates.  Reactions  were  run  at  95°C/1min, 
52°C/1min  and  72°C/1min  for  30  cycles  and  72°C  for  10 
min  in  a  Mastercycler  pro  S  (Eppendorf,  Hamburg,  Ger-
many).  PCR  products  were  submitted  to  electrophoresis  in 
1%  agarose  gels  containing  104 X  diluted  GelRed  (Biotium, 
California,  USA)  DNA  stain  and  observed  in  an  image  cap-
ture  device  coupled  UV  transiluminator  (Alpha  Innotech, 
San Leandro, USA). In addition to the  above  mentioned ge-
netic  markers,  PCR  for  the  irp2  and  shf  –  sequences  com-
monly found in different pathogenic E. coli, particularly dif-
fusely adhering strains and EAEC [8,9] – were performed. E. 
coli K12 HB101 strain was selected as a PCR-negative con-
trol  and  E2348-69,  O42,  40T,  EHY,  and  EIX,  as  EPEC, 
EAEC,  ETEC,  EHEC  and  EIEC  positive  controls,  respec-
tively. Genetic similarity among the strains were investigated 
by ERIC2-PCR [10], and their identity with E. coli reference 
(EcoR) groups [11] analyzed on the basis of combination of 

distinct  amplicons  generated  by  triplex  PCR  specific  for 
chuA, yjaA, and TSPE4.C2, as previously described [12]. 

  When  submitted  to  ERIC2-PCR,  DNA  of  the  17  strains 
from distinct birds generated identical band profiles (Fig. 1). 
Genetic  similarity  could  also  be  observed  from  the  EcoR 
PCR  typing  results:  all  the  strains  had  chuA,  yjaA,  and 
TSPE4.C2,  a  gene  combination  corresponding  to  the  EcoR 
B2 group [12].  

  Table  1  presents  the  virulence  features  of  psittacidae  E. 
coli.  Five  strains  expressed  DA,  one  AA  and  one  LA  (Fig. 
2). One strain caused cytotoxic effect, leading to HEp-2 cell 
fragmentation  and  detachment  (Table  1).  A  high  prevalence 
(70.5%)  of  CRA+  strains  was  observed  within  this  E.  coli 
population.  Over  50%  of  psittacidae  E.  coli  were  hemolytic 
and  the  majority  of  strains  harbored  some  of  the  virulence 
genes  searched  for.  The  cytotoxic  effect  causing  strain  was 
PCR  positive  for  stx  and  the  LA+  strain  had  eae  (Table  1). 
Since  along  with  bfpA,  LA  and  eae    distinguish  EPEC,  an 
additional  PCR  for  the  bundle  forming  pilus  gene  permitted 
the  typing  of  the  LA+  strain  as  belonging  to  the  typical 
EPEC  pathotype.  Based  on  the  above  results,  three  DEC 
strains were recognized among the 17 psittacidae E. coli: one 
Shiga toxin E. coli (STEC), one atypical EAEC (AA+, aggR-), 
and one typical EPEC.  

  Antibiotic resistance was observed for at least one of the 
eight drugs tested and a higher prevalence of resistant strains 
was for sulphamycin and  chloramphenicol (82.3  and 70.6%, 
respectively).  Multidrug  resistant  strains  include  EAEC  and 
STEC,  which  were  the  single  TetR  and  StrR-TriR  strains  de-
tected, respectively (Table 1). 

  Although E.  coli  can  be  pathogenic  for  humans,  the  sig-
nificance  of  their  association  with  psittacidaes  is  controver-
sial. Enteric microbiota in these birds is mostly comprised of 
gram-positive [1] and for some authors [2] the mere observa-
tion of E. coli in feces of a bird presented with enteritis could 
be  significant  enough  to  relate  the  bacteria  with  the  symp-
toms.  Yet,  reports  of  E.  coli  isolation  from  psittacidaes  are 
abundant,  even  in  clinically  healthy  birds  [1],  sometimes  in 
figures as high as 80% [4]. E. coli incidence varies according 
to  the  host  psittacidae  species  [1],  hygiene  conditions  and 
possibly  the  human  contact  [4].  The  E.  coli  prevalence  ob-
served  here  –  25%  for  white-eyed  conure  and  18.6%  for 
blue-fronted  parrot  –  are  not  too  different  from  previously 
reported results [1,3].  

  CRA,  a  frequently  employed  approach 
identify 
chicken  colisepticemic  invasive  E.  coli,  has  previously  been 
used to differentiate potentially virulent from innocuous psit-
tacidae  E.  coli  [13].  Accordingly,  CRA+  isolates  are  found 

to 

 

 

 

 

Fig. (1). DNA fingerprints from ERIC2 PCR of 17 E. coli strains individually isolated from 17 distinct psittacidae birds.  

74    The Open Microbiology Journal, 2011, Volume 5 

Marietto-Gonçalves et al. 

Table 1.  Virulence Properties of 17 E. coli Strains Belonging to the EcoR B2 Group Isolated from Psittacidaes 

Strain a 

bird b 

Adhesion c 

CRA d 

Hemolysis 

Gene (s) e 

Antibiotic Resistance Profile f 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

White-eyed conure 

White-eyed conure 

Blue-frontet parrot 

Blue-frontet parrot 

Blue-frontet parrot 

Blue-frontet parrot 

Blue-frontet parrot 

Blue-frontet parrot 

Blue-frontet parrot 

Blue-frontet parrot 

Blue-frontet parrot 

Blue-frontet parrot 

White-eyed conure 

White-eyed conure 

Blue-frontet parrot 

Blue-frontet parrot 

Blue-frontet parrot 

NA 

AA 

CE 

NA 

NA 

DA 

NA 

LA 

DA 

DA 

DA 

DA 

NA 

NA 

NA 

NA 

NA 

+ 

+ 

+ 

- 

+ 

+ 

+ 

- 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

- 

- 

- 

- 

+ 

+ 

+ 

- 

- 

- 

+ 

+ 

- 

+ 

- 

- 

+ 

+ 

- 

+ 

irp2 

irp2 

stx 

irp2 

irp2 

none 

none 

Sensitive to all 

CipR,CfcR,EnrR,SulR,TetR 

CfcR, EnrR,StrR,SulR,TriR 

CfcR,EnrR,SulR 

CfcR,SulR 

SulR 

CfcR,EnrR,SulR 

irp2, eae, bfpA 

CipR, CfcR, SulR 

irp2 

none 

irp2 

irp2 

irp2 

irp2 

none 

none 

none 

CfcR,SulR 

SulR 

CfcR 

CfcR,SulR 

GenR 

SulR 

CfcR,EnrR,GenR,SulR 

CfcR,EnrR,GenR,SulR 

CfcR,SulR 

a Each strain was isolated from a distinct bird 
b Bird species: White-eyed-conure: Aratinga leucophthalmus; Blue-fronted-parrot: Amazonia aestiva 
c HEp-2 cell adhesion phenotypes; AA, DA, LA: aggregative, diffuse and localized adhesion, respectively; NA: non adherent; CE: cytotoxic effect  
d CRA: Congo red adsorption. 
e Virulence genes: bfpA: bundling, structural subunit of the EPEC bundle forming pilus; eae, EPEC intimin; stx, Shiga cytotoxins; irp2, yersiniabactin. 
f Antibiotics: Cip, ciprofloxacin; Cfc, chloramphenicol; Enr, enrofloxacin; Gen, gentamycin; Str, streptomycin; Sul, sulphamycin; Tet, tetracycline; Tri, trimethoprim. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. (2). Localized adhesion to HEp-2 cells expressed by the irp2-eae-bfpA+ strain (N° 8 labeled in Table 1), after a 3h incubation period of 
contact bacteria-cells. May-Grunwald/Giemsa dye stained preparation. Magnification: 1000x. 

only  in  birds  presenting  clinical  signs  of  illness,  apparent 
behavioral change or physical debility. However data shown 
here do not support this conclusion, because, although 12 of 
17 (70.5%) birds harbored CRA+ strains, all of them were in 
a  good  health  and  adapted  to  their  condition  at  the  time  of 
sample collection. 

  Apart from the role played by these bacteria in their bird 
host, the virulence markers that they possess grant the recog-
nition of them as human pathogens. Significant difference is 

observed  in  E.  coli  prevalence  between  birds  kept  under 
strict  hygiene  rules  and  limited  human  contact  and  those  of 
public  recreational  parks  and  zoos,  with  very  higher  figures 
for the later [4], in an indication of birds’ bacterial contami-
nation from humans. The identification of three DEC bearing 
birds  here  demonstrates  that  they  can  be  carriers  of  these 
enteropathogens,  configuring  a  public  health  problem.  It 
should  also  be  noted  that  one  E.  coli-free  bird  harbored  a 
Salmonella  enterica  serovar  Enteritidis  isolate  (data  not 

Presence of a Human Diarrheagenic Escherichia coli Clone in Captivity 

The Open Microbiology Journal, 2011, Volume 5    75 

shown).  Since  geographical  distribution  of  psittacidae  spe-
cies  is  restricted,  unmonitored  commerce  may  turn  them 
potential  and  generalized  transmitters  of  these  enteropatho-
gens. In fact, EPEC a particular diarrhea agent from develop-
ing  countries  have  been  detected  in  a  pscittacidae  of  un-
known  origin  in  Germany  [3].  Besides  the  detection  of 
EPEC,  the finding of a stx+ strain in psittacidae was also of 
great significance in the present work, since strains with this 
marker  has  usually  been  found  only  in  mammalian  hosts. 
Although assays were not conducted on Vero cells, which is 
the appropriate model for Shiga cytotoxins detection, pheno-
typic evidence could be inferred from the bacterial action on 
HEp-2  cells  in  the  adhesion  test  and  the  strain  hemolytic 
activity. This strain was resistant to five of the eight antibiot-
ics  tested.  The  third  detected  DEC  was  EAEC,  presently 
recognized as a universal enteropathogen [14] and apparently 
assuming  a  more  significant  role  as  an  infantile  diarrhea 
agent than EPEC in developing countries [15]. The ability to 
express the aggregative adhesion is the shared E. coli pheno-
type  of  this  group  of  strains,  which  nevertheless  are  very 
heterogeneous  with  respect  to  other  features.  Some  are  usu-
ally  isolated  from  feces  of  normal  subjects  and  the  clinical 
significance  of  isolation  depends  on  a  more  complete  strain 
characterization,  besides  adhesion  assays.  A  number  of  ge-
netic markers have been identified in EAEC, which based on 
the presence of aggR, a plasmid encoded transcriptional acti-
vator  of  virulence  factors,  have  been  classified  in  typical 
(aggR+)  and  atypical  (aggR-)  [14].  The  role  of  atypical 
EAEC  in human disease is as yet unclear. It has been found 
that  shf+  atypical  EAEC  are  associated  with  diarrheal  cases 
[16], but none of the psittacidae strains was positive for this 
marker.  However,  the  atypical  EAEC  of  this  study  was 
multidrug  resistant  (Table 1),  a  feature  adding  some  signifi-
cance  to  its  finding.  The  DA  phenotype  and  the  irp2  gene 
were  very  common  among  the  psittacidae  strains  (Table  1). 
The  later  is  part  of  the  yersiniabactin  operon,  is  relatively 
ubiquitous  among  EAEC  and  DAEC  strains  [8,]  and  seems 
to be involved in biofilm formation [17]. Like EAEC, DAEC 
is  a  very  heterogeneous  bacterial  group  including  at  least 
some  pathogenic  strains.  No  particular  DAEC  marker  other 
than  HEp-2  cell  adhesion  was  investigated  in  these  strains, 
thus  limiting  the  interpretation  of  their  high  prevalence 
among the investigated strains.  

  Virulence  of  E.  coli  is  a  clonally  distributed  feature 
within its natural populations. Commensal strains are mostly 
assigned  to  EcoR  A  and  B1  phylogenetic  groups  and  those 
bearing pathogenicity markers  to B2  and D [18]. Strains be-
longing to the later groups are suspected of being associated 
with  inflammatory bowel diseases cases [19]. Thus, the pre-
sent finding of a genetically homogeneous E. coli population 
of  the  EcoR  B2  group,  including  traditional  human  patho-
types in psittacidaes suggests a role for these birds as poten-
tial reservoirs of  these bacteria, and  might represent  an alert 
for  the  adoption  of  more  strict  control  measures  to  prevent 
 
 
Received: April 30, 2011 
 

their carriage not only of E. coli but of other human bacterial 
pathogens. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

  This  work  was  supported  by  Fapesp  Grant  Nº  2008/ 
10975-0 given to J.R. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

[15] 

[16] 

Flammer  K,  Drewes  LA.  Species  related  differences  in  the  inci-
dence  of  gram-negative  bacteria  isolated  from  the  cloaca  of  clini-
cally normal psittacine birds. Avian Dis 1988; 32: 79-83. 
Grahan CL, Grahan DL. Occurrence of Escherichia coli in feces of 
Psittacine birds. Avian Dis 1978; 22: 717-20. 
Schremmer  C,  Lohr  JE,  Wastlhuber  U,  et  al.  Enteropathogenic 
Escherichia coli in Psittaciformes. Avian Pathol 1999; 28: 349-54. 
Mattes BR, Consiglio SAS, Almeida BZ, et al. Influência da Bios-
segurança na colonização intestinal por Escherichia coli em Psita-
cídeos. Arq Inst Biol 2005; 72: 13-6. 
Nataro  JP,  Kaper  JB.  Diarrheagenic  Escherichia  coli.  Clin  Micro-
biol Rev 1998; 11:142-201. 
Cravioto  A,  Gross  RJ,  Scotland  SM,  Rowe  B.  An  adhesive  factor 
found in strains of Escherichia coli belonging to the traditional in-
fantile enteropathogenic serotypes. Curr Microbiol 1979; 3: 95-9. 
Toma C, Lu Y, Higa N, et al. Multiplex PCR assay for identifica-
tion  of  human  diarrheagenic  Escherichia  coli.  J  Clin  Microbiol 
2003; 41: 2669-71. 
Czeczulin  JR,  Whittam  TS,  Henderson  IR,  Navarro-Garcia  F,  
Nataro JP. Phylogenetic analysis of enteroaggregative and diffusely 
adherent Escherichia coli. Infect Immun 1999; 67: 2692-9. 
Kahali  S,  Sarkar  B,  Rajendran  K,  et  al.  Virulence  characteristics 
and molecular epidemiology of enteroaggregative Escherichia coli 
isolates  from  hospitalized  diarrheal  patients  in  Kolkata,  India.  J 
Clin Microbiol 2004; 42: 4111-20. 
Johnson  JR,  O’Bryan,  TT.  Improved  repetitive  element  PCR  fin-
gerprinting  for  resolving  pathogenic  and  nonpathogenic  phyloge-
netic  groups  within  Escherichia  coli.  Clin  Diagn  Lab  Immunol 
2000; 7: 265-73. 
Ochman H, Selander RK. Standard reference strains of Escherichia 
coli from natural populations. J Bacteriol 1984; 157: 690-3. 
Clermont O, Bonacorsi S, Bingen E. Rapid and simple determina-
tion  of  the  Escherichia  coli  phylogenetic  group.  Appl  Environ  
Microbiol 2000; 66: 4555-8. 
Styles DK,Flammer K. Congo red binding of Escherichia coli from 
the cloacae of psittacine birds. Avian Dis 1991; 35: 46-8. 
Kaper  JB,  Nataro  JP,  Mobley  HLT.  Pathogenic  Escherichia  coli. 
Nature Rev Microbiol 2004; 2: 123-40. 
Rodrigues  J,  Thomazini  CM,  Morelli  A,  Batista  GCM.  Reduced 
etiological  role  for  enteropathogenic  Escherichia  coli  in  cases  of 
diarrhea in Brazilian infants. J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42: 398-400. 
Zamboni  A,  Fabbricotti  SH,  Fagundes-Neto  U,  Scaletsky  ICA. 
Enteroaggregative virulence factors are found to be associated with 
infantile diarrhea in Brazil. J Clin Microbiol 2004; 42:1058-63. 

[18] 

[17]  Mohamed  JA,  Huang  DB,  Jiang  Z,  et  al.  Association  of  putative 
enteroaggregative  Escherichia  coli  virulence  genes  and  biofilm 
production in isolates from travelers to developing countries. J Clin 
Microbiol 2007; 45:121-6. 
Restieri  C,  Garriss  G,  Locas  M-C,  Dozois  CM.  Autotransporter-
encoding sequences are phylogenetically distributed among clinical 
Escherichia coli clinical isolates and reference strains. Appl Environ 
Microbiol 2007; 73: 1553-62. 
Kotlowski  R,  Bernstein  CN,  Sepehri  S,  Krause  DO.  High  preva-
lence  of  Escherichia  coli  belonging  to  the  B2+D  phylogenetic 
group in inflamamatory bowel disease. Gut 2007; 56: 669-75. 

[19] 

 Marietto-Gonçalves et al.; Licensee Bentham Open. 

 

This is an open access article licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ 
by-nc/3.0/) which permits unrestricted, non-commercial use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the work is properly cited.  

Revised: May 10, 2011 

Accepted: May 12, 2011 

